UlMI  VtK5>li  V Qf" 

AT  HS  LIBRARY 

& UReSTACKS MPAIGN 


UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  AT  URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 

The  person  charging  this  material  is  responsible  for  its 
renewal  or  return  to  the  library  on  or  before  the  due  date. 
The  minimum  fee  for  a lost  item  is  $125.00,  $300.00  for 
bound  journals. 

Theft,  mutilation,  and  underlining  of  books  are  reasons 
for  disciplinary  action  and  may  result  in  dismissal  from 
the  University.  Please  note:  self-stick  notes  may  result  in 
torn  pages  and  lift  some  inks. 

Renew  via  the  Telephone  Center  at  217-333-8400, 
866-262-1510  (toll-free)  orcirclib@illinois.edu. 

Renew  online  by  choosing  the  My  Account  option  at: 

http://www.library.illinois.edu/catalog/ 


JAN  i o m 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
University  of  Illinois  Urbana-Champaign 


https://archive.org/details/warofrebellion15unit 


DP-2 


!QU 


ffAR  OF  THE  REBELLION 

A COMPILATION  OF  THE 

OFFICIAL  RECORDS 


OF  THE 


ttitT 


ON  AND  CONFEDERATE  ARMIES. 


D,  UNDER  THE  DIRECTION  OF  THE  SECRETARY  OF  WAR, 


BY 


Lieut.  Ool.  ROBERT  N.  SCOTT,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery, 

AND 


PUBLISHED  PURSUANT  TO  ACT  OF  CONGRESS  APPROVED  JUNE  16,  1880. 


SERIES  I — VOLUME  XV. 


WASHINGTON: 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE. 

1886. 


PREFACE. 


^73,7f 

U^y c3 

r.  IS 


By  an  act  approved  June  23,  1874,  Congress  made  an  appropriation 
“to  enable  the  Secretary  of  War  to  begin  the  publication  of  the  Official 
Records  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  both  of  the  Union  and  Confed- 
erate Armies,”  and  directed  him  “ to  have  copied  for  the  Public  Printer 
all  reports,  letters,  telegrams,  and  general  orders  not  heretofore  copied 
or  printed,  and  properly  arranged  in  chronological  order.” 

Appropriations  for  continuing  such  preparation  have  been  made  from 
time  to  time,  and  the  act  approved  June  16,  1880,  has  provided  “for 
the  printing  and  binding,  under  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of 
ten  thousand  copies  of  a compilation  of  the  Official  Records  (Union  and 
Confederate)  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  so  far  as  the  same  may  be 
ready  for  publication,  during  the  fiscal  year”;  and  that  u of  said  num- 
ber, seven  thousand  copies  shall  be  for  the  use  of  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives, two  thousand  copies  for  the  use  of  the  Senate,  and  one 
thousand  copies  for  the  use  of  the  Executive  Departments.”* 

This  compilation  will  be  the  first  general  publication  of  the  military 
records  of  the  war,  and  will  embrace  all  official  documents  that  can  be 
obtained  by  the  compiler,  and  that  appear  to  be  of  any  historical  value. 

* Volumes  I-V  distributed  under  act  approved  June  16,  1880.  The  act  approved 
August  7,  1882,  provides  that — 

“ The  volumes  of  the  Official  Records  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  shall  be  distributed 
as  follows : One  thousand  copies  to  the  Executive  Departments,  as  now  provided  by 
law.  One  thousand  copies  for  distribution  by  the  Secretary  of  War  among  officers  of 
the  Army  and  contributors  to  the  work.  Eight  thousand  three  hundred  copies  shall 
be  sent  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  such  libraries,  organizations,  and  individuals  as 
may  be  designated  by  the  Senators,  Representatives,  and  Delegates  of  the  Forty- 
seventh  Congress.  Each  Senator  shall  designate  not  exceeding  twenty-six,  and  each 
Representative  and  Delegate  not  exceeding  twenty-one  of  such  addresses,  and  the 
volumes  shall  be  sent  thereto  from  time  to  time  as  they  are  published,  until  the  pub- 
lication is  completed.  Senators,  Representatives,  and  Delegates  shall  inform  th© 
Secretary  of  War  in  each  case  how  many  volumes  of  those  heretofore  published  they 
have  forwarded  to  such  addresses.  The  remaining  copies  of  the  eleven  thousand  to> 
be  published,  and  all  sets  that  may  not  be  ordered  to  be  distributed  as  provided 
herein,  shall  be  sold  by  the  Secretary  of  War  for  cost  of  publication,  with  ten  per 
cent,  added  thereto,  and  the  proceeds  of  such  sale  shall  be  covered  into  the  Treasury. 
If  two  or  more  sets  of  said  volumes  are  ordered  to  the  same  address,  the  Secretary  of 
War  shall  inform  the  Senators,  Representatives,  or  Delegates,  who  have  designated 
the  same,  who  thereupon  may  designate  other  libraries,  organizations,  or  individuals. 
The  Secretary  of  War  shall  report  to  the  first  session  of  the  Forty-eighth  Congress 
what  volumes  of  the  series  heretofore  published  have  not  been  furnished  to  such 
libraries,  organizations,  and  individuals.  He  shall  also  inform  distributees  at  whoso 
instance  the  volumes  are  sent.” 

(hi) 


IV 


PREFACE. 


Tlie  publication  will  present  the  records  in  the  following  order  of 
arrangement : 

The  First  Series  will  embrace  the  formal  reports,  both  Union  and  Con- 
federate, of  the  first  seizures  of  United  States  property  in  the  Southern 
States,  and  of  all  military  operations  in  the  field,  with  the  correspond, 
©nee,  orders,  and  returns  relating  specially  thereto,  and,  as  proposed,  is 
to  be  accompanied  by  an  Atlas. 

In  this  series  the  reports  will  be  arranged  according  to  the  campaigns 
and  several  theaters  of  operations  (in  the  chronological  order  of  the 
events),  and  the  Union  reports  of  any  event  will,  as  a rule,  be  imme. 
diately  followed  by  the  Confederate  accounts.  The  correspondence,  &c., 
not  embraced  in  the  u reports  ” proper  will  follow  (first  Union  and  next 
Confederate)  in  chronological  order. 

The  Second  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns,  Union  and  Confederate,  relating  to  prisoners  of  war,  and  (so 
far  as  the  military  authorities  were  concerned)  to  State  or  political 
prisoners. 

The  Third  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Union  authorities  (embracing  their  correspondence  with 
the  Confederate  officials)  not  relating  specially  to  the  subjects  of  the 
first  and  second  series.  It  will  set  forth  the  annual  and  special  reports 
of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of  the  General-in-Chief,  and  of  the  chiefs  of 
the  several  staff  corps  and  departments ; the  calls  for  troops,  and  the 
correspondence  between  the  National  and  the  several  State  authorities. 

The  Fourth  Series  will  exhibit  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Confederate  authorities,  similar  to  that  indicated  for  the 
Union  officials,  as  of  the  third  series,  but  excluding  the  correspondence 
between  the  Union  and  Confederate  authorities  given  in  that  series. 

EGBERT  N.  SCOTT, 

Major  Third  Art.,  and  Bvt.  Lieut.  Col . 

War  Department,  August  23,  1880. 

Approved : 


ALEX.  RAMSEY, 

Secretary  of  War. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTEE  XXVII. 


Pag©. 

Operations  in  West  Florida,  Southern  Alabama,  Southern  Mississippi  (embrac- 
ing all  operations  against  Vicksburg.  May  18-July  27, 1862),  and  Louisiana..  1-1135 

(v) 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 


VOLUME  I. 


CHAPTER  I.  Page. 

Operations  in  Charleston  Harbor,  South 
Carolina.  December  20,  1860-April  14, 

1861 1-317 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  secession  of  Georgia.  J anuary  3-26, 

1861  31 8—325' 

CHAPTER  III. 

The  secession  of  Alabama  and  Mississippi. 

January  4-20, 1861 326-330 

CHAPTER  IY. 

Operations  in  Florida.  January  6-August 
31,  1861 331-473 


CHAPTER  Y.  Page. 

The  secession  of  North  Carolina.  Janu- 
ary 9-May  20, 1861 474-488 

CHAPTER  YI. 

The  secession  of  Louisiana.  January  10- 

February  19, 1861 489-501 

CHAPTER  YII. 

Operations  in  Texas  and  New  Mexico. 

February  1-June  11,  1861  502-636 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Operations  in  Arkansas,  the  Indian  Terri- 
tory, and  Missouri.  February  7-May  9, 

1861  .. 637-691 


VOLUME  II. 

CHAPTER  IX.  Page. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  April  16-July  31,  1861.  1-1012 

VOLUME  ITT. 

CHAPTER  X.  Page. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  and  Indian  Territory.  May  10-November  19,  1861.  1-749 

VOLUME  IV. 


CHAPTER  XI.  Page. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and 
Arizona.  June  11, 1861-February  1, 1862.  1-174 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Operations  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee. 

July  1-November  19, 1861  175-565 

VOLUME  V. 

CHAPTER  XIY.  Page. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Northern  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  August  1, 1861-March  17, 1862.  1-1106 

VOLUME  VI. 


CHAPTER  XIII.  Page. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina  and  South- 
eastern Virginia.  August  1, 1861-J  anu- 
ary 11,  1862 566-721 


CHAPTER  XV.  Page. 

Operations  on  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina, 

Georgia,  and  Middle  and  East  Florida. 

August  21,  1861-April  11,  1862 1-435 


CHAPTER  XVI.  Page. 

Operations  in  West  Florida,  Southern  Al- 
abama, Southern  Mississippi,  and  Lou- 
isiana. September  1, 1861-May  12, 1862  . 436-894 


VOLUME  VII. 


CHAPTER  XVII.  Page. 

Operations  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  N.  Alabama,  and  S.  W.  Virginia.  Nov.  19, 1861-Mar.  4, 1862.  1-946 

(VII) 


Till 


Operations 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 

VOLUME  Till. 

CHAPTER  XVIII.  Page* 

in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansc,  and  Indian  Territory.  Nov.19, 1801-April  10, 1862.  1-83. 

VOLUME  IX. 

CHAPTER  XXI.  Page. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and 


1-71 


CHAPTER  XIX.  Page 

Operations  in  Southeastern  Virginia.  Jan- 
uary 11-March  17, 1862 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina.  January 
11- An  gust  20,  1862  


Arizona. 
1862  


February  1-Septemher  20, 


481-736 


72-480 

VOLUME  X— IX  TWO  PASTS, 


Operations  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee, 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

North  Mississippi,  North  Alabama,  and  Southwest  Virginia. 
March  4-June  10, 1862. 


Part  I— Reports 

Part  II — Correspondence,  etc 


Page. 

1-927 

1-642; 


VOLUME  XI— IX  THREE  PARTS. 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

The  Peninsular  Campaign,  Virginia.  March  17-Septeniher  2, 1802. 

Jrage. 

1-1073 

Part  I — Reports,  March  17-June  24 ; 1-994 

Part  II— Reports,  June  25-September  2 - i_69i 

Part  III— Correspondence,  etc 

VOLUME  XII — IN  THREE  PARTS. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Operations  in  Northern  Virginia,  West  Virginia,  and  Maryland. 

1-8I8 

Part  I — Reports,  March  17-June  25  1-820 

Part  II— Reports,  June  26-September  2 i_966 

Part  III— Correspondence,  etc 

VOLUME  XIII. 

CHAPTER  XXV.  p&ge 

Operations  in  Mi.souri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  the  Indian  Territory,  and  the  Department  of  the  ^ 
Northwest.  April  10-November  20,  1862 

VOLUME  XIV. 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Operations  on  the  casts  of  Sonth  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Middle  and .East “ ^ ^ 
1862-June  11, 


Page. 

1025 


CHAPTER  X X V 1 1 . 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  FLORIDA,  SOUTHERN  ALA- 
BAMA, SOUTHERN  MISSISSIPPI,*  AND  LOUISIANA. 


May  12,  1862-May  14,  1863. 


AND  IN 

TEXAS,  NEW  MEXICO,  AND  ARIZONA. 


September  20,  1862-May  14,  1863. 


SUMMARY  OF  THE  RRHSTCLPAL.  EYENTS.f 

May  12-13, 1862. — Surrender  of  Natchez,  Miss.,  demanded,  and  occupation  of,  by 
U.  S.  naval  forces. 

18-Aug.  6, 1862.— Operations  about  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  and  Baton  Rouge,  La. 

26,  1862.— Department  No!  2 (Confederate)  extended  to  embrace  Mississippi 
south  of  33d  parallel  and  west  of  the  Pascagoula  and  Chicka- 
sawha  Rivers,  and  Louisiana  east  of  the  Mississippi. 

Trans-Mississippi  Department  (Confederate)  constituted,  embrac- 
ing, with  other  territory,  Louisiana  west  of  the  Mississippi  and 
Texas. 

28/  1862.— District  of  West  Louisiana  and  Texas  (Confederate)  constituted, 
under  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  Paul  O.  Hubert. 

June  3,  1862.— Col.  George  F.  Shepley,  Twelfth  Maine  Infantry,  appointed  Mili- 
tary Governor  of  Louisiana. 

14-15,  1862. — Expedition  from  Pensacola  to  Milton,  Fla. 

17,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Pass  Manchac,  La. 

18,  1862. — Brig.  Gen.  Paul  O.  Hubert,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  the 

District  of  West  Louisiana  and  Texas. 

20,  1862.—  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  the 
Department  of  Southern  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana. 

Skirmish  at  Bayou  des  Allemands,  La. 

22, 1862.— Expedition  from  Ship  Island  to  Pass  Christian,  Miss. 

Skirmish  at  Bayou  des  Allemands,  La. 

25  1862. — Department  No.  1 merged  into  Department  No.  2,  under  command 
of  General  Braxton  Bragg,  C.  S.  Army. 

Skirmish  near  Pensacola,  Fla. 

29j  1862.— The  Department  of  Alabama  and  West  Florida  (Confederate) 
discontinued. 

* Embracing  all  operations  against  Vicksburg,  May  18-July  27,  1862. 
t Of  some  of  the  minor  conflicts  noted  in  this  “ Summary”  no  circumstantial  reports 
are  on  file. 

. 1 R R — VOL  XV 


1 


2 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


June  29, 1862. — Capture  of  the  steamer  Ann  under  the  guns  of  Fort  Morgan,  Ala. 

July  2. 1862. — District  of  Mississippi  (Van  Dorn)  and  District  of  the  Gulf  (For- 
ney) constituted. 

5-  8, 1862. — Expedition  from  Ponchatoula,  La. 

18. 1862.  — Department  No.  2 extended  to  embrace  all  of  Mississippi,  East 

Louisiana,  and  West  Florida. 

24. 1862.  — Skirmish  on  the  Amite  River,  La. 

25-Aug.  2, 1862. — Expedition  to  Lake  Pontchartrain,  Pass  Manchac,  and  up 
the  Tchefuncta  and.  Pearl  Rivers,  La.,  with  skirmishes. 

27. 1862.  — Skirmish  at  Madisonville,  La. 

Skirmish  near  Covington,  La. 

Aug.  7-10, 1862. — Reconnaissances  from  Pensacola  to  Bagdad  and  Milton,  Fla. 

8. 1862.  — West  Florida  transferred  from  Department  of  the  South  to  the 

Department  of  the  Gulf. 

9. 1862.  — Bombardment  of  Donaldsonville,  La. 

10. 1862.  — Affair  at  Bayou  Sara,  La. 

18. 1862.  — Affair  at  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  and  capture  of  steamer  Fair  Play.* 

20.1862.  — Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  the  command 

of  the  District  of  West  Louisiana. 

Skirmish  at  Baton  Rouge,  La. 

21. 1862.  — Baton  Rouge,  La.,  evacuated  by  Union  forces. 

23. 1862.  — Affair  at  Bayou  Sara,  La. 

29. 1862.  — Skirmish  near  Saint  Charles  Court-House,  La. 

Engagement  between  U.  S.  S.  Anglo-American  and  Port  Hudson 
batteries.t 

Sept.  4-  5, 1862. — Affairs  at  Boutte  Station  and  Bayou  des  Allemands,  La. 

7. 1862.  — Engagement  between  IT.  S.  S.  Essex  andPort  Hudson  batteries.t 
7-  8,1862. — Expedition  from  Carrollton  to  vicinity  of  Saint  Charles  Court- 

House,  La,,  and  skirmish. 

13-15, 1862. — Expedition  to  Pass  Manchac  and  Ponchatoula,  La.,  and  skirmish. 
21-25, 1862. — Expedition  from  Carrollton  to  Donaldsonville,  La.,  and  skirmish. 
24-25, 1862. — Engagement  at  Sabine  Pass,  Tex. 

27. 1862.  — Affair  on  Taylor’s  Bayou,  Tex. 

Oct.  1,1862. — The  Department  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana  constituted, 

under  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army. 

2. 1862.  — Destruction  of  railroad  depot  near  Beaumont,  Tex. 

4. 1862.  — Engagement  near  Donaldsonville,  La. 

5. 1862.  — Galveston,  Tex.,  captured  by  Union  fleet. 

9-Nov.  25,  1862. — Expedition  from  Fort  Union  to  the  Canadian  River  and 
Utah  Creek,  N.  Mex. 

10. 1862.  — Maj.  Gen.  John  B.  Magruder,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command 

of  the  District  of  Texas. 

14. 1862.  — Lieut.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 

the  Department  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana. 

19. 1862.  — Skirmish  at  Bonnet  Carrd,  Saint  John  Baptist  Parish,  La. 

24-Nov.  6, 1862. — Operations  in  the  La  Fourche  District,  La. 

25. 1862.  — Capture  of  Donaldsonville,  La. 

27. 1862.  — Action  at  Georgia  Landing,  near  Labadieville,  La. 

29. 1862.  — Affair  at  Sabine  Pass,  Tex. 

31-Nov.  1, 1862. — Bombardment  of  Lavaca,  Tex. 


* For  reports,  see  Series  I,  Vol.  XIII,  pp.  240-247. 

fFor  reports,  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  1,  1862. 


CHAP.  XXVH.] 


SUMMARY  OF  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. 


3 


Nov.  1-  6, 1862. — Naval  operations  on  Berwick  Bay,  La. 

8,1862.— Maj.  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks,  U.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf. 

14. 1862. — Brig.  Gen.  Andrew  J.  Hamilton,  U,  S.  Army,  appointed  military 

governor  of  Texas. 

20. 1862. — Affair  near  Matagorda,  Tex. 

21. 1862. — Skirmish  at  Bayou  Bonfouca,  La. 

21-22, 1862.— Affairs  at  Petite  Anse  Island,  La. 

27. 1862.  — Capture  of  steamboat  Lone  Star. 

29.1862. — Maj.  Gen.  John  B.  Magruder,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 

the  District  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona. 

Dec.  7, 1862.— Affair  at  Padre  Island,  Tex. 

10. 1862. — Skirmish  at  Desert  Station,  La. 

14. 1862. — Brig.  Gen.  William  W.  Mackall,  C.  S.  Army,  supersedes  Maj.  Gen. 

John  H.  Forney  in  command  of  the  District  of  the  Gulf. 

Maj.  Gen.  Simon  B.  Buckner,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  the  command 
of  the  District  of  the  Gulf. 

16. 1862. — Maj.  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks,  U.  S.  -Army,  assumes  command  of 

the  Nineteenth  Army  Corps. 

17. 1862.  — Baton  Rouge,  La.,  reoccupied  by  Union  forces. 

Major-General  Banks  supersedes  Major-General  Butler  in  command 
of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf. 

23.1862. — Major-General  Buckner  assumes  command  of  the  District  of  the 

Gulf. 

24. 1862. — Galveston,  Tex.,  occupied  by  Union  forces. 

25-26, 1862.— Expedition  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  Dallas  Station  and  Delhi,  La.* 

28.1862. — Maj.  Gen.  Franklin  Gardner,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  at 

Port  Hudson,  La. 

29. 1862.  — Affair  near  Plaquemine,  La. 

31-Jau.  3,  1863.— Affairs  at  Plaquemine,  La. 

Jan.  * 1,1863. — Recapture  of  Galveston,  Tex.,  by  Confederate  forces. 

4-May  8,  1863. — Operations  against  Indians  in  New  Mexico. 

9, 1863.— Loss  of  U.  S.  transport  Sparkling  Sea. 

10. 1863. — Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman  assumes  command  of  Defenses  of 

' New  Orleans,  La. 

11.1863. — Capture  of  U.  S.  S.  Hatteras  off  Galveston,  Tex. 

14.1863.  — Engagement  on  Bayou  Teche,  La.,  and  destruction  of  the  Confed- 

erate gunboat  Cotton. 

Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  the  command 
of  the  Southwestern  Army. 

21. 1863. — Attack  on  blockading  squadron  at  Sabine  Pass,  Tex. 

28. 1863.  — Skirmish  at  Indian  Village,  La. 

29. 1863.  — Skirmish  near  Richmond,  La.t 

Feb.  3, 1863. — Capture  of  steamers  Baker,  Berwick  Bay,  and  Moro  by  the  Queen 

of  the  West.t 

10. 1863.  — Skirmish  at  Old  River,  La.t 

12-28, 1863.— Operations  on  Bayou  Plaquemine  and  Atchafalaya  River,  La. 

14. 1863.  — Capture  of  the  Queen  of  the  West.t 

19. 1863.  — Expedition  from  Indian  Village  to  Rosedale,  La. 

24.1863.  — Capture  of  the  Indianola.t 

Mar.  2-30, 1863. — Expedition  from  New  Orleans  to  the  mouth  of  the  Rio  Grande. 
7-27, 1863. — Operations  against  and  about  Port  Hudson,  La. 

21-29, 1863. — Expedition  from  Bonnet  Carr6  to  the  Jackson  Railroad  and  Amite 
River. 

*In  connection  with  operations  against  Vicksburg.  TSee  Series  I,  Vol.  XVII. 
tin  connection  with  operations  against  Vicksburg.  See  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIV. 


4 W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

Mar.  21-30,  1863. — Expedition  from  New  Orleans  to  Ponchatoula,  La.,  and  skirmishes. 

28,  1863. —Capture  of  U.  S.  S.  Diana  near  Pattersonville,  La. 

April  7,  1863.— Attack  on  the  steamer  Barataria,  Amite  River,  La. 

9-May  14,  1863.— Operations  in  West  Louisiana. 

12,  1863.— Affair  on  the  Amite  River,  La. 

17,  1863.— Skirmish  on  the  Amite  River,  La. 

18,  1863.— Affair  at  Sabine  Pass,  Tex. 

27,  1863.— Maj.  Gen.  Dabney  H.  Maury,  C.  S.  Army,  ordered,  upon  being  re- 
lieved by  Major-General  Buckner  in  East  Tennessee,  to  assume 
command  of  the  District  of  the  Gulf. 

May  1,  1863.— Skirmishes  near  Greensburg  and  at  Williams’  Bridge,  La.  * 

2,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Roberts’  Ford,  Comite  River,  La.* 

3,  1863.— Affair  at  Saint  Joseph’s  Island,  Tex. 

4,  1863.— Engagement  at  Fort  De  Russy,  Red  River,  La.* 

9-18,  1863. — Operations  on  the  Amite  River  and  Jackson  Railroad,  and  skir- 
mishes at  Ponchatoula,  Independence  Station,  and  Tickfaw 
Bridge,  La. 

10,  1863.— Attack  on  Fort  Beauregard,  La.* 

Skirmishes  at  Caledonia  and  Pin  Hook,  or  Bayou  Macon,  La.* 

14,  1863. — Banks’  forces  commence  moving  from  Alexandria  for  attack  upon 
Port  Hudson,  La. 


MAY  18-ATJGUST  6,  1862.— Operations  about  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  and  Baton 

Rouge,  La. 


SUMMARY  OJEH  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. 


May 


June 


July 

Aug. 


18,  1862. — Surrender  of  Vicksburg  demanded  by  Major-General  Butler  and 
Flag-Officer  Farragut  and  refused  by  Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith. 
26,  1862.— Affair  at  Grand  Gulf,  Miss. 

7-  9,  1862.— Expedition  from  Baton  Rouge,  La. 

9,  1862. — Engagement  at  Grand  Gulf,  Miss. 

20- July  24, 1862.— Expedition  from  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  to  Vicksburg,  Miss. 
24,  1862.— Skirmish  at  Hamilton’s  Plantation,  near  Grand  Gulf,  Miss. 

27-29,  1862. — Reconnaissauce  to  the  Amite  River,  La.,  and  skirmish. 

28,  1862.— Naval  bombardment  of  Vicksburg  and  passage  of  the  batteries 
by  the  Union  fleet. 

15,  1862.— Engagement  between  the  Union  fleet  and  the  Arkansas. 

22,  1862. — Engagement  with  the  Arkansas. 

5,  1862. — Engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La. 

6,  1862. — Destruction  of  the  Arkansas. 


REPORTS,  ETC.t 


No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  defenses  of  Vicksburg,  of 
operations  at  Vicksburg,  May  18-July  27. 

No.  2.— Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  District  of  Mississippi, 
of  operations  at  Vicksburg  and  Baton  Rouge,  June  27-August  6 (including 
destruction  of  the  Arkansas),  with  congratulatory  order. 

* In  connection  with  operations  against  Vicksburg.  See  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIV. 

t The  following  reports  are  of  the  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge  when  not  otherwise 
indicated. 

For  United  States  naval  reports  of  engagements  June  28,  July  15  and  22,  and  de- 
struction of  the  Arkansas,  August  6,  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy, 
December  1,  1862. 


Chap.  XXVII.  J VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA.  5 

No.  3. — Col.  Nathan  A.  M.  Dudley,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  of  expedition 
from  Baton  Rouge,  La. , J une  7-9. 

No.  4. — Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell,  C.  S.  Army,  of  engagement  at  Grand  Gulf,  Miss., 
June  9. 

No.  5. — Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Williams,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Expeditionary  Corps, 
of  operations  May  26-August  2,  with  instructions  from  Major-General 
Butler. 

No.  6. — Col.  Halbert  E.  Paine,  Fourth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  of  skirmish  at  Hamilton’s 
Plantation,  near  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  June  24. 

No.  7. — Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Keith,  Twenty-first  Indiana  Infantry,  of  reconnaissance 
to  the  Amite  River,  La.,  and  skirmish,  June  27-29. 

No.  8. — Lieut.  Col.  Alfred  W.  Ellet,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Ram  Fleet,  of  engage- 
ment with  the  Arkansas,  July  22. 

No.  9. — Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butlor,  U.  8.  Army,  commanding  the  Department 
of  the  Gulf,  with  orders  and  resulting  correspondence. 

No.  10. — Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces. 

No.  11. — Lieut.  Godfrey  Weitzel,  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers,  Chief  Enginoor  Depart- 
ment of  the  Gulf. 

No.  12. — Col.  Thomas  W.  Cahill,  Ninth  Connecticut  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade,  and  resulting  correspondence. 

No.  13. — Col.  Nathan  A.  M.  Dudley,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  commanding 
right  wing  Second  Brigade. 

No.  14.— Lieut.  George  G.  Trull,  Second  Battery  Massachusetts  Light  Artillery. 

No.  15. — Capt.  Charles  H.  Manning,  Fourth  Battery  Massachusetts  Light  Artil- 
lery. 

No.  16.— Lieut.  William  W.  Carruth,  Sixth  Battery  Massachusetts  Light  Artil- 
lery. 

No.  17. — Maj.  Horace  O.  Whittemore,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  18. — Capt.  Charles  E.  Clarke,  Sixth  Michigan  Infantry. 

No.  19. — Lieut.  Col.  Volney  S.  Fullarn,  Seventh  Vermont  Infantry. 

No.  20. — Col.  Frank  S.  Nickerson,  Fourteenth  Maine  Infantry,  commanding  left  wing 
Second  Brigade. 

No.  21. — Lieut.  Col.  Richard  Fitz  Gibbons,  Ninth  Connecticut  Infantry. 

No.  22. — Capt.  James  Grimsley,  Twenty-first  Indiana  Infantry. 

No.  23. — Lieut.  Col.  Sidney  A.  Bean,  Fourth  Wisconsin  Infantry. 

No.  24. — Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Breckinridge,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  expedition,  of 
engagement  at  Baton  Rouge  and  occupation  of  Port  Hudson. 

No.  25. — Return  of  Casualties  in  the  First  Division,  Confederate  forces. 

No.  26. — Capt.  John  A.  Buckner,  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  C.  S.  Army,  command- 
ing First  Brigade,  First  Division. 

No.  27. — Col.  Jeptha  Edwards,  Thirty-first  Alabama  Infantry. 

No.  28. — Lieut.  Col.  John  Snodgrass,  Fourth  Alabama  Battalion. 

No.  29. — Capt.  John  H.  Millett,  Fourth  Kentucky  Infantry. 

No.  30. — Maj.  J.  C.  Wickliffe,  Fifth  Kentucky  Infantry. 

No.  31. — Maj.  H.  E.  Topp^  Thirty-first  Mississippi  Infantry. 

No.  32. — Col.  T.  B.  Smith,  Twentieth  Tennessee  Infantry,  commanding  Fourth  Bri- 
gade. 

No.  33. — Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Division,  with 
Return  of  Casualties, 

No.  34.  Col.  J.  W.  Robertson,  Thirty-fifth  Alabama  Infantry,  commanding  First 
Brigade. 

No.  35. — Col.  J.  W.  Robertson,  Thirty-fifth  Alabama  Infantry. 

No.  33. — Lieut.  Col.  Edward  Goodwin,  Thirty-fifth  Alabama  Infantry. 

No.  37. — Capt.  J . H.  Bowman,  Third  Kentucky  Infantry. 


6 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Ohap.  xxvn. 

No.  38.— Lieut.  Col.  M.  H.  Cofcr,  Sixth  Kentucky  Infantry. 

No.  39.— Col.  Edward  Crossland,  Seventh  Kentucky  Infantry. 

No.  40.— Col.  H.  W.  Allen,  Fourth  Louisiana  Infantry,  commanding  Second  Bri- 
gade. 

No.  41.— Col.  Gustavus  A.  Breaux,  Thirtieth  Louisiana  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No.  42.— Lieut.  Col.  S.  E.  Hunter,  Fourth  Louisiana  Infantry. 

No.  43.— Col.  Gustavus  A.  Breaux,  Thirtieth  Louisiana  Infantry. 

No.  44.— Lieut.  Col.  T.  Shields,  Thirtieth  Louisiana  Infantry. 

No.  45.— Capt.  Thomas  Bynum,  Boyd’s  Battalion,  Stewart’s  Legion. 

No.  46.— Capt.  O.  J.  Semmes,  commanding  Battery. 


No.  1. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith , G.  S.  Army , commanding  defenses  of 
Vicksburg,  of  operations  at  Vicksburg , May  18 -July  27. 

Headquarters  Third  District, 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  August  — , 1862. 

Major  : The  following  report  of  the  attack  and  defense  of  Ticks* 
burg  is  respectfully  submitted  to  the  major-general  commanding  the 
District  of  Mississippi : 

I assumed  command  of  Vicksburg  and  its  defenses  on  May  12,  m 
obedience  to  orders  from  Major-General  Lovell,  and  proceeded  at  once 
to  prepare  for  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  then  known  to  have  passed 
Baton  Rouge  with  a formidable  fleet,  having  in  view  to  open  the  river 
to  Memphis  and  Fort  Pillow,  then  in  our  possession.  At  the  time  of 
arriving  the  state  of  preparation  for  defense  was  as  follows : Of  the 
ten  batteries  that  have  been  in  use  three  were  mostly  completed  and  a 
fourth  begun ; the  armed  troops  present  consisted  of  the  remnant  of 
the  Eighth  Louisiana  Battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pinkney,  and  the 
Twenty-seventh  Louisiana  Volunteers,  Colonel  Marks,  both  of  my  bri- 
gade, which  had  preceded  me  some  six  or  ten  days.  Col.  J.  L.  Autry, 
ordered  here  by  General  Bragg,  was  found  in  command,  pushing  the 
works  forward  vigorously  through  his  chief  engineer,  Capt.  D.  B.  Har- 
ris, who  afterward  remained  with  me  in  the  same  capacity  until  most 
of  the  works  were  completed.* 

From  the  12th  until  the  18th  the  works  were  pushed  forward  night 
and  day  with  all  possible  vigor,  at  the  end  of  which  the  first  division 
of  the  Federal  fleet,  together  with  transports  carrying  some  3,000  men, 
made  their  appearance,  and  found  us  in  a condition  to  dispute  with  a 
fair  prospect  of  success  a farther  advance  j that  is  to  say,  six  batteries 
were  complete,  the  cannoneers  at  their  posts  and  fairly  drilled.  The 
arrival  of  this  advanced  division  was  immediately  followed  by  a de- 
mand for  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg  and  its  defenses,  couched  in  the 
following  terms : 


United  States  Steamer  Oneida, 

Near  Vicksburg,  May  18,  1862. 

To  the  Authorities  at  Vicksburg  : 

The  undersigned,  with  orders  from  Flag-Officer  Farragut  and  Major-General  Butler, 
respectfully  demand,  in  advance  of  the  approaching  fleet,  the  surrender  of  V lckslmrg 

*See  Beauregard  to  Cooper,  September  24,  1862,  in  “Correspondence,  etc .f  post. 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


and  its  defenses  to  the  lawful  authority  of  the  United  States,  under  which  private 
property  and  personal  rights  will  he  respected. 

Very  respectfully  yours,  pHILLIps  EEE,  u.  g.  n., 

Commanding  Advance  of  Naval  Division. 

T.  WILLIAMS, 

Brigadier-General. 

The  subjoined  reply  was  returned : 

Headquarters,  Vicksburg,  May  18, 1862. 

Phillips  Lee,  U.  S.  N.,  . . 

Commanding  Advance  of  Naval  Division  : 


Sir  : Your  communication  of  this  date,  addressed  to  the  authorities  of  Vicksburg 
demanding  the  surrender  of  the  city  and  its  defenses,  has  been  received.  In  regard 
to  the  surrender  of  the  defenses,  I have  to  reply  that,  having  been  ordered  here  to 
hold  these  defenses,  my  intention  is  to  do  so  as  long  as  it  is  in  my  power. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  L gMITH 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


I remark  here  that  the  citizens  of  the  town  had  with  great  unanimity 
made  up  their  minds  that  its  possession  ought  to  be  maintained  at  all 
hazards,  even  though  total  demolition  should  be  the  result.  11ns  de- 
termination was  enthusiastically  concurred  in  by  persons  of  all  ages 
and  both  sexes  and  borne  to  my  ears  from  every  quarter.  Thus  cheered 
on  and  upheld  the  defense  became  an  affair  of  more  than  public  interest, 
and  the  approving  sentiments  of  those  so  deeply  interested  unquestion- 
ably had  its  influence  on  the  ultimate  result  as  affairs  stand  to-day. 
Our  cause  probably  needed  an  example  of  this  kind,  and  assuredly  a 

bright  one  has  been  given.  . • , 

The  inhabitants  had  been  advised  to  leave  the  city  when  the  smoke 
of  the  ascending  gunboats  was  first  seen,  under  the  impression  that 
the  enemy  would  open  fire  immediately  on  arrival  5 hence  the  above 
demand  found  the  city  sparsely  populated  and  somewhat  prepaied  101 
an  attack,  although  when  it  really  commenced  there  were  numbers  still 
to  depart,  besides  many  who  had  determined  to  remain  and  take  the 
chances  of  escaping  unharmed,  a few  of  whom  absolutely  endured  to 
the  end.  As  bearing  immediately  upon  the  defense  of  this  place,  meas- 
ures had  also  been  taken  to  push  the  Arkansas  to  completion.  It  was 
reported  that  the  contractor  had  virtually  suspended  work;  that  me- 
chanics and  workmen  were  leaving ; that  supplies  were  wanting  5 hna  y, 
that  a very  considerable  quantity  of  iron  prepared  for  covering  her  had 
been  sunk  in  the  Yazoo  River.  Steps  were  taken  to  promptly  lurnis 
mechanics  and  supplies,  and  a bell-boat  being  obtained  and  sent  up  to 
the  spot,  the  prepared  iron  was  soon  recovered.  It  was  considered 
fortunate  that  soon  after  this  Captain  Brown  was  assigned  to  the  duty 
of  completing  the  boat,  as  after  his  assignment  this  important  work: 

gave  me  no  further  concern.  . 

The  enemy  remained  apparently  inactive  until  the  ^6th,  during  which 
time  the  advance  division  of  the  fleet  was  joined  by  other  gunboats, 
making  ten  in  all.  My  force  had  in  the  mean  time  been  increased  by 
. the  Twentieth  and  Twenty-eighth  Louisiana  Volunteers,  numbering  lor 
duty  some  500  each,  by  five  companies  of  Starke’s  cavalry,  one  battery 
Withers’  artillery,  Captain  Ridley,  and  four  companies  Sixth  Missis- 
sippi Battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Balfour ; but  all  new  troops,  just 
mustered  into  service,  and  indifferently  armed.  These  were  thrown  tor- 
ward  toward  Warren  ton,  and  disposed  for  disputing  men  by  inch  the 
approach  by  land.  This  force  was  subsequently  increased  by  the  b ourth 
and  Fifth  Louisiana. 


8 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

The  ensuing  ten  days  I consider  the  most  critical  period  of  the  de- 
fenses of  Vicksburg : batteries  incomplete  ; guns  not  mounted  ; troops 
few,  and  both  officers  and  men  entirely  new  to  service,  and  not  a single  . 
regular  officer  to  assist  in  organizing  and  commanding.  Had  a prompt 
and  vigorous  attack  been  made  by  the  enemy,  while  I think  the  dispo- 
sitions made  would  have  insured  their  repulse,  still  the  issue  would  have 
been  less  certain  than  at  any  time  afterwards. 

The  enemy  opened  fire  on  the  afternoon  of  the  26th  for  the  first  time, 
and  continued  about  two  hours,  apparently  with  a view  of  getting  our 
range.  The  orders  given  to  the  batteries  were  not  to  return  their  fire 
at  extreme  range,  and  at  ordinary  range  only  at  considerable  intervals. 
This  policy  was  adhered  to  throughout ; at  first  because  little  ammuni- 
tion had  then  arrived;  afterward  for  the  reason  that  our  works  could 
not  be  injured  by  direct  firing,  and  by  saving  the  men  they  were  fresh 
night  and  day  to  meet  close  and  serious  attacks,  such  as  occurred  before 
the  termination  of  the  bombardment ; besides,  the  enemy  were  thus  kept 
ignorant  of  our  real  strength  as  well  as  the  effect  of  their  own  shot.  It 
was  not  long  before  they  apparently  came  to  the  conclusion  that  no  im- 
pression could  be  made  on  our  works  by  their  gunboats,  nor  the  erection 
of  new  batteries  prevented  whenever  attempted,  and  the  remaining  six 
batteries  of  the  ten  first-mentioned  were  constructed  under  their  eyes. 

From  May  20  to  the  middle  of  June  the  firing  was  kept  up  at  inter- 
vals and  more  or  less  heavy,  the  latter  part  of  the  time  directed  mainly 
at  the  town  and  at  localities  where  they  apparently  thought  troops  were 
encamped. 

From  June  14  to  18  there  was  an  entire  cessation  of  the  attack,  the 
mortar  fleet  that  had  bombarded  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  being 
on  the  'way  here  to  join  in  the  attack.  They  began  to  arrive  on  the  18th, 
and  to  the  number  of  eighteen  or  nineteen  were  in  position  on  the  20tli, 
on  the  afternoon  of  which  day  the  bombardment  again  opened.  Prior  to 
this  a new  source  of  anxiety  arose.  Fort  Pillow  and  Memphis  had  fallen, 
and,  in  addition  to  the  attack  we  were  enduring,  Vicksburg  was  threat- 
ened by  a combined  land  and  naval  force  from  above. 

From  the  20th  to  the  27th  the  bombardment  was  pretty  constant 
during  the  day-time,  at  times  very  heavy,  but  generally  ceasing  at  10 
or  11  o’clock  at  night. 

On  the  evening  of  the  27th  the  firing  began  to  increase  in  fury,  and 
for  some  hours  a shower  of  bomb-shells  was  rained  upon  our  batteries 
that  severely  tried  the  nerve  and  courage  of  both  officers  and  men. 
Still  the  damage  was  quickly  repaired,  and  the  men  held  their  places 
at  the  guns. 

At  daylight  on  the  28th  the  enemy  recommenced  with  the  same  fury, 
and  it  was  soon  perceived  that  the  entire  gunboat  fleet  was  in  motion, 
moving  rapidly  up  in  front  of  the  batteries  and  city,  and  it  became 
apparent  that  the  decisive  struggle  was  at  hand.  Some  thirty-five 
vessels  were  soon  firing  as  rapidly  as  was  possible,  the  mortars  filling 
the  air  with  shells,  and  the  sloops  of  war  and  gunboats  delivering 
broadside  after  broadside  of  shot,  shell,  and  grape,  according  to  their  ^ 
distance.  Our  batteries  opened  as  soon  as  the  vessels  were  within' 
range  and  for  the  first  time  in  full  force.  The  roar  of  cannon  was  now 
continuous  and  deafening;  loud  explosions  shook  the  city  to  its  founda- 
tions; shot  and  shell  went  hissing  and  tearing  through  trees  and  walls, 
scattering  fragments  far  and  wide  in  their  terrific  flight ; men,  women, 
and  children  rushed  into  the  streets,  and,  amid  the  crash  of  falling 
houses,  commenced  their  hasty  flight  to  the  country  for  safety.  This 
continued  for  about  an  hour  and  a half,  when  the  enemy  left,  the  ves- 


9 


CHAP.  XXVH.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 

ge]s  that  had  passed  the  lower  batteries  continuing  on  up  the  river, 
apparently  as  the  quickest  means  of  getting  out  of  range,  those  that 
had  not  passed  rapidly  dropping  down. 

The  result  of  this  effort  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  was  most  satisfac- 
tory: not  a single  gun  was  silenced,  none  disabled,  and,  to  their  sur- 
prise, the  serious  bombardment  of  the  preceding  seven  days  had  thrown 
nothing  out  of  fighting  trim.  It  also  demonstrated  to  our  satisfaction 
that  how  large  soever  the  number  of  guns  and  mortar-boats,  our  bat- 
teries could  probably  be  successfully  held;  consequently  that  the  ulti- 
mate success  of  our  resistance  hinged  upon  a movement  by  land.  The 
enemy  evidently  came  to  the  same  conclusion,  as,  after  one  week’s 
bombardment  with  their  mortars  and  the  final  attempt  on  the  morning 
of  June  28  to  silence  and  take  our  guns,  the  attack  sensibly  decreased 
in  vigor  and  persistency. 

Up  to  the  28th  there  had  been  a great  pressure  on  my  command, 
owing  to  the  limited  number  of  men.  The  situation  of  the  enemy’s 
fleet  and  the  peculiar  shape  of  the  river  in  this  vicinity,  combined  with 
the  proximity  of  the  Yazoo  and  the  expected  descent  of  a large  force 
from  above  (as  reported),  had  necessitated  a rather  heavy  line  of  pick- 
ets, extending  along  a distance  of  20  miles.  To  keep  up  this  line  and 
sustain  a heavy  attack  at  the  same  time  taxed  the  energies  of  my  men 
to  a great  extent.  The  arrival  of  the  advance  brigade  of  Major-Gen- 
eral Breckinridge’s  reserve  corps  was  a great  respite,  and  as  the  force 
was  gradually  increased,  thus  bringing  us  to  an  equality  in  numbers 
with  that  which  accompanied  the  fleet,  it  was  almost  felt  that  Vicks- 
burg was  no  longer  besieged.  The  general  command  of  these  defenses 
was  assumed  by  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn  on  June  28,  Major-General 
Lovell  having  been  relieved  by  him  from  the  command  of  the  depart- 
ment. 

Being  authorized  to  make  requisitions  on  the  reserve  corps  for  what- 
ever force  was  deemed  necessary  to  carry  out  the  plan  of  defense,  the 
picket  front  was  after  the  28th  divided  into  five  divisions,  the  two 
extreme  ones  guarded  by  detachments  from  my  brigade  (Third  Louis- 
iana), the  remaining  three  by  detachments  from  Brigadier-General 
Preston’s,  Helm’s,  and  Colonel  Statham’s  brigades,  re-enforced  by  light 
batteries  from  Colonel  Withers’  artillery. 

The  fleet  from  Memphis  began  to  make  its  appearance  above  on 
June  26,  and  continued  to  receive  accessions  until  it  numbered  in  all 
forty-odd  gunboats,  mortar  boats,  rams,  and  transports. 

Firing  commenced  from  this  fleet  on  July  12,  and,  although  at  no  time 
as  heavy  as  from  the  lower  fleet,  continued  with  but  little  interruption 
until  the  final  bombardment  of  the  attack. 

On  the  morning  of  [July]  15  the  daring  passage  of  the  ram  Arkansas 
out  of  the  Yazoo  through  the  enemy’s  fleet  seemed  to  necessitate  a 
prompt  descent  of  those  vessels  that  had  passed  up  on  the  28th,  and 
everything  was  accordingly  placed  in  readiness  for  them.  A newT  bat- 
tery of  24-pounders,  just  erected,  was  manned  by  a light  artillery  de- 
tachment from  Preston’s  brigade,  under  Lieutenant  Gracey,  and  sharp- 
shooters from  the  same  brigade  placed  along  the  bank  wherever  the 
ground  was  favorable. 

As  conjectured,  the  enemy  were  in  motion  at  sundown,  and  at  dusk 
descended  amid  the  roar  of  cannon,  the  flashing  of  musketry,  the  glare 
of  lightning,  and  scenes  in  every  respect  such  as  had  distinguished 
their  passage  up,  except  that  the  action  was  of  shorter  duration  and 
the  Arkansas  was  on  the  river  returning  their  broadside.  The  firing 


10 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIX 


was  mainly  over  in  the  course  of  an  hour,  and  at  the  batteries  not  a 
single  casualty  from  the  enemy’s  shot  occurred. 

From  the  15th  to  the  18th  the  enemy  were  mainly  occupied  in  endeav- 
oring to  sink  the  Arkansas  with  their  mortars,  and  on  the  morning  of 
the  18th  a daring  attempt  was  made  to  cut  her  out  from  under  one  of 
our  batteries.  It  resulted,  however,  in  no  injury  to  the  Arkansas,  but 
in  the  destruction  of  one  of  their  boats.  This  was  really  the  termina- 
tion of  the  attack,  although  the  bombardment  was  kept  up  until  the 
27th,  when  both  fleets  disappeared. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  enemy  were  in  front  of  Yicksburg  sixty- 
seven  days,  during  which  the  combined  efforts  of  two  powerful  fleets 
have  been  foiled,  and  the  accompanying  land  force,  from  4,000  to  5,000, 
held  at  bay.  The  number  of  shot  and  shell  thrown  by  the  fleet  is 
unknown  ; it  had  been  estimated  as  high  as  25,000  and  put  as  low  as 
20,000.  The  number,  however,  is  unimportant,  and  mentioned  only  to 
illustrate  the  fact  that  the  loss  to  a land  battery  when  attacked  by  one 
afloat  is  comparatively  small. 

The  casualties  from  the  enemy’s  firing  were  7 killed  and  15  wounded ; 
in  the  town  2 only  are  reported. 

The  enemy  fired  at  least  ten  shots  to  our  one,  and  their  number  of 
killed  and  wounded  can,  from  information,  be  safely  put  down  at  five 
times  as  great. 

It  is  a matter  of  surprise  that  not  a single  gun  was  dismounted  during  i 
the  whole  time,  and  only  two  temporarily  disabled,  both  being  repaired 
in  one  night.  The  number  of  guns  brought  against  us,  including  mor- 
tars, could  not  have  been  much  less  than  300 ; the  number  on  our  side 
was,  as  you  are  aware,  considerably  less. 

After  this  general  description  given,  it  would  be  great  injustice  not 
to  mention  the  commands  and  their  officers  that  have  been  instrumental 
in  so  signal  a success.  The  batteries  were  manned  by  three  companies 
First  Regiment  Louisiana  Artillery,  twocompanies  of  the  Twenty- second, 
two  companies  Twenty-third  Louisiana  Volunteers,  Major  Clinch;  four 
companies  heavy  artillery  from  Fort  Pillow,  Major  Hoadley ; three  com- 
panies Eighth  Louisiana  Battalion,  Major  Ogden.  Col.  A.  Jackson,  jr.,, 
and  Lieutenant- Colonel  Sterling,  both  of  the  heavy  artillery,  were  re- 
spectively in  immediate  command  of  the  upper  and  lower  batteries,  and 
Colonel  Fuller  chief  of  heavy  artillery.  , Lieutenant-Colonel  Pinkney, 
Eighth  Louisiana  Battalion,  in  command  of  two  of  the  lower  batteries 
for  a portion  of  the  time,  was  temporarily  relieved  under  a special  or- 
ganization, which  reduced  the  battalion  to  a major’s  command.  The 
officers  commanding  these  companies  were  as  follows:  Captains  Capers, 
Grayson,  Butler,  Tissot,  Purves,  Harrod,  Todd,  Dismukes,  Parks,  Nor- 
man, Postleth waite,  Durrive,  Kerr,  and  Lieutenants  Eustis,  Butler,  and 
McCrory.  The  names  of  the  above-mentioned  officers  are  given  for  the 
reason  that,  in  connection  with  their  lieutenants  and  men,  they  have ; 
passed  through  an  ordeal  that  troops  are  but  seldom  called  upon  to 
undergo.  For  more  than  seventy-five  days  and  nights  have  these  bat- 
teries been  continuously  manned  and  ready  for  action  at  a moment’s 
notice;  during  much  of  this  time  the  roar  of  cannon  has  been  unceas- 
ing, and  there  have  been  portions  of  it  during  which  the  noise  of  falling 
shot  and  the  explosions  of  shells  have  been  such  as  might  make  the 
stoutest  heart  quail,  yet  none  faltered;  the  blazing  sun,  the  fatiguing 
night-watch,  the  storm  of  battle,  all  were  alike  cheerfully  endured,  and 
whenever  called  upon  heavy  and  telling  blows  were  dealt  upon  our  foe.4 
in  return.  I feel  a pride  in  having  such  officers  and  such  men  unde? 


’hap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


11 


ny  command,  for  they  have  nobly  sustained  our  cause  in  time  of  need, 
lave  added  to  the  country’s  glory,  and  deserve  well  of  her  gratitude. 

Some  officers  possibly  attracted  my  attention  more  than  others  by 
ffieir  chivalric  courage  and  inspiriting  manner,  yet  the  conduct  of  all  wa  s 
so  noble  and  unexceptionable  that  I do  not  venture  to  particularize. 

The  distant  picketing  was  most  efficiently  and  faithfully  performed 
j>y  the  cavalry,  commanded  at  different  times  by  Colonel  Starke,  Lieu- 
:enant-Colonel  Ferguson,  and  Major  Jones,  according  as  they  were 
present.  The  nearer  picket  duty,  together  with  that  of  being  at  all 
;imes  guarded  against  surprise  and  ready  to  meet  an  attack,  was  so  pa- 
tently and  carefully  performed  by  the  Twenty-sixth,  Twenty- seventh, 
ind  Twenty-eighth  Louisiana  Volunteers,  under  Colonels  De  Clouet, 
Marks,  and  Allen  Thomas;  the  Fourth  and  Seventeenth  Louisiana 
Volunteers,  Colonel  Allen  and  Colonel  Eichardson  ; also  by  the  Third 
Regiment  and  Sixth  Battalion  Mississippi  Volunteers,  Colonel  Mellon 
md  Lieutenant-Colonel  Balfour,  together  with  Withers’  light  artillery, 
mder  Lieutenant-Colonel  Parker,  that  1 felt  secure  in  giving  most  of 
ny  attention  to  the  bombardment  going  on. 

‘Whenever  events  demanded  a united  movement  of  all  I found  a most 
reliable  and  efficient  officer  to  represent  me  and  carry  out  my  instruc- 
Dions  in  the  person  of  my  present  assistant  adjutant- general,  Colonel 
Girault,  whose  judgment  and  zeal  were  never  at  fault. 

Of  Captain  Lockett,  the  accomplished  engineer  officer  of  my  staff, 

[ have  to  speak  in  terms  of  unqualified  praise,  both  as  regards  skill  in 
his  profession  and  qualities  as  a soldier.  The  services  of  such  an  officer 
are  so  important  and  indispensable  as  to  have  all  the  effect  of  a positive 
increase  of  force  in  determining  the  issue  of  a contest.  I most  cordially 
recommend  him  to  notice. 

Captain  McDonald,  brigade  ordnance  officer,  and  Captains  Frost  and 
Harrod,  aides,  have  in  turn  performed  almost  every  duty  during  the 
siejie  known  to  the  service;  always  prompt,  they  are  distinguished  for 
intelligence  and  perseverance  in  the  performance  of  duty  that  merits 
constant  praise. 

To  the  brigade  quartermaster,  Maj.  J.  W.  Patton,  and  brigade  com- 
missary, Major  Eeed,  are  due  such  mention  as  devoted  attention  to 
their  duties  and  the  interests  of  the  service  merit;  both  have  performed 
all  the  duties  pertaining  to  a department,  and  both  have  been  compelled 
almost  to  create  what  they  have  had. 

The  part  borne  during  the  latter  days  of  the  bombardment  by  a de- 
tachment from  Major-General  Breckinridge’s  division  requires  special 
mention.  Captain  Cobb’s  company  of  light  artillery,  under  Lieutenant 
Gracey,  manned  a battery  which  was  so  spiritedly  served  as  to  attract 
attention  on  both  occasions  in  which  it  was  engaged  and  was  even 
noticed  by  the  enemy.  The  sharpshooters  detailed  from  the  same 
command  kept  up  a galling  fire  on  the  enemy  during  the  passage  of 
the  vessels  on  the  evening  of  the  15th,  and  drove  them  from  the  tops. 
The  lamented  Colonel  Statham’s  brigade,  under  his  own  lead,  showed 
a bravery  in  guarding  the  front  of  attack  assigned  him  that  could  not 
be  surpassed.  On  one  occasion,  having  forced  his  way  through  a swamp 
deemed  impassable,  he  made  a rush  upon  the  mortar-boats  moored  to 
shore,  driving  the  force  guarding  on  board,  and  had  the  positions  of 
the  boats  been  accurately  known  would  have  taken  possession  of  and 
destroyed  several.  The  engineer  company,  under  Captain  Wintter,  was 
steadily  occupied  in  the  repairs  of  batteries  and  did  valuable  service. 

The  report  of  the  struggle  at  Yicksburg  would  be  incomplete  with- 
out the  following  merited  tribute : During  the  engagement  of  the  28th 


12 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


a most  estimable  lady,  Mrs.  Gamble,  lost  her  life  by  the  fragment  of  a 
shell  striking  her  while  leaving  the  city.  This  lady  deserves  more  than 
a passing  notice.  Burning  with  patriotism,  she  inspired  all  around  her 
with  the  noble  spirit  of  resistance  to  oppression  and  confidence  in  the 
success  of  our  cause.  Ever  present  in  the  hospitals,  ministering  to  the 
sick  and  wounded  soldiers,  she  was  among  the  last  of  her  sex  to  leave 
the  devoted  city,  where  she  yielded  up  her  life  in  attestation  of  her  faith 
and  devotion.  Though  but  the  type  of  a . class  of  which  our  Southern  < 
land  can  boast,  she  is  a martyr  to  the  cause  she  loved,  and  without  her 
name  the  history  which  Vicksburg  has  made  for  herself  would  be  in- 
complete. 

To  the  citizens  of  Vicksburg  a nation’s  thanks  are  due  for  their  noble 
example  in  surrendering  their  property  and  homes  to  almost  certain? 
destruction,  and  that  so  little  damage  was  done  does  not  detract  from 
the  merit  of  their  act,  but  rather  serves  to  call  for  gratitude  to  the  Su-i 
preme  Being,  who  has  not  only  preserved  from  destruction  the  homes? 
of  a patriotic  people,  but  in  mercy  granted  a victory  over  their  enemies.! 

In  conclusion,  I deem  it  proper  to  remark  upon  the  manner  in  which 
the  bombardment  was  conducted.  In  locating  the  batteries  pains  had? 
been  taken  to  place  them  without  the  limits  of  the  town,  advantageous 
positions  even  having  been  rejected  with  that  view,  so  that  in  the  ap-t 
proaching  struggle  the  fight  might,  if  the  enemy  so  chose,  be  confined] 
to  the  armed  points,  and  the  city  itself,  which  could  have  no  bearing 
upon  the  ultimate  issue,  be  made  to  suffer  as  little  as  an  enlightened 
and  humane  method  of  conducting  war  would  lead  us  to  expect,  and 
which  under  the  same  circumstances  I think  most  enemies  would  have 
pursued.  Events  did  not  justify  our  expectations.  The  bombardment 
opened  upon  both  batteries  and  town.  This  was  expected  and  could  not 
be  objected  to,  and  no  fault  is  found  at  its  continuing  so  as  long  as  the 
enemy  had  hopes  of  accomplishing  their  object ; but  when  the  attack 
on  the  batteries  ceased,  when  the  bombarding  force  began  even  toi 
gradually  leave,  when  it  was  notorious  that  they  deemed  their  attack 
a failure,  then  to  continue  to  throw  shells  into  a beautiful  town,  as  was 
done  day  after  day,  with  the  sole  purpose  of  injuring  it,  of  defacing  it, 
of  destroying  private  property,  indicated  a spirit  of  wanton  destruction 
scarcely  pardonable  in  the  uncivilized  Indian.  This  seemed  to  be  the 
special  mission  of  the  upper  fleet.  Shame  to  the  man  who  commanded  it! 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  SMITH, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding  Defenses  of  Vicksburg. 

Maj.  M.  M.  Kimmel, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  District  of  Mississippi. 

[Addenda.*] 

Mayor’s  Office, 
Vicksburg , Miss.,  May  18,  1802. 

S.  P.  Lee,  U.  S.  K, 

Commanding  Advance  of  Naval  Division  : 

Your  communication  of  this  date,  addressed  u To  the  authorities  of 
Vicksburg,”  f has  been  delivered  to  me.  In  reply  I will  state  to  you 
that,  as  far  as  the  municipal  authorities  are  concerned,  we  have  erected 
no  defenses,  and  none  are  within  the  corporative  limits  of  the  city. 

* Embracing  the  correspondence  in  reference  to  surrender  of  Vicksburg  not  em- 
braced in  General  Smith’s  report. 

t See  Smith’s  report,  p.  6. 


jap.  XXVH.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA.  13 

ut,  sir,  in  further  reply  I will  state  that  neither  the  municipal  author- 
ies  nor  the  citizens  will  ever  consent  to  the  surrender  of  the  city. 
Respectfully,  yours, 

L.  LINDSAY, 

Mayor  of  the  City. 


Headquarters, 
Vicksburg , Miss.,  May  18,  1862. 

P.  Lee, 

Comdg.  Advance  of  Naval  Division , U.  S.  S.  Oneida : 

Sir  : As  your  communication  of  this  date  is  addressed  u To  the  au- 
lorities  of  Vicksburg,”  and  that  you  may  have  a full  reply  to  the  said 
unmunication,  I have  to  state  that  Mississippians  don’t  know  and 
fuse  to  learn  how  to  surrender  to  an  enemy.  If  Commodore  Farragut 
Brigadier-General  Butler  can  teach  them,  let  them  come  and  try. 
s to  the  defenses  of  Vicksburg,  I respectfully  refer  you  to  Brigadier- 
eneral  Smith,  commanding  forces  at  or  near  Vicksburg,  whose  reply 
herewith  inclosed.* 

Respectfully, 

JAMES  L.  AUTRY, 

Military  Governor  and  Colonel  Commanding  Post. 


U.  S.  Steamer  Oneida, 

Below  Vicksburg , Miss.,  May  21,  1862. 

Lindsay,  Esq., 

Mayor  of  the  City  of  Vicksburg : 

Sir  : It  becomes  my  duty  to  give  you  notice  to  remove  the  women 
id  children  beyond  the  range  of  our  guns  within  twenty-four  hours, 
i it  will  be  impossible  to  attack  the  defenses  without  injuring  or  de- 
roying  the  town,  a proceeding  which  all  the  authorities  of  Vicksburg 
em  determined  to  require.  I had  hoped  that  the  same  spirit  which 
duced  the  military  authorities  to  retire  from  the  city  of  New  Orleans 
>ther  than  wantonly  sacrifice  the  lives  and  property  of  its  inhabitants 
ould  have  been  followed  here. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

S.  PHILLIPS  LEE, 

Commanding  Advance  of  Naval  Division. 


Mayor’s  Office, 
Vicksburg , Miss..  May  21,  1862. 

P.  Lee,  U.  S.  Navy, 

Comdg.  Advance  of  Naval  Division , TJ.  S.  S.  Oneida  : 

Sir:  Your  communication  of  this  date  was  handed  to  me  at  a late 
)ur  this  evening ; too  late  to  give  public  notice  to  the  women  and 
lildren.  In  consequence  thereof  I shall  date  your  twenty-four  hours’ 
me  from  to-morrow  morning,  the  22d  instant,  at  8 a.  m. 

Respectfully, 

L.  LINDSAY,  Mayor. 


* See  Smith’s  report,  p.  7. 


14 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVn. 


U.  S.  Steamer  OnKida, 

Below  Vicksburg , Miss.,  May  22,  1862. 

L.  Lindsay,  Esq., 

Mayor  of  the  City  of  Vicksburg  : 

Sir:  I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication  of 
yesterday  evening,  and  in  reply  have  to  state  that  my  communication 
of  yesterday  in  relation  to  the  removal  of  the  women  and  children  was 
for  the  purpose  of  placing  it  at  my  option  to  fire  or  not,  as  I might 
think  proper,  at  the  earliest  moment  upon  the  defenses  of  the  town 
without  producing  a loss  of  innocent  life,  and  to  that  determination  I 
shall  adhere. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

S.  PHILLIPS  LEE, 
Commanding  Advance  of  Naval  Division. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn , C.  8.  Army , commanding  District  of 
Mississippi,  of  operations  at  Vicksburg  and  Baton  Rouge,  June  27— August 
6 (including  destruction  of  the  Arkansas ),  with  congratulatory  orders. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  28,  1862. 
Bombardment  heavy  yesterday  and  this  morning.  No  flinching. 
Houses  perforated ; none  burnt  yet.  Contest  will  commence  when  en- 
emy attempt  to  land ; he  will  probably  try  it.  Crippled  several  boats. 
They  only  amuse  our  men  by  firing  on  them  occasionally.  There  are 
about  forty  vessels  of  war  and  mortar-boats,  all  sound  and  fury  and  to 
brave  men  contemptible.  Will  keep  you  advised. 

EARL  VAN  HORN, 

Major-General. 

The  President. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  August  7,  1862. 

Arkansas  ordered  to  co  operate  with  General  Breckinridge.  Broke 
machinery  5 miles  above  Baton  Rouge.  On  way  down  was  attacked  bj 
enemy.  In  this  condition  fought  well,  inflicting  great  damage  to  gun 
boats,  and  was  then  blown  up  by  crew,  all  of  whom  escaped;  so  re 
ported.  Breckinridge  drove  the  enemy  from  town  to  cover  ot  boats 
Burnt  camp  and  large  amount  of  stores.  Captured  some  prisoners 
and  several  colors.  Was  reduced  one-lialf  by  sickness  since  left  Vicks 
burg.  General  Clark  mortally  wounded.  General  Thomas  Williams 
commanding  enemy’s  troops,  and  several  other  prominent  officers,  killed 
Sending  re-enforcements  to  break  up  garrison  entirely.  Breckinridge 
in  camp  10  miles  from  Baton  Rouge. 

EARL  VAN  HORN, 

Major-General. 

Secretary  of  War. 

[Indorsement.] 

Read  with  deep  regret  for  loss  of  Arkansas,  but  joy  at  the  success  o 
our  troops,  and  hope  that  it  will  be  made  complete. 

J . H. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


15 


Headquarters  District  of  Mississippi, 

Jackson , Miss.,  September  9,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  for  the  information  of  the 
War  Department  the  following  report  of  the  defense  of  Vicksburg  and 
of  operations  in  this  district  up  to  the  present  time: 

Pursuant  to  orders,  I assumed  command  of  this  district  and  the  de- 
fenses of  Vicksburg  on  June  27.  Prior  to  my  arrival  Major-General 
Lovell,  having  resolved  to  defend  the  city,  had  ordered  a detail  of  his 
force,  under  the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith,  to  garrison  the 
place  and  construct  works  for  its  defense.  I found  the  city  besieged  by 
a powerful  fleet  of  war  vessels  and  an  army.  The  inhabitants,  inspired 
by  a noble  patriotism,  had  determined  to  devote  the  city  to  destruction 
rather  than  see  it  fall  into  the  hands  of  an  enemy  who  had  abandoned 
many  of  the  rules  of  civilized  warfare.  This  voluntary  sacrifice  on  the 
altar  of  liberty  inspired  me  with  the  determination  to  defend  to  the  last 
extremity.  Orders  to  this  effect  were  at  once  issued,  to  which  my  army 
responded  with  the  liveliest  enthusiasm.  The  citizens  retired  to  the 
interior  while  the  troops  marched  in  and  pitched  their  tents  in  the  valleys 
and  on  the  hills  adjacent  in  convenient  position  to  support  batteries 
and  strike  assailants. 

The  batteries  of  heavy  guns  already  established  by  the  skill  and 
energy  of  General  Smith  on  the  crest  of  the  hills  overlooking  the  river 
were  placed  in  complete  readiness  for  action.  Other  guns  were  brought 
up  from  Mobile,  from  Richmond,  from  Columbus,  and  elsewhere,  and 
put  in  battery.  Breckinridge’s  division  occupied  the  city.  Smith’s 
brigade,  which  previous  to  my  arrival  had  furnished  the  garrison  of 
the  place,  manned  the  batteries,  and  with  details  from  Breckinridge’s 
division  guarded  the  approaches  in  front  and  on  the  flanks.  Withers’ 
light  artillery  was  placed  in  such  positions  as  to  sweep  all  near  ap- 
proaches, while  Starke’s  cavalry  watched  at  a distance  on  our  flanks  on 
the  Yazoo  and  below  Warren  ton  on  the  Mississippi. 

Prior  to  my  assuming  command  the  attacking  force  of  the  enemy 
was  confined  to  Porter’s  mortar  fleet  and  Farragut’s  gunboats  (with 
their  attendant  army  in  transports),  which  had  ascended  the  river  from 
New  Orleans.  For  the  operations  of  this  force  in  attack  and  for  the 
successful  and  heroic  resistance  made  by  General  Smith  and  the  troops 
under  his  command  I refer  the  Department  to  the  satisfactory  and 
graphic  report  of  that  officer,  herewith  communicated. 

The  evacuation  of  Fort  Pillow  and  the  fall  of  Memphis  opened  the 
new  danger  of  a combination  between  the  upper  and  lower  fleets  of 
the  enemy.  This  junction  was  effected  early  in  July,  and  thus  an  added 
force  of  more  than  forty  gunboats,  mortar-boats,  rams,  and  transports 
lay  in  menace  before  the  city.  On  July  12  it  opened  fire  and  kept  up 
a continuous  attack  until  the  bombardment  of  the  city  ceased.  Having 
received  authority  from  the  President  to  use  the  ram  Arkansas  as  part 
of  my  force,  some  days  prior  to  July  15  I issued  an  order  to  Gapt.  [I.  N.] 
Brown  to  assume  command  of  her  and  prepare  her  for  immediate  and 
active  service.  From  all  reliable  sources  I learned  that  she  was  a vessel 
capable  of  great  resistance  and  armed  with  large  offensive  power. 
Making  the  order  imperative,  I commanded  Captain  Brown  to  take 
her  through  the  raft  of  the  Yazoo,  and  after  sinking  the  Star  of  the 
West  in  the  passage  to  go  out  and  attack  the  upper  fleet  of  the  enemy, 
to  the  cover  of  my  batteries.  I left  it  to  his  judgment  to  determine 
whether  on  reaching  the  city  his  vessel  was  in  a condition  to  proceed 
down  the  river  and  destroy  the  lower  mortar  fleet.  Captain  Brown 
properly  substituted  a vessel  of  inferior  quality  in  place  of  the  Star  of 


16 


W.  FLA.,  & ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX=,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

the  West,  entered  the  Mississippi,  and  on  the  memorable  morning  of 
July  15  immortalized  his  single  vessel,  himself,  and  the  heroes  under 
his  command  by  an  achievement  the  most  brilliant  ever  recorded  m 
naval  annals.  I deeply  regret  that  I am  unable  to  enrich  my  report  by 
an  authentic  account  of  the  heroic  action  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the 
Arkansas.  Commodore  [Wm.  F.J  Lynch  declines  to  furnish  me  with  a 
report  of  the  action,  on  the  ground  tha/t  he  was  an  officer  out  of  the  scope 
of  my  command.  The  glory  of  this  deed  of  the  Arkansas  stung  the  pride 
of  the  Federal  Navy,  and  led  to  the  most  speedy  but  unsuccessful  effort 
of  the  combined  fleets  to  destroy  her.  I refer  the  Department  to  the 
accompanying  report  of  General  Smith  for  an  accurate  detail  ot  those 
efforts,  as  also  for  a connected  and  faithful  relation  of  the  important 
events  which  make  the  history  of  the  siege  and  defense  of  Vicksburg. 
With  the  failure  to  destroy  or  take  the  Arkansas  the  siege  ot  Vicksburg 
practically  ended.  The  attack  on  the  batteries  soon  ceased,  and  the 
enemy,  baffled  and  enraged  by  an  unexpected,  determined,  and  persist- 
ent defense,  vented  his  wrath  in  impotent  and  barbarian  efforts  to  de- 
stroy the  city.  On  July  27  both  fleets  disappeared— foiled  m a more 
than  two  months7  struggle  to  reduce  the  place. 

The  casualties  on  our  side  during  the  entire  siege  were  22  killed  and 
wounded.  Not  a gun  was  dismounted  and  but  two  were  temporarily 

^The  successful  defense  of  Vicksburg  is  due  to  the  unflinching  valor 
of  the  cannoneers,  who,  unwearied  by  watchfulness,  night  and  day 
stood  by  their  guns,  unawed  by  the  terrors  of  a fierce  and  continuous 
bombardment:  to  the  sleepless  vigilance  and  undaunted  courage  ot  the 
troops,  who  lay  at  all  hours  in  close  supporting  distance  of  every  bat- 
terv,  ready  to  beat  back  the  invader  so  soon  as  his  footsteps  should 
touch  the  shore:  to  the  skillful  location  of  scattered  batteries,  and  last, 
but  not  least,  to  that  great  moral  power— a high  and  patriotic  resolve, 
pervading  and  swelling  the  breasts  of  officers,  soldiers,  and  citizens— 
that  at  every  cost  the  enemy  should  be  repelled.  I refer  the  Depart- 
ment to  the  specific  enumeration  of  the  names  of  officers  and  men  who 
won  distinction  by  meritorious  service  during  the  siege,  as  reported  by 
General  Smith,  and  I heartily  indorse  his  commendations. 

Satisfied  that  the  enemy  disappeared  from  Vicksburg  under  the  mor- 
tifying conviction  that  it  was  impregnable  to  his  attack,  1 resolved  to 
strike  a blow  before  he  had  time  to  organize  and  mature  a new  scheme 

° The  enemy  held  Baton  Rouge,  the  capital  of  Louisiana,  40  miles  below 
the  mouth  of  Red  River,  with  a land  force  of  about  3,500  men,  m 
conjunction  with  four  or  five  gunboats  and  some  transports,  it  was 
a matter  of  great  necessity  to  us  that  the  navigation  of  Red  River 
should  be  opened  as  high  as  Vicksburg.  Supplies  much  needed  existed 
there,  hard  to  be  obtained  from  any  other  quarter,  and  strong  military 
reasons  demanded  that  we  should  hold  the  Mississippi  at  two  points,  to 
facilitate  communications  and  co-operation  between  my  district  and 
the  Trans-Mississippi  Department.  The  capture  of  Baton  Rouge  and 
the  forces  of  the  enemy  at  that  point  would  open  the  Mississippi,  secure 
the  navigation  of  Red  River,  then  in  a state  of  blockade,  and  also 
render  easier  the  recapture  of  New  Orleans.  To  this  end  I gave  orders 
to  General  Breckinridge  to  move  upon  Baton  Rouge  with  a force  ot 
5,000  men  picked  from  the  troops  at  Vicksburg,  and  added  to  ns 
command  the  whole  effective  force  of  General  Ruggles,  then  at  Camp 
Moore,  making  a total  force  of  6,000  men.  To  insure  the  success  of 
the  plan  1 ordered  the  Arkansas  to  co-operate  with  the  land  forces 


etup.  mn.i  vicksdurg,  Miss.,  And  baton  rouge,  la.  17 

by  a simultaneous  attack  from  the  river.  All  damages  sustained  by 
the  Arkansas  from  the  fleets  of  the  enemy  had  been  repaired,  and 
when  she  left  the  wharf  at  Vicksburg  for  Baton  Rogue  she  was  deemed 
to  be  as  formidable  in  attack  or  defense  as  when  she  defied  a fleet  of 
forty  vessels  of  war,  many  of  them  iron-clads.  With  such  effective 
means  I deemed  the  taking  of  Baton  Rouge  and  the  destruction  or 
capture  of  the  enemy  on  land  and  water  the  reasonable  result  of  the 
expedition. 

By  epidemic  disease  the  land  force  under  Major-General  Breckin- 
ridge was  reduced  to  less  than  3,000  effective  men  within  the  period  of 
ten  days  after  he  reached  Camp  Moore.  The  Arkansas,  after  arriving 
within  a short  distance  of  Baton  Rouge  in  ample  time  for  joint  action 
at  the  appointed  hour  of  attack,  suddenly  became  unmanageable  from 
a failure  in  her  machinery  and  engine,  which  all  the  efforts  of  her  en- 
gineers could  not  repair.  The  gallant  Breckinridge,  advised  by  tele- 
gram every  hour  of  her  progress  toward  Baton  Rouge  and  counting 
on  her  co-operation,  attacked  the  enemy  with  his  whole  effective  force 
(then  reduced  to  about  2,500  men),  drove  him  from  all  his  positions, 
and  forced  him  to  seek  protection  under  the  cover  of  his  gunboats. 

I regret  to  state  that  the  labors  of  General  Breckinridge  in  a distant 
field  of  operations  have  thus  far  prevented  him  from  making  to  me  a 
report  of  his  action,  but  enough  has  transpired  to  enable  me  to  assure 
the  Department  that  the  battle  of  Baton  Rouge  illustrated  the  valor  of 
our  troops  and  the  skill  and  intrepidity  of  their  commander.  His  re- 
port will  be  forwarded  so  soon  as  it  is  received. 

It  will  be  thus  manifest  to  the  Department  that  an  enterprise  so 
hopeful  in  its  promise  met  with  partial  failure  only  from  causes  which 
were  not  only  beyond  my  control,  but  out  of  the  reach  of  ordinary  fore- 
sight. I could  not  anticipate  the  sudden  illness  of  3,000  picked  men, 
and  the  failure  of  the  Arkansas  at  the  critical  hour  appointed  to  her  for 
added  honors  was  a joyful  surprise  to  the  startled  fleet  of  the  enemy 
and  a wonder  to  all  who  had  witnessed  her  glory  at  Vicksburg. 

Advised  of  the  result  of  the  expedition,  I immediately  ordered  the 
occupation  of  Port  Hudson,  a point  selected  for  its  eligibility  for  de- 
fense and  for  its  capacity  for  offensive  annoyance  of  the  enemy-estab- 
lished batteries — manned  them  with  experienced  gunners  and  guarded 
them  by  an  adequate  supporting  force,  holding  Baton  Rouge  in  the 
mean  while  in  menace.  The  effect  of  these  operations  was  the  evacua- 
tion of  Baton  Rouge  by  the  enemy  and  his  disappearance  from  the  Mis- 
sissippi between  the  capital  of  Louisiana  and  Vicksburg.  The  results 
sought  by  the  movement  against  Baton  Rouge  have  been  to  a great 
extent  attained.  We  hold  two  points  on  the  Mississippi,  more  than  200 
miles,  unmolested  by  the  enemy  and  closed  to  him.  The  navigation 
of  the  Mississippi  River  from  the  mouth  of  Red  River  to  Vicksburg  was 
at  once  opened  and  still  remains  open  to  our  commerce,  giving  us  also 
the  important  advantage  of  water  connection  by  Red  River  of  the 
East  with  the  West.  Indispensable  supplies  have  been  and  continue 
to  be  drawn  from  this  source.  The  desired  facilities  for  communica- 
tion and  co-operation  between  this  district  and  the  Trans-Mississippi 
Department  have  been  established.  The  recapture  of  New  Orleans  has 
been  made  easier  to  our  army. 

I think  it  due  to  the  truth  of  history  to  correct  the  error  industri- 
ously spread  by  the  official  reports  of  the  enemy  touching  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Arkansas.  She  was  no  trophy  won  by  the  Essex  nor  did 
she  receive  injury  at  Baton  Rouge  from  the  hands  of  any  of  her  adver- 

2 R R — VOL  XV 


18 


W.  FLA. 


saries.  Lieutenant  Stevens,  her  gallant  commander,  finding  lier  un- 
manageable, moored  her  to  the  shore.  On  the  cautious  approach  of 
the  enemy,  who  kept  at  a respectful  distance,  he  landed  his  crew,  cut 
her  from  her  moorings,  fired  her  with  his  own  hands,  and  turned  her 
adrift  down  the  river.  With  every  gun  shotted,  our  flag  floating  from 
her  bow,  and  not  a man  on  board,  the  Arkansas  bore  down  upon  the 
enemy  and  gave  him  battle.  The  guns  were  discharged  as  the  flames 
reached  them,  and  when  her  last  shot  was  fired  the  explosion  of  her 
magazine  ended  the  brief  but  glorious  career  of  the  Arkansas.  it 
was  beautiful,”  said  Lieutenant  Stevens,  while  the  tears  stood  m his 
eyes  uto  see  her,  when  abandoned  by  commander  and  crew  and  dedi- 
cated to  sacrifice,  fighting  the  battle  on  her  own  hook.”  I trust  that 
the  official  report  of  Commodore  Lynch  will  do  justice  to  the  courage, 
constancy,  and  resolution  of  the  officers  and  men  who  were  the  last  crew 

of  the  Arkansas.  , ' . ,, 

I deem  it  eminently  proper  to  say  to  the  Department  that  neither  the 
spirit  which  resolved  to  dispute  at  Vicksburg  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
Mississippi  Liver  nor  the  energy  which  successfully  executed  that 
resolution  was  local  in  its  character.  Lor  was  it  a siiirit  bounded  by 
State  lines  or  circumscribed  by  State  pride.  It  was  a broad,  catholic 
spirit,  wide  as  our  country,  and  unlimited  as  the  independence  which 
we  struggle  to  establish.  The  power  which  baffled  the  enemy  resided 
in  the  breasts  of  the  soldiers  of  seven  States,  marshaled  behind  the 
ramparts  of  Vicksburg.  Mississippians  were  there,  but  there,  too,  also 
were  the  men  of  Kentucky,  of  Tennessee,  of  Alabama,  of  Arkansas,  of 
Louisiana,  and  of  Missouri,  as  ready  to  defend  the  emporium  of  Missis- 
sippi as  to  strike  down  the  foe  at  their  own  hearth-stones. 

I incorporate  with  my  report  a schedule  of  the  forces  under  my  com- 
mand at  Vicksburg  as  a proper  contribution  to  the  archives  of  the 

Confederacy.  __ . , , « , , 

General  Helm:  Fourth  Kentucky  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Hynes;  Fifth  Kentucky  Volunteers,  Colonel  Hunt;  Thirty -first  Ala- 
bama Volunteers,  Colonel  Edwards;  Fourth  Alabama  Battalion,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Snodgrass;  Thirty-first  Mississippi  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Orr ; Hudson’s  battery,  First  Lieutenant  Sweaney. 

General  J.  S.  Bowen:  First  Missouri  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Riley ; Tenth  Arkansas  Volunteers,  Col.  A.  E.  Witt;  Ninth  Arkansas 
Volunteers,  Colonel  Dunlop;  Sixth  Mississippi  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Lowry;  Second  Confederate  Battalion,  [James  C.  Malone];  Watson 
Battery,  Captain  Bursley. 

General  Preston:  Third  Kentucky  Volunteers,  Colonel  Thompson; 
Sixth  Kentucky  Volunteers,  Colonel  Lewis;  Seventh  Kentucky  Volun- 
teers, Colonel  .Crossland ; Thirty-fifth  Alabama  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Robertson;  Cobb’s  battery,  Lieutenant Gracey. 

Col.  W.  S.  Statham : Fifteenth  Mississippi  Volunteers,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Farrell ; Twenty-second  Mississippi  V olunteers,  Captain  Hughes ; 

Nineteenth  Tennessee  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Moore;  Twentieth 

Tennessee  Volunteers,  Colonel  Smith;  Twenty-eighth  Tennessee  Volun- 
teers, Colonel  Brown ; Forty-fifth  Tennessee  Volunteers,  Colonel  Searcy ; 
McClung’s  battery,  Captain  McClung.  _ ^ , 

General  M.  L.  Smith : Company  of  sappers  and  miners,  Captain  Wint 
ter;  Twenty-sixth  Louisiana  Volunteers,  Colonel  De  Clouet;  Twenty 
eighth  Louisiana  Volunteers,  Colonel  Thomas ; Sixth  Mississippi  Bat 
talion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Balfour ; Twenty- seventh  Louisiana  Volun 
teers,  Colonel  Marks;  Third  Mississippi  Volunteers,  Colonel  Mellon; 
Seventeenth  Louisiana  Volunteers,  Colonel  Richardson ; Fourth  Loui- 
siana Volunteers,  Colonel  Allen  ; Company  I,  Thirty-ninth  Mississippi 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


19 


Volunteers,  Captain  Randel;  First  Mississippi  Light  Artillery,  Colonel 
Withers;  regiment  heavy  artillery,  Colonel  Jackson;  Eighth  Louisiana 
Battalion,  W.  E.  Pinkney ; First  Louisiana  Battalion,  Major  Clinch ; 
Twenty-eighth  Mississippi  Cavalry,  Colonel  Starke ; Battalion  Zouaves, 
Major  Dupeire ; cavalry  escort,  Lieutenant  Bradley. 

To  the  members  of  my  staff,  Majors  Kimmel  and  Stith,  assistant 
adjutant-generals;  to  Majrs.  Joseph  D.  Balfour  and  A.  M.  Haskell,  in- 
spectors; to  Surgeon  Choppin,  medical  director;  Surgeon  Bryan,  medi- 
cal inspector ; to  Lieutenants  Sulivane  and  Shoemaker,  my  aides ; to 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Lomax,  assistant  adjutant  and  inspector  general; 
Lieut.  Col.  J.  P.  Major,  acting  engineer ; Capts.  A.  H.  Cross  and  Thys- 
sens,  engineers;  to  Col.  Fred.  Tate,  and  to  Majors  Uriel  Wright  and 
Wechler,  volunteer  aides,  I return  my  thanks  for  the  ready  and  efficient 
services  rendered  by  them  in  their  respective  departments. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major-General. 

P.  S. — Since  this  report  was  written  I have  received  the  report  of 
Major-General  Breckinridge  of  his  operations  at  Baton  Rouge  and  Port 
Hudson,  herewith /or warded.*  It  gives  me  pleasure  to  commend  to  the 
special  notice  of  the  Department  the  names  of  all  who  won  distinction 
in  this  service. 


GrENERAL  ORDERS,  1 WAR  DEPT.,  ADJT.  AND  INSP.  GEN.’S  OFFICE, 

No.  51.  f Richmond , Va.,  July  22,  1862. 

The  successful  defense  of  Vicksburg  against  the  mortar  fleet  of  the 
memy  by  Major-General  Van  Dorn  and  the  officers  and  men  under  his 
command  entitles  them  to  the  gratitude  of  the  country,  the  thanks  of 
the  Government,  and  the  admiration  of  the  Army.  By  their  gallantry 
md  good  conduct  they  have  not  only  saved  the  city  intrusted  to  them, 
t)ut  they  have  shown  that  bombardments  of  cities,  if  bravely  resisted, 
ichieve  nothing  for  the  enemy,  and  only  serve  to  unveil  his  malice  and 
the  hypocrisy  of  his  pretended  wish  to  restore  the  Union.  The  world 
aow  sees  that  his  mission  is  one  of  destruction,  not  restoration. 

Lieutenant  Brown  and  the  officers  and  crew  of  the  Confederate 
steamer  Arkansas,  by  their  heroic  attack  upon  the  Federal  fleet  before 
Vicksburg,  equaled  the  highest  recorded  examples  of  courage  and  skill. 
They  prove  that  the  Navy,  when  it  regains  its  proper  element,  will  be 
me  of  the  chief  bulwarks  of  national  defense,  and  that  it  is  entitled  to 
i high  place  in  the  confidence  and  affection  of  the  country. 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  Nathan  A.  M.  Dudley , Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Infantry , 
of  expedition  from  Baton  Rouge , La .,  June  7-9. 

Hdqrs.  Thirtieth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Vols., 

Baton  Rouge , La.,  June  9,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  for  the  information  of  the  general  com- 

* See  Report  No.  24. 


20 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  IChap.  XXVrt. 


manding,  that,  pursuant  to  his  instructions,  I proceeded  at  6 p.  m.  on 
the  evening  of  the  7th,  with  eight  companies  of  the  Thirtieth  Regiment 
Massachusetts  Volunteers  and  one  section  of  Kims’  battery  (joined  af- 
terward near  Laycock’s  plantation  by  two  companies  of  the  Fourth 
Wisconsin  Regiment,  under  Captain  Bailey),  to  George  Keller’s  plan- 
tation, located  on  the  Benton  Ferry  road.  On  arriving  at  the  forks  of 
the  road  (one  leading  to  Castle’s  house)  I detached  three  companies, 
under  Maj.  H.  O.  Whittemore,  with  instructions  to  surround  the  house 
and  secure  the  person  of  Castle,  or  any  other  party  that  might  be  found 
of  a suspicious  character,  but  with  positive  instructions  not  to  burn  or 
destroy  the  premises,  as  it  would  create  an  alarm  in  the  front,  which  I 
had  previously  guarded  against  by  throwing  out  a small  scout,  under 
Lieutenant  Norcross,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  who  per-  ■ 
formed  this  duty  in  a most  creditable  manner.  I reached  Penny’s  plan- 
tation about  lip.  m.  This  place  is  located  about  7£  miles  from  the 
city,  on  the  north  side.  Captain  Kelty,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Vol- 
unteers, deployed  his  company  as  skirmishers  and  closed  a line  of  men 
entirely  around  the  house  before  the  inmates  were  aware  of  his  ap- 
proach. The  overseer  of  Penny’s  plantation,  who  was  found  on  the  ; 
premises,  was  made  a prisoner,  and  is  now  in  charge  of  the  guard.  I \ 
am  informed  that  he  has  been  out  once  or  twice  witluflunter’s  company. 

I left  Captain  Bailey  and  two  companies  of  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  Reg- 
iment as  a guard  to  what  stock  and  property  were  found  here,  with  orders 
to  detach  one  company  and  proceed  himself  in  command  to  Johnston’s 
estate,  about  1 mile  to  the  rear  of  Penny’s,  where  both  Penny  and  Castle 
were  seen  some  eight  hours  previous,  while  I proceeded  with  the  bal- 
ance of  the  command  to  Keller’s  plantation,  about  4 miles  farther.  So 
quietly  did  the  troops  move  out  that  the  arrival  of  the  advance  guard 
was  entirely  unexpected  by  the  inmates  of  the  house.  Kot  finding  the 
party  I was  ordered  to  arrest,  after  making  a thorough  search  of  all  the 
out-buildings  and  grounds,  I placed  a close  line  of  sentinels  around  the 
house  and  negro  huts,  aud  ordered  the  command  to  bivouac  outside  of 
the  house  grounds  in  a cotton  field  until  daylight. 

I found  the  wife  of  Keller,  her  father  and  mother,  daughter,  and  two 
young  ladies  at  the  residence.  I commenced  collecting  all  the  live 
stock  I could  find  on  the  premises.  I found  about  10  head  of  horses,  a 
few  mules,  about  60  head  of  beeves,  carriage,  &c.,  all  of  which  I 
brought  to  town.  Out  of  consideration  for  the  presence  of  ladies  I did 
not  destroy  the  dwelling,  kitchen,  or  pantry  building ; all  others  I either 
burnt  or  tore  down,  except  the  cotton-gin,  which  contained  30  bales  of 
cotton.  The  fences  I burnt ; the  ornamental  trees  I either  cut  down  or 
destroyed.  This,  the  most  painful  duty  of  my  military  life,  I executed 
in  the  most  delicate  manner  I possibly  could,  first  tendering  the  ladies 
an  escort  and  transportation  to  the  next  plantation  before  I commenced 
the  destruction  of  anything  belonging  to  the  estate,  which  was  decliued 
in  anything  but  a kindly  style.  I did  not  allow  any  of  the  enlisted  men 
to  enter  the  dwelling.  I permitted  Mrs.  Keller  and  each  of  the  family 
to  select  as  many  servants  as  they  desired  left  them,  three  horses,  and 
seven  cows,  which  they  expressed  a desire  for.  I am  positive  that  not 
the  first  article  of  the  personal  property  of  either  of  the  ladies  was 
touched  or  brought  away.  The  father-in-law  of  Keller  admitted  that 
all  I took  away  or  destroyed  was  the  sole  property  of  Keller,  and  added 
that  he  had  predicted  such  a result  by  the  recent  conduct  of  Keller. 

At  6.30  a.  m.  I took  up  line  of  march ; was  joined  by  Major  Whitte 
more’s  detachment  about  2 miles  from  Penny’s  estate  ; proceeded  to  the 
latter’s  plantation,  when  Captain  Bailey  reported  his  failure  to  arresl 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


21 


either  of  the  parties  we  were  in  pursuit  of.  I here  dispatched  a note 
to  the  general  commanding.  On  the  messenger’s  return  I commenced 
the  destruction  of  this  once  beautiful  plantation.  I burnt  every  build- 
ing on  the  estate  except  such  as  were  required  to  cover  the  negroes  left 
behind,  including  an  extensive  and  valuable  sugar-mill,  and  also  de- 
stroyed the  fences — in  fact,  left  nothing  but  the  blackened  chimneys  as 
monuments  to  the  folly  and  villainy  of  its  guerrilla  owner. 

The  amount  of  live  stock  brought  in  by  the  expedition,  which  I have 
directed  to  be  turned  over  to  the  brigade  quartermaster,  consists  of 
about  90  head  of  beef  cattle,  45  head  of  mules,  10  four-mule  wagons, 

10  head  of  horses,  1 carriage,  1 light  wagon,  together  with  3 barrels  of 
molasses  and  30  hogsheads  of  sugar.  I was  compelled  to  leave  at  Cas- 
tle’s estate,  for  the  want  of  proper  transportation,  some  50,000  pounds 
of  sugar ; at  Penny’s,  16  hogsheads  of  sugar;  at  Keller’s,  35  bales  of 
cotton  and  a considerable  amount  of  sugar,  all  of  which  can  be  got  if 
sent  for  soon. 

I found  a very  united  feeling  among  the  several  residents  with  whom 
I conversed  as  to  the  guilt  of  each  of  the  three  parties — Keller,  Penny, 
and  Castle — that  I visited,  and  they  expressed  gratification  that  a 
speedy  punishment  had  fallen  upon  them. 

The  negro  prisoners  I brought  in  have  all  been  turned  over  to  the 
quartermaster’s  department.  They  number  over  100. 

I have  made  this  report  somewhat  longer  than  may  seem  necessary 
to  the  general  commanding,  but  I have  thought  it  proper  to  give  him 
a full  detail  of  all  that  occurred. 

It  affords  me  great  gratification  to  say  that  the  men  of  each  corps 
and  regiment  represented  in  the  command  behaved  in  the  most  soldierly 
manner,  all  paying  the  most  sacred  regard  to  the  property  of  all  per- 
sons on  the  route,  except  when  ordered  to  destroy  the  property  referred 
to  in  this  report;  in  fact,  I saw  no  man  leave  the  column  without  per- 
mission. 

I was  especially  indebted  to  the  energy  and  efficiency  of  Captain  . 
Kelty  and  his  company,  who  acted  as  skirmishers  the  entire  route  out, 
for  some  2 miles  at  one  time  working  their  way  through  a most  dense 
foliage. 

I inclose  Major  Whittemore’s  report,  which  refers  only  to  the  Castle 
plantation  detachment. 

I have  the  honor,  sir,  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  A.  M.  DUDLEY, 

Colonel  Thirtieth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

Captain  Hoffman,  A.  A.  G.,  Second  Brigade , Dept,  of  the  Gulf. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell , C.  S.  Army , of  engagement  at 
Grand  Gulf  Miss.,  June  9. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  June  18,  1862. 

Enemy’s  fleet  attacked  our  batteries  at  Grand  Gulf  and  were  repulsed 
with  loss.  Casualties  on  our  side  none.* 

M.  LOVELL. 

General  Cooper. 

*lhis  probably  refers  to  engagement  June  9, 1862,  between  the  Grand  Gulf  batteries 
aDd  U.  S.  steamers  Wissahickon  and  Itasca.  See  reports  of  Commanders  James  S. 
Palmer  and  John  De  Camp  in  Annual  Report  of  Secretary  of  Navy,  Dec.  1,  1862. 


22 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap,  xxvn, 


No.  5. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Williams , U.  8.  Army , commanding  Expe- 
ditionary Corps , of  operations  May  26- August  2,  with  instructions  from 
Major-General  Butler. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Baton  Rouge  Arsenal , May  29,  1862. 
Major:  My  last  report,*  from  just  below  Vicksburg,  is  supposed  to 
have  reached  headquarters  by  the  bauds  of  Lieutenant  McCoy,  acting 
brigade  commissary,  sent  with  steamer  Benton  for  subsistence  stores 
and  clothing;  ammunition  also  much  needed  for  our  small-arms,  should 
have  been  required  at  the  same  time.  The  latter  is  now  nearly  ex-  i 
hausted. 

Arriving  here  this  morning  at  6.30  a.  m.,  under  escort  of  the  war  . 
sloop  Brooklyn  and  gunboat  Kineo,  I found  the  flag-officer  off  the  town  I 
with  the  Hartford  and  Kennebec.  Having  called  upon  the  flag-officer, 
he  represented  to  me  that  the  inhabitants,  in  momentary  expectation  ) 
of  sack,  burning,  and  pillage  at  the  hands  of  the  rebels,  entreated  our  i 
protection,  and  that  he  himself  had  opened  the  batteries  of  his  own 
vessel  on  a party  of  irregular  cavalry  who  rode  down  to  the  water’s  j 
edge  yesterday  and  fired  into  one  of  his  boats,  wounding  an  officer  and  j 
2 men.  With  the  view  of  saving  the  public  buildings  and  affording  I 
protection  to  the  lives  and  property  of  loyal  citizens  the  flag-officer 
suggested  the  expediency  of  landing  the  troops,  in  which  I the  more 
readily  concurred,  the  troops  requiring  rest,  the  means  of  cooking,  and 
cleaning  themselves.  To  enable  me  to  effect  this,  my  subsistence  being 
exhausted,  the  flag  officer  has  kindly  supplied  me  with  subsistence, 
chiefly  bread  and  meat,  for  three  days.  Meanwhile  I must  rely  on  the 
return  of  the  Benton,  with  Lieutenant  McCoy,  and  such  supplies  of 
fresh  meat  as  it  may  be  in  my  power  to  procure  from  the  surrounding 
country  invested  with  guerrilla  bands. 

Union  men,  in  great  alarm,  represent  a large  force  at  Camp  Moore, 
some  say  6,000  men,  some  less,  who  threaten  to  march  on  the  town  and 
burn  it.  Mv  whole  effective  infantry  force  of  1,400,  and  75  artillery 
and  four  pieces,  may  suffice  to  prevent  such  a disaster,  but  for  perfect 
security  I would  suggest  respectfully  that  the  remaining  three  regi- 
ments of  my  brigade  and  Mm  s’  battery  be  sen  t me,  and  perhaps  it 
would  be  well  to  send  the  additional  regiments  designed  to  take  part 
in  the  Mobile  expedition,  in  order,  first,  that  they  may  be  put  in  shape 
for  service  and  that  troops  and  commander  may  have  some  knowledge 
of  each  other.  Another  reason  may  be  stated  that  the  position  here  is 
high  and  probably  far  more  healthy  than  New  Orleans  and  the  ground 
for  encamping  and  exercising  troops  such  as  cannot  be  found  about 
New  Orleans. 

The  steamer  Star,  with  subsistence  stores,  Lieutenant  McCoy  in 
charge,  has  as  I write  arrived  from  New  Orleans,  and  brings  Major- 
General  Butler’s  dispatch  of  May  27. 

I regret  to  say  I believe  there  is  just  ground  against  the  Wisconsin 
and  Michigan  regiments  for  the  charge  of  pillaging  and  marauding 
preferred  against  them  by  the  inhabitants  of  Kenner  Station.  Orders 
have  been  issued,  conversations  held  with  the  officers  remonstrating 
and  denouncing,  and  the  fidelity  of  guards  and  sentinels  insisted  on, 
thus  far,  I believe,  in  vain.  These  regiments,  officers  and  men,  with  rare 


This  is  the  first  of  the  reports  found. 


Chat.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


23 


exceptions,  appear  to  be  wholly  destitute  of  the  moral  sense,  and  I 
believe  that  they  believe,  in  the  face  of  all  remonstrances,  exhorta- 
tions, and  disgust,  expressed  in  no  measured  terms,  that  they  regard 
pillaging  not  only  right  in  itself  but  a soldierly  accomplishment.  The 
major-general  commanding  will  perceive  that  where  nearly  all  are  in 
league  how  difficult  detection  is,  how  far  more  difficult  conviction.  He 
may  rest  assured  that  I will  prevent  pillaging  when  I can,  and,  not 
preventing,  will  detect  and  punish  when  I can  detect  and  convict. 

The  major-general  commanding,  in  his  dispatch  of  27tli  of  May,  as- 
sumed my  transportation  to  have  been  excessive.  On  this  subject  I 
beg  to  differ  from  him  wholly,  and  to  say,  on  the  contrary,  that  the 
men  have  suffered  from  insufficiency  of  transportation,  cramped  and 
crowded  more  like  live  stock  than  men,  without  the  means  of  exercise 
on  board  or  room  to  form  for  inspection.  Filth  and  dirt,  with  all  the 
authority  and  supervision  I could  exert,  abounded  on  vessels  and  men 
to  a disgusting  and  of  course  most  unwholesome  degree.  Indeed  it 
may  be  said,  “You  were  not  expected  to  be  gone  long,  and  you  were 
expected  to  land  whenever  you  could  to  relieve  your  men  and  cleanse 
your  vessels ; ” but  I answer,  In  the  quarter  where  I have  been  longest 
the  flooded  country  afforded  no  dry  ground  to  land  on.  I followed  the 
fleet,  and  as  the  crews  of  the  fleet  could  find  no  landing  place  and  re- 
mained on  board  my  men  remained  on  board,  with  this  difference,  that 
while  the  former  were  in  comfort  with  their  ton’s  measurement  per  man, 
we  were  in  as  much  and  more  discomfort  with  our  fraction  of  a ton 
than  men  should  ever  be  subjected  to,  especially  if  expected  to  be  vig- 
orous, disciplined,  and  effective  military. 

I shall  refer  to  the  flag-officer,  requesting  the  assistance  of  one  or  two 
gunboats,  what  the  major-general  commanding  says  about  the  probable 
attempt  of  the  rebels  to  bring  troops  and  beef  cattle  down  the  Red  River 
and  thence  by  the  way  of  the  Black  River  to  rear  of  Vicksburg,  but  m 
my  position  here  and  objects  here  shall  await  his  further  orders  before 
taking  part  with  the  troops  in  intercepting,  &c.  Black  River  enters  the 
Mississippi  at  Grand  Gulf,  some  40  miles  below  Vicksburg,  and  inter- 
sects the  Jackson  Railroad  some  12  miles  behind  Vicksburg.  I sug- 
gested to  the  flag-officer  a movement  by  that  river  on  the  rear  of  Vicks- 
burg to  destroy  the  railroad  bridge  at  the  railroad  crossing  of  the  Black 
River,  understood  to  be  about  1 mile  long,  but  on  consulting  the  pilots 
they  said  the  river  was  not  navigable  for  our  gunboats ; that  the  trade 
by  that  river  was  inconsiderable,  and  carried  on  by  boats  of  the  lightest 
draught.  When  off  Vicksburg  we  learned  from  negro  runaways  that  the 
rebels  had  a battery  of  four  guns  at  the  railroad  bridge  for  its  protection 
and  to  defend  the  approach  up  the  Black  River,  and  while  at  the  town 
of  Grand  Gulf  (mouth  of  the  Black  River)  the  26th  were  informed  by 
like  authority  that  a battery  of  eleven  guns  had  been  placed  12  miles 
above  the  mouth  as  a further  defense  against  our  advance.  It  is  proper 
for  me  to  report  that  having  on  the  26th  been  fired  on  by  a field  battery 
of  four  guns  when  off  the  town  of  Grand  Gulf  and  descending  the  river 
(with  the  loss  of  1 man  killed  and  1 officer  slightly  wounded),  the  gun- 
boat Kineo,  at  the  instance  of  Captain  Craven,  fired  several  shot  and 
shell  into  the  town,  and  the  battery,  with  its  camp,  about  1 J miles  in  rear 
of  the  town,  was  thereby  persuaded  to  leave.  Learning,  however,  to- 
ward evening  that  they  had  left  their  camp  and  one  gun  behind  in  their 
hasty  flight,  I dispatched  four  Wisconsin  companies,  under  Major  Board- 
man,  to  capture  the  gun  and  remove  and  destroy  the  camp.  These 
troops  came  up  as  the  last  of  the  rebels  were  leaving,  guns  and  tents 
having  preceded  them.  A few  shots  only  were  exchanged  between 


24  W/FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 

pursuers  and  pursued,  and  the  pursuit  discontinued  as  the  night  came 
on.  One  of  our  men  was  slightly  wounded  in  the  left  arm  and  several 
of  the  rebels  were  seen  to  fall.  It  would  have  been  well  had  matters 
ended  thus  and  we  should  still  have  been  gainers,  but  I regret  to  say 
that  my  aide-de-camp,  Lieutenant  George  De  Kay,  who  volunteered  to 
accompany  Major  Boardman,  having  most  inconsiderately  placed  himseli 
in  advance  of  the  advance  guard,  was  severely  and  it  is  feared  fatally- 
wounded,  receiving  seven  buck-shot  in  the  left  arm  and  five  m the  left 
side  and  back.  He  bears  his  misfortune  manfully  and  cheerfully  and 
looks  better  far  than  be  could  be  expected  to  look,  but  he  complains  of 
paralysis  of  his  lower  limbs.  The  surgeon  confirms  this,  but  hopes  the 
paralysis  may  not  be  permanent.  None  of  the  shots  in  his  body  have 
yet  been  extracted.  His  surgeon  thinks  it  best  and  he  himself  desires  to 
be  sent  North,  but  without  the  knowledge  of  any  immediate  opportunity 
from  New  Orleans  of  going  North  it  is  perhaps  best  he  should  remain 
here  until  advised  of  such  opportunity  that  his  delay  in  the  hotter  and 
less  healthy  air  of  New  Orleans  may  be  as  short  as  jiossible. 

I regret  to  say  that  the  flag-officer  left  for  New  Orleans  before  I could 
communicate  with  him  respecting  the  probable  transmission  of  men  and 
supplies  by  the  rebels  via  the  Red  River  and  the  Black  River  to  Vicks- 
burg but  would  respectfullv  here  suggest  that  a gunboat  at  the  mouth 
of  ei  ther  river  would  effectually  stop  any  such  proceeding.  The  gunboats 
Kineo  and  Kennebec  left  here  by  the  order  of  the  flag-officer  for  the  pro- 
tection of  Baton  Rouge— I should  suppose  not  available  for  that  service 
at  this  time,  if  I had  the  authority  to  order  them. 

If  in  the  uncertainties  which  surround  me,  chiefly  regarding  the  inten- 
tions of  the  enemv,  it  be  possible  to  take  steps  to  secure  the  cotton  (.340 
bales)  at  Turnbull’s  Island  I shall  gladly  and  promptly  do  so. 

While  writing,  Captain  Bailey,  the  officer  of  the  day,  is  announced, 
and  reports  he  has  reliable  authority,  or  at  least  the  authority  of  loyal 
men,  for  saying  that  Colonel  Wingfield,  of  the  rebels,  with  2,500  men,  is 
at  this  writing  (4  p.  m.)  within  3 miles  of  the  town,  and  is  supported  o 
miles  in  rear  by  a force  of  7,000,  with  sixteen  guns,  supposed  to  be 
siege  guns.  He  is  informed  by  the  same  source  that  the  rebel  chiet  has 
notified  all  the  families  to  leave  the  town  with  their  effects,  and  says  the 
families  are  leaving  in  great  consternation.  I have  made  up  my  mind 
how  to  defend  the  town,  and  am  about  to  confer  on  the  subject  with  our 
friends  of  the  Navy,  Captains  Ransom  and  Russell,  of  the  gunboats 
Kineo  and  Kennebec  respectively. 

I learn  that  there  are  on  the  Laurel  Hill,  now  here,  o0,000  rounds  ot 
ammunition  for  the  Michigan  regiment.  The  Wisconsin  are  those  who 
need,  having  only  about  25  rounds  per  man,  and  this  .54  caliber  will  not 
help  the  Wisconsin  .69  caliber  at  all. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  _ ■ _ _a 

T.  WILLlAMb, 
Brigadier- General,  Volunteers. 

. George  C.  Strong, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Hdqrs,,  New  Orleans. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans,  June  1,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Williams, 

Commanding  Expeditionary  Corps , &c. : 

General  : I have  sent  yon  three  regiments,  the  Thirtieth  Massa- 


Chap,  xxvn.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


25 


chusetts,  Ninth  Connecticut,  Twenty-first  Indiana,  and  Ninas7  battery, 
which,  with  the  forces  under  your  command,  will  make  ten  guns  and 
4,500  effective  men. 

With  these,  unless  you  see  cause  to  the  contrary,  you  may  make 
demonstration  on  Camp  Moore,  provided  it  can  be  done,  and  return  by 
the  8th,  so  as  to  assist  in  ulterior  movement. 

My  advices  from  Camp  Moore  are  that  there  are  from  4,000  to  5,000 
men  there,  poorly  armed  and  worse  organized.  The  only  possible  danger 
there  can  be  is  in  the  fact  that  by  the  Jackson  road  large  re-enforce- 
ments can  be  sent  to  Lovell,  but  a reasonably  rapid  movement  will  guard 
against  that.  Of  this,  however,  you  will  judge.  Punish  with  the  last 
severity  every  guerrilla  attack  and  burn  the  property  of  every  guerrilla 
found  murdering  your  soldiers. 

My  object  in  making  this  demonstration  is  that  if  we  leave  Baton 
Bouge  to  go  either  up  or  down  it  may  be  held  with  a small  force,  for 
after  we  once  occupy  a place  it  is  worse  than.death  to  our  Union  friends 
there  to  leave  it  unguarded.  Were  it  not  for  this  consideration  I would 
let  Lovell  and  his  men  stay  unmolested  at  Camp  Moore,  where  they  are 
melting  away  faster  than  we  could  kill  them  if  we  were  before  it. 

I am,  most  respectfully,  yours, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEB, 
Major-  General , Commanding . 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

■ New  Orleans , La.,  June  6,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Williams, 

Commanding  Forces , Baton  Rouge , La. : 

General  : I am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  say 
that  he  will  send  you  the  remainder  of  Everett’s  battery,  with  its  horses 
and  harness,  the  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  and  the  Seventh  Vermont 
Begiment,  and  Magee7s  cavalry,  with  transportation,  ammunition,  and 
forage  for  all. 

With  this  force  the  general  will  expect  you  to  proceed  to  Vicksburg 
with  the  flag-officer,  and  then  take  the  town  or  have  it  burned  at  ail 
hazards. 

You  will  leave  such  force  as  you  may  judge  necessary  to  hold  Baton 
Bouge.  Camp  Moore  is  believed  to  be  broken  up  substantially,  and 
perhaps  you  will  think  a regiment  sufficient;  Colonel  McMillan’s  is 
recommended,  as  he  has  two  pieces  of  cannon.  The  flag-officer  has  dis- 
tinct instructions  to  open  the  river,  and  will  do  it,  I doubt  not.  A large 
force  is  sent  to  you  with  what  you  have,  and  sufficient,  as  it  would  seem, 
to  take  any  batteries  and  the  supporting  force  they  may  have  at  Vicks- 
burg. 

You  will  be  often  amused  by  reports  of  the  enemy’s  strength.  Wit- 
ness your  report  of  the  numbers  approaching  Baton  Bouge.  These 
stories  are  exaggerated  always.  You  will  send  up  a regiment  or  two  at 
once  and  cut  off  the  neck  of  land  beyond  Vicksburg  by  means  of  a 
trench  across,  thus — 


Vicksburg. 


26 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  LOhai*.  XXVIL  I 


making  the  cut  about  4 feet  deep  and  5 feet  wide.  The  river  itself  will 
do  the  rest  for  us. 

A large  supply  of  spades  and  shovels  have  been  sent  for  this  purpose. 
Eeport  frequently. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEE, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Baton  Rouge , La .,  June  12,  1862. 

Capfc.  E.  S.  Davis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  <&c.,  New  Orleans. 

Sir  : Lieutenant  Caldwell,  of  one  of  our  gunboats,  is  just  from  above, 
on  his  way  to  New  Orleans,  reporting  batteries  at  various  points,  he 
thinks  chiefly  movable  batteries  of  field  artillery,  which  will  make  our 
passage  up  to  Vicksburg  something  to  be  won. 

The  flag-officer  and  myself  concur  in  that  gunboats  alone  will  not 
suffice,  and  that  the  land  forces,  where  a landing  is  practicable,  will 
have  to  carry  the  batteries  by  an  attack  in  rear.  We  are  to  go  up  to- 
gether as  soon  as  I can  get  ready.  The  only  transport  now  with  me 
is  the  Laurel  Hill,  which  is  being  loaded  with  thirty  days’  subsistence 
for  1,000  men.  The  other  transports  no  doubt  will  arrive  in  rapid 
succession,  and  no  time  will  be  lost  in  embarking  stores  and  troops. 

The  flag-officer  does  not  concur  in  the  advantage  which  possibly  at- 
taches to  the  project  of  sending  troops  in  advance  to  make  the  cut 
opposite  Vicksburg,  saying  that  his  gunboats  will  have  to  pass  Vicks- 
burg and  take  port  on  the  upper  side  of  the  proposed  cut  before  a land- 
ing of  troops  can  be  made  there;  otherwise  the  enemy’s  gunboats  would 
sweep  them  off.  In  any  event  we  have  evidently  work  to  do  before  we 
get  there,  and  that  we  will  first  try  to  do. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  WILLIAMS, 

Brigadier -General  Volunteers , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Below  Vicksburg , July  4,  1862. 

Captain  : Leaving  the  Twenty-first  Indiana,  Sixth  Michigan,  a sec- 
tion of  Everett’s  battery,  and  Magee’s  cavalry,  and  taking  with  me  the 
Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  Ninth  Connecticut,  Seventh  Vermont,  Fourth 
Wisconsin  Eegiments,  Nims’  battery,  and  two  sections  of  Everett’s,  I 
left  Baton  Eouge  in  the  morning  of  the  20th  June,  arrived  off  Ellis’ 
Cliffs  in  the  afternoon  of  the  22d,  where  1 found  three  gunboats  await- 
ing my  approach  to  cover  the  transports  in  passing  the  cliff's,  and  landed, 
so  as  to  occupy  all  the  roads  leading  from  the  cliffs  to  the  interior  and 
cut  off  two  field  guns  reported  to  be  in  position  on  the  cliffs.  The  Thir- 
tieth Massachusetts  and  two  guns  of  Nims’  made  a turning  march  of  8 
miles,  while  the  Fourth  Wisconsin,  with  skirmishers  in  advance4,  fol- 
lowed by  the  Ninth  Connecticut,  four  guns  of  Nims’  and  two  of  Everett’s, 
marched  directly  forward  by  the  cliff  road,  leading  to  the  battery  and 
to  Natchez.  Soon  the  skirmishers  of  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  came  upon 
the  abandoned  battery,  abandoned  save  by  a gun-limber  left  behind  in 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


27 


the  abandonment.  Limber,  benches,  tables,  a broken  whiffletree,  some 
ears  of  newly  gathered  green  corn  from  a neighboring  field,  and  the  well- 
trodden  earth  marked  the  place  of  the  camp  near  the  battery,  which  was 
spacious,  shaded,  afforded  a clear  view  of  the  river  up  and  down,  and 
perfectly  protected  by  its  height  above  the  river  from  the  fire  of  the 
gunboats.  The  rebel  method  of  using  their  guns  from  the  cliffs  is  to 
run  the  gun  forward  till  it  projects  beyond  the  cliff,  depress  it,  fire,  and 
run  the  gun  back  out  of  sight,  load  and  repeat. 

Negroes  afterward  told  us  that  the  battery,  consisting  of  two  guns 
and  90  mounted  men,  left  some  five  hours  before  our  landing,  but  the 
fellows  had  greatly  loitered  on  the  way,  for  Colonel  Dudley  reported  he 
was  within  an  hour  of  intercepting  them. 

The  23d  of  June  Rodney  was  passed  without  molestation,  but,  having 
learned  from  various  sources  that  resistance  to  the  farther  advance  of 
the  transports  would  certainly  be  made  by  guns  in  position  on  the  heights 
of  Grand  Gulf,  we  entered  Bayou  Pierre  about  3 o’clock  in  the  morning 
of  the  24th,  and  attempted  to  reach  its  point  of  intersection  with  the 
Port  Gibson  and  Grand  Gulf  Railroad,  in  order  to  move  from  thence  on 
the  rear  of  the  town  and  heights  of  Grand  Gulf. 

After  passing  up  the  bayou  some  9 miles,  and  still  8 miles  from  Port 
Gibson,  a raft  across  the  bayou  stopped  us.  We  then  backed  down 
(for  the  bayou  was  too  narrow  to  turn  in)  to  one  Colonel  Barry’s  planta- 
tion, 4 miles  only  from  Grand  Gulf,  and  by  a good  wagon  road.  Here, 
at  about  11  o’clock  in  the  morning,  the  troops  were  landed,  the  Fourth 
Wisconsin,  Ninth  Connecticut,  and  four  guns,  after  marching  2 miles, 
taking  a branch  road  by  Hamilton’s  plantation,  which  led  to  the  rear  of 
the  reported  rebel  camp,  some  said  500,  some  900  strong,  pitched  between 
the  Port  Gibson  Railroad  and  the  road  from  Grand  Gulf  to  Willow  Spring, 
and  which  branch  road  produced,  as  shown  by  dotted  line  on  the  sketch,* 
cut  the  only  two  roads,  viz,  the  railroad  and  Willow  Spring  road,  lead- 
ing from  Grand  Gulf  to  the  interior,  and  two  regiments  with  six  guns 
taking  the  direct  road,  which  cuts  the  railroad  about  1 mile  in  rear  of 
Grand  Gulf,  one  of  the  regiments — the  Seventh  Vermont — to  co-operate 
with  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  or  Ninth  Connecticut  in  the  contemplated 
attack  on  the  camp,  and  the  other  (Colonel  Dudley’s)  to  be  held  in  re- 
serve at  the  fork  of  the  two  roads. 

As  in  our  first  landing  (Ellis’  Cliffs)  so  in  this,  the  rebels,  apprised  of 
our  coming,  had  decamped,  leaving  some  three  sick,  a few  old  tents, 
numerous  booths  of  bushes,  some  articles  of  household  furniture,  and  a 
secession  flag.  (See  herewith  Colonel  Paine’s  report.)  The  town  of 
Grand  Gulf,  which  our  troops  before  leaving  burned  to  the  ground,  was 
abandoned  of  all  save  a single  sentinel  on  picket,  who,  left  behind,  was" 
captured  by  Colonel  Dudley’s  flankers. 

The  25th  we  arrived  here  off  Vicksburg,  and  commenced  running  and 
leveling  the  line  of  the  cut-off  canal,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  27th 
broke  ground.  Between  1,100  and  1,200  negroes,  gathered  from  the 
neighboringplantationsby  armed  parties,  are  now  engaged  in  the  work  of 
excavating,  cutting  down  trees,  and  grubbing  up  the  roots.  Two  sketches 
(Nos.  1 and  2)  herewith  represent  the  present  state  of  the  work.  The 
labor  of  making  this  cut  is  far  greater  than  estimated  by  anybody.  The 
soil  is  hard  clay  as  far  as  yet  excavated  (6  Jto  7 feet),  and  must  be  gone 
through  with,  say,  some  4 feet  or  more  before  the  water  can  be  let  in  ; for 
all  concur  in  this,  that  we  must  come  to  sand  before  the  cut  can  be  pro- 
nounced a success.  The  current  of  the  river,  however  great,  will  not 
wash  the  clay.  Yesterday  the  river  fall  was  only  2 inches.  Drift- wood  was 

* The  sketch  found  does  not  answer  the  description  and  is  omitted. 


28 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chat.  XXVTL 


seen  coming  down  this  morning,  and  th  e Missouri  Eepublican  of  the  28th 
June  announces  the  flooding  of  the  Missouri  Eiver  and  rise  of  the  Up- 
per Mississippi  under  the  heading  of  “ The  June  Eise.”  With  the  hard- 
working 1,200  negro  force  engaged  and  this  prospect  of  a rise  we  are  in 
good  heart.  The  project  is  a great  one  and  worthy  of  success.  In  the 
next  three  days  we  expect  to  be  ready  for  the  water  of  the  Mississippi. 
The  fleets  of  Flag-Officers  Farragut  and  Davis  are  awaiting  the  result 
with  great  interest.  Seven  of  Flag-Officer  Farragut’s  vessels,  having 
passed  Vicksburg  at  4 in  the  morning  of  the  28th  without  silencing  the 
batteries  of  the  town,  are  anchored  with  Flag-Officer  Davis7  fleet  of  six 
mortar  boats  and  four  gunboats  on  the  west  side  of  Barney’s  Point. 
The  mortar  vessels  of  Commodore  Porter  and  the  remainder  of  Flag- 
Officer  Farragut’s  fleet  remain  below  Vicksburg.  Captain  Davis  arrived 
from  Memphis  the  1st  of  July. 

To  protect  Commodore  Porter’s  mortar  fleet,  lying  close  along  the  east 
bank  of  the  river  within  range  of  the  batteries  of  Vicksburg,  but  con- 
cealed from  their  view  by  a dense  forest  from  the  enemy’s  skirmishers, 
I have  dispatched  some  300  men,  under  Major  Whittemore,  Thirtieth 
Massachusetts,  for  picket  and  reconnoitering  service  on  that  side  of  the 


t0In  the  next  five  or  six  days  I hope  to  be  in  possession  of  much  infor- 
mation regarding  the  batteries,  their  approaches,  and  the  forces  in 
support. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ WILLIAMS 

Brigadier- General  Volunteers , Commanding. 


Capt.  E.  S.  Davis. 


P.  S.— Lieutenant  H.  H.  Elliott,  brigade  quartermaster,  goes  down  for 
supplies  and  can  furnish  details  not  given  here. 


Bird's-eye  view  of  Vicksburg  and  vicinity,  July  5,  1862. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


29 


•[Inclosure  Xo.  1.] 


tn 


>- 


fa> 


30 


W.  FLA, 


S.  ALA. ? S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  LChaf.  XXVH 


flnclosure  Xo.  2.] 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


31 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Below  Vicksburg , July  6,  1862. 

Captain:  The  Tennessee  left  here  last  evening  with  the  mail,  but, 
hearing  the  beating  of  drums  at  Grand  Gulf,  proceeded  no  farther,  and 
returned  this  evening  for  an  additional  gunboat  to  protect  her  in  pass- 
ing that  point.  Her  return  enables  me  to  supply  an  omission  in  my 
report  of  the  4th  instant.  It  is  that  the  eight  long-range  rifled  guns 
of  Mins’  and  Everett’s  batteries,  from  their  position  behind  the  levee 
at  Barney’s  Point,  distant  seven-eighths  of  a mile  from  the  enemy’s 
heaviest  batteries  on  the  upper  side  of  Vicksburg,  co-operated  gallantly 
and  effectively  with  the  fleet  in  their  cannonade  and  bombardment  of 
the  28th  ultimo.  Everett’s  battery  lost  1 man  and  1 horse  killed. 

The  fall  of  the  water  in  the  river  is  nearly  at  a stand-point,  and  the 
drift  of  logs  and  brush  foreshadows  what  the  newspapers  promise,  viz, 
a June  rise.  To-day’s  work  of  the  negro  force  bn  the  cut-off,  duly 
organized  into  squads  of  20,  with  an  intelligent  non-commissioned  officer 
or  private  to  each,  superintended  by  officers,  is  highly  satisfactory. 
The  flag-officer  with  his  fleet  is  most  sanguine  and  even  enthusiastic. 
I regard  the  cut-off  to  be  my  best  bower.  Should  it  fail  me  I shall  re- 
sort to  the  next  best,  to  seize  and  hold  the  enemy’s  batteries,  or  at  least 
spike  their  guns. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* T.  WILLIAMS, 

Brigadier-  Genera l , Volunteers. 

Capt.  R.  S.  Davis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

P.  S.— The  reconnaissance  of  to-day  has  shown  how  we  oughf  not 
to  approach  the  batteries ; that  of  to-morrow  will  probably  give  the 
affirmative  side. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , July  16,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Williams,  Vicksburg : 

General  : From  all  I can  learn  of  operations  at  Vicksburg  your 
force  is  at  present  not  so  much  needed  there  as  it  is  elsewhere. 

The  enemy  are  concentrating  some  forces  in  the  neighborhood  of 
Baton  Rouge,  and  it  is  necessary  that  something  be  done  on  the  Red 
River  line.  Besides,  you  are  in  the  geographical  department  of  General 
Halleck.  Therefore,  if  the  state  of  affairs  will  permit  without  serious 
detriment  to  the  public  service,  you  will  withdraw  your  force  and  return 
as  soon  as  possible  to  Baton  Rouge. 

I remain,  &c., 


BERJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Below  Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  17,  1862. 
On  July  11  the  general  grade  of  the  bottom  of  the  proposed  cut-off 
had  been  carried  about  1J  feet  below  the  then  level  of  the  Mississippi, 
and  in  some  twelve  hours  would  have  been  ready  to  let  in  the  water, 


82 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  ft.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXvil. 

when  sudden  caving  began  at  several  points,  and  thereby  so  arrested 
the  excavation  remaining  to  be  made  that  the  rapidly  falling  river  had 
in  the  next  left  the  bottom  of  the  cut-off  some  feet  above  the  river’s 
level.  Thus  I am  chagrined  to  report  that,  after  the  great  labor  of  an 
average  excavation  of  18  feet  in  width  and  13  feet  deep,  we  have  en- 
countered at  least  a temporary  failure.  My  purpose  now  is  (if  not  in- 
terrupted by  the  enemy)  to  collect  an  additional  force  of  blacks,  shovels, 
axes,  carts,  wheelbarrows,  scrapers,  &c.,  to  my  present  force  of  1,500 
blacks,  with  nearly  as  many  shovels  and  axes,  few  wheelbarrows,  no 
scrapers,  and  no  carts,  and  make  a real  canal,  carrying  it,  if  necessary, 
to  the  depth  of  the  greatest  fall  of  the  river  at  this  point,  say  some  35 
to  40  feet;  a labor  which,  with  sufficient  force — that  is,  with  as  much 
force  as  can  be  profitably  worked — will  take  three  months. 

A sketch  and  estimate  is  inclosed,  showing  the  work  contemplated  ; 
but  the  present  cut-off  (if  reports  be  true  of  the  landing  of  rebel  forces 
below  us,  opposite  Grand  Gulf)  may  not  be  without  its  uses  as  a tem- 
porary line  of  defense,  and  it  is  therefore  now  being  made  available 
for  that  purpose.  I would  remark  that  as  the  water  of  the  river  falls 
below  its  banks  the  gunboats  become  less  and  less  (daily)  of  a protec 
tion  practically;  therefore  my  own  field  guns  must  ere  long  furnish  my 
only  direct  or  flank  artillery  defense.  Morally,  however,  in  any  case 
the  Navy  are  a great  support. 

The  health  of  the  troops  has  been  much  impaired  by  the  absence  of 
proper  shelter.  The  quarters  on  board  the  transports  are  hot  and 
crowded  and  those  on  shore  are  no  protection  against  rain.  Tents  or 
boards  are  indispensable  for  shelter  for  the  well  and  the  sick — a rap- 
idly increasing  list.  The  large  force  of  negroes  also  require  shelter. 
Store-tents  are  required.  My  brigade  quartermaster  incloses  an  esti- 
mate to  day  for  lumber,  store-tents,  and  tents  for  men. 

These  subjects,  all  of  urgent  interest,  are  enhanced,  if  it  were  pos- 
sible, by  the  presence,  under  the  guns  of  Vicksburg  and  in  view  of  our 
two  fleets,  of  the  rebel  ram  (iron  clad)  Arkansas.  I inclose  a sketch* 
of  her.  Hearing  she  was  near  completion  up  the  Yazoo,  Commodores 
Farragut  and  Davis  sent  two  gunboats  (one  an  iron-clad)  and  one  of 
Colonel  Ellet’s  rams,  in  the  morning  of  July  14,  at  5 o’clock,  to  recon- 
noiter  and  ascertain  what  other  naval  and  co-operating  land  force  would 
suffice  for  her  capture  or  destruction  and  the  destruction  or  capture  of 
the  land  batteries  and  the  land  force  protecting  her.  To  accompany 
the  reconnaissance  as  sharpshooters  I furnished  two  parties,  of  an  offi- 
cer and  20  men  each — Captain  J.  W.  Lynn  and  20  Wisconsin  men  and 
Lieutenant  E.  A.  Fiske  and  20  Massachusetts  men. 

In  the  encounter  about  to  be  reported  I regret  to  announce  the  death 
of  Captain  Lynn  and  5 of  his  men  and  the  wounding  of  5 other  men — 
all  by  the  exploding  of  one  of  the  enemy’s  shells. 

The  reconnaissance  had  proceeded  on  its  way  to  within  about  a mile 
of  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo  (see  sketch*)  when  it  encountered,  at  6 
o’clock  in  the  morning,  the  rebel  ram  steaming  down,  and  at  once  en- 
gaged her,  our  gunboat  (Tyler)  in  the  lead  firing  first,  followed  by  the 
ram  Queen  of  the  West  and  the  iron-clad  gunboat  Carondelet.  The 
Tyler,  Queen  of  the  West,  and  Carondelet  all  engaged,  joining  the 
rebel  ram  as  she  passed  and  coming  down  with  her ; but  the  Queen  of 
the  West,  they  say,  fired  but  failed  to  ram,  though  signaled  to  ram, 
while  our  iron-clad  (Carondelet)  lay  side  by  side  with  the  rebel  ram 
some  5 miles,  exchanging  broadsides,  when  some  sudden  break  in  steer- 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVII. | VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


33 


in g apparatus  or  engine  enabled  the  rebel  to  get  clear  of  her  and  leave 
her  behind,  and,  to  the  surprise  of  the  two  fleets  (who  to  economize 
fuel  had  not  steam  enough  to  pursue),  passed  along  down  and  through 
them,  firing  as  she  came  on  and  in  return  receiving  the  fire  of  several 
vessels  of  the  two  fleets ; but  she  passed  on,  getting  some  heavy  blows 
indeed,  but  making  her  way  to  Vicksburg,  where  she  now  lies  under 
the  guns  of  the  town.  « 

In  the  night  of  the  16th  Flag-Officer  Farragut,  with  the  steam -sloops 
Hartford,  Kichinond,  Oneida,  Iroquois,  and  other  principal  vessels  of 
his  fleet,  steamed  from  their  station  above  the  bend  opposite  Vicksburg 
for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  rebel  ram  by  shot  and  shell  and  run- 
ning down.  It  was  the  purpose  of  the  flag-officer  to  grapple  her  him- 
self, but  it  had  become  so  dark  she  could  not  be  seen  and  so  could  not 
be  destroyed.  Another  attempt,  it  is  understood,  is  contemplated  to- 
lay,  the  iron  clads  of  Commodore  Davis  to  co-operate,  and  our  ram,  the 
Sumter,  said  to  be  most  formidable.  The  expectation  is  that  if  not 
lestroyed  where  she  lies  she  will  be  driven  down  into  Commodore 
Farragut’s  fleet  and  there  finished. 

Kespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  WILLIAMS, 
Brigadier - General  of  Volunteers . 

Capt.  K.  S.  Davis. 

P.  S. — We  learned  of  the  death  of  De  Kay  with  great  sorrow.  Poor 
De  Kay ; that  so  much  worth  should  be  lost  to  his  country  and  his 
friends ! 

Pray  send  lumber,  tents  for  men,  tents  for  supplies ; the  requisition 
s herewith,  and  dispatch  Elliott  with  the  supplies  he  went  for. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf, 

* Baton  Rouge , La .,  July  26,  1862. 


Captain  : Conveyed  by  Commodore  Farragut’s  fleet,  the  troops  which 
left  here  with  me  for  Vicksburg  June  20  arrived  here  this  morning  and 
tfternoon,  numerically  little  reduced  by  disease,  effectively  greatly  so. 
A return  will  be  transmitted  as  early  as  practicable. 

Without  attaching  undue  importance  to  rumors  of  attack  upon  this 
position,  I shall  take  such  measures  of  military  security  as  may  suggest 
themselves  to  be  necessary,  avoiding  unnecessary  exposure  or  fatigue 
to  the  troops. 

The  serious  illness  of  my  adjutant-general,  Captain  Hoffman,  from 
malarious  fever,  and  some  probable  disaster  to  my  aide-de-camp,  Lieut. 
[James  C.]  Biddle,  some  60  miles  above  Vicksburg,  while  on  his  way  home 
sick  with  fever — for  the  steamer  is  reported  to  have  been  burned  by  the 
rebels — is  equally  a subject  of  regret  and  embarrassment. 

Kespectfully,  &c., 


Capt.  E.  S.  Davis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


T.  WILLIAMS, 
Brigadier-  General , Volunteers. 


3 r r — vol  xv 


34 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Baton  Rouge , La.,  August  2,  1862. 

John  Mahan  [Mann?],  with  a pass  from  General  Butler,  dated  July 
22,  for  Vicksburg,  and  who  left  New  Orleans  July  25  and  arrived  at 
Ponchatoula  and  Camp  Moore  Monday,  July  28,  having  proceeded  up 
the  Jackson  Bailroad  as  far  as  Jackson,  arrived  here  by  the  way  of 
Summit,  Liberty,  and  Bayou  Sara  this  morning  at  10  o’clock.  He  says 
he  saw  Breckinridge’s  force  of  six  full  regiments  and  fourteen  guus  at 
Camp  Moore  and  Ponchatoula  Monday,  July  28,  and  that  their  pur- 
pose is  to  attack  this  place ; says  they  may  be  expected  on  the  rear  of 
Baton  Rouge  at  this  time,  or  at  any  time  in  the  next  day  or  two. 

Mahan  also  reports  that  the  rebels  have  field  guns  and  beef  cattle  at 
the  mouth  of  Red  River.  They  intend  crossing  to  the  east  bank  of  the 
Mississippi  to-night  or  to-morrow  morning,  and  I have  sent  him  with  a 
note  to  Captain  Porter,  TJ.  S.  Navy,  commanding  the  flotilla  here,  at 
the  same  time  advising  Porter  of  Mahan’s  statement  regarding  Breckin- 
ridge’s movement  on  this  place,  to  put  the  gunboats  designed  to  flank 
us  on  their  guard. 

If  Mahan  be  a true  man  and  a true  observer  there  is  to  be  an  attack 
here  or  at  New  Orleans ; if  at  New  Orleans,  a demonstration  here. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  WILLIAMS, 
Brigadier- General,  Volunteers . 

Capt,  R.  S.  Davis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General . 

P.  S. — I shall  send  Mahan  down  by  the  first  opportunity  to  head- 
quarters. I hope  the  rebels  have  as  many  sick  as- 1 have.  Perhaps 
(let  us  hope  at  least)  that  a battle  may  Co  our  sick  exert  all  the  effects 
of  the  best  tonic  of  the  pharmacopoeia. 

T.  W., 

Brigadier-  General. 

P.  S. — Two  additional  gunboats  are  desirable.  The  Arkansas  may 
come  to  co-operate  with  the  rebel  land  force,  and  also  the  Music  and  the 
Webb;  the  latter  is  said  to  be  rather  formidable,  carrying  eight  guns. 

Why  not  send  up  the  sloop  Oneida?  Preble  is  here.  Who  is  to 
command  her— the  Oneida  and  a gunboat  ? 1 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans,  August  3,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Williams, 

Commanding  at  Baton  Rouge : 

General  : I received  your  note  by  the  hand  of  John  Mann  [Mahan  ?], 
who  was  in  my  confidential  service.  While  his  information  may  be 
relied  upon  as  correct,  yet  all  the  inferences  may  not  be  which  he  draws. 
The  truth  is  this,  as  I gather  it  from  various  sources : On  the  25th  ot 
July  I sent  500  men  on  an  expedition  around  the  lake  at  Mandeville 
and  Madisonville.  The  movement  was  delayed  forty-eight  hours,  and 
in  that  time  word  was  sent  to  the  enemy  that  it  was  to  go  out.  There- 
upon Breckinridge  was  telegraphed,  down  to  Camp  Moore,  with  four 
regiments  to  proceed  to  Madisonville,  but  it  so  happened  that  Colonel 
McMillan  on  the  same  day  sent  out  to  the  Amite  River  a reconnoiter- 


Dhaf.  XXVEL]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


35 


ing  party  of  two  companies,  and  they  made  an  attack  on  the  guerrilla 
-amp  there.  News  of  this  came  to  Camp  Moore,  and  they,  concluding 
that  the  expedition  to  Madisouville  was  but  a feint,  while  the  real  at- 
tack was  to  be  upon  Camp  Moore,  immediately  counter-marched  to  get 
back  to  repel  the  Expected  assault  upon  the  camp. 

This  is  the  cause  of  the  assembly  of  troops  at  Camp  Moore.  While 
[ would  not  have  you  relax  your  vigilance,  I think  you  need  fear  no 
assault  at  present.  When  it  does  come  I know  you  will  be  ready. 

I should  much  like  to  see  you,  if  possible  to  be  absent  from  your  com- 
mand. There  are  many  things  upon  which  I wish  to  consult. 

The  matter  of  the  charges  against  several  officers  will  be  submitted 
bo  a court-martial. 

I am,  very  truly,  yours, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


P.  S. — I have  communicated  with  the  flag-officer  concerning  the  boat 
it  Red  River. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Col.  Halbert  F.  Paine,  Fourth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  of  skirmish 
at  Hamilton's  Plantation , near  Grand  Gulf  Miss.,  June  24. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Wisconsin  Regiment, 

Steamer  Laurel  Hill,  June  24,  1862. 

Captain  : I respectfully  report  that  the  troops  under  my  command 
Fourth  Wisconsin  Regiment,  Ninth  Connecticut  Regiment,  one-half  of 
Sims’  battery,  and  one  section  of  Everett’s  battery)  to-day  discovered 
i few  rebel  horsemen  near  Charles  Hamilton’s,  and  fired  on  them  with 
shells  and  rifled  muskets.  They  fled.  We  have  no  reliable  informa- 
tion respecting  the  loss  inflicted,  but  it  is  rumored  that  3 rebels  were 
dlled  or  wounded.  Subsequently  we  approached  a camp  of  rebel 
nfantry  near  the  Grand  Gulf  and  Port  Gibson  Railroad.  While  we 
vere  recon noitering  it  a locomotive  and  freight  car  from  Port  Gibson 
stopped  in  the  vicinity,  having  apparently  some  connection  with  the 
iamp  and  carrying  one  gun.  We  fired  at  it  and  also  at  the  camp.  We 
ire  not  informed  whether  any  loss  was  inflicted.  The  rebels  on  the 
3ar  replied  with  their  field  piece.  We  captured  in  the  camp  3 rebel 
soldiers  (2  armed  with  muskets),  but  w^ere  unable  to  capture  the  car. 

Near  the  Willow  Spring  road  we  reached  a rebel  camp  which  had 
ieen  hastily  abandoned.  The  tents  were  still  standing.  We  burned 
the  camp,  saving  6 of  the  best  tent-flies,  1 piano,  1 rebel  flag,  1 camp 
30t  marked  “Captain  Mackey,  Butler’s  Revengers,  Camp  Benjamin,” 
ind  also  many  articles  of  slight  intrinsic  value,  which  are  properly  re- 
fined as  mementos  by  those  who  found  them. 

I hold,  subject  to  the  orders  of  Brigadier-General  Williams,  1 piano, 
16  flies,  1 camp  cot,  2 muskets,  and  5 prisoners. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

HALBERT  E.  PAINE, 

Colonel  Fourth  Wisconsin  Regiment. 

Capt.  Wickham  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


36 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Lieut,  Col,  John  A.  Keith,  Twenty  first  Indiana  Inf antry , of  recon- 
naissance to  the  Amite  River , La.,  and  shirmish,  June  27-29. 

Camp  Twenty-first  Indiana  Volunteers, 

Baton  Rouge,  July  — , 1862. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  order  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Clarke,  Sixth  Michi- 
gan Volunteers,  then  commanding  post,  I,  with  40  of  Magee’s  cavalry, 
under  Capt.  James  M.  Magee,  started  from  the  camp  of  Twenty-first 
Indiana  Volunteers  at  7 p.  m.  of  the  27th  of  June,  to  make  such  recon- 
naissance as  in  my  opinion  deemed  best. 

Following  the  Greensburg  road  19  miles  we  crossed  to  the  Camp 
Moore  road  by  an  unfrequented  path ; distance  6 miles.  Nine  miles 
from  where  this  path  intersected  the  last-named  road  we  breakfasted 
and  fed  our  horses.  At  8 o’clock  a.  m.  we  resumed  our  march  12  miles 
farther  in  the  direction  of  Camp  Moore,  then  recrossed  to  the  Greens- 
burg road,  capturing  on  the  way  a guerrilla.  On  arriving  at  the  road 
we  captured  3 prisoners  and  the  horse  of  a fourth,  who  escaped  under 
fire,  by  taking  to  the  woods.  Two  of  the  prisoners  were  members  of  Cap- 
tain Terrell’s  Mississippi  Cavalry  and  were  well  armed.  I learned  that 
he,  with  his  company  of  110  men,  were  encamped  at  Williams’  Bridge, 
across  the  Amite  Biver,  on  the  Greensburg  road,  8 miles  distant. 

I determined  to  surprise  him  and  destroy  his  camp.  The  camp  is 
only  a mile  from  the  Clinton  road.  There  are  three  bridges  to  cross  on 
the  Port  Hudson  road  before  reaching  the  camp,  the  farthest  one  not 
more  than  half  a mile  removed.  On  reaching  the  first  bridge  I left 
Captain  Magee  in  rear  with  instructions,  and  with  20  men  pushed  rap- 
idly forward.  We  saw  no  pickets  until  we  reached  the  Amite  Bridge 
(the  last  one).  These  were  hailed  by  my  advance.  They  fled  without 
giving  any  alarm.  One  shot  was  fired  after  them,  when  one  of  them 
was  seen  to  fall.  Twenty  rods  from  the  bridge  we  were  brought  in 
front  of  the  encampment.  Here  we  delivered  a volley  and  charged  in 
upon  them.  The  volley  seemed  to  be  the  first  notice  to  the  inmates  of 
our  approach.  The  effect  may  well  be  imagined.  A general  stampede 
ensued,  in  which  everything  not  in  actual  possession  at  the  time  was 
abandoned. 

Accompanied  by  5 of  the  men  I crossed  a small  branch  in  the  direc- 
tion taken  by  the  enemy  in  their  flight,  when  on  ascending  the  bank 
a volley  of  20  rounds  was  poured  into  us  from  a thicket  immediately  in 
front  and  at  a distance  of  not  more  than  30  paces.  We  returned  the 
fire  with  our  revolvers.  I then  ordered  the  rear,  who  were  across  the 
branch,  to  move  forward  to  our  support.  This  they  refused  to  do,  but 
remained  in  the  hollow  , seemingly  paralyzed  at  this  sudden  show  of  re- 
sistance. We  continued  firing  with  our  revolvers,  and  received  a sec- 
ond volley,  at  which  time  Captain  Magee  was  heard  dashing  across  the 
bridge  with  the  reserve.  Seeing  this,  the  enemy  fled  precipitately 
under  our  fire.  The  captain’s  arrival  was  well  timed,  for  every  man 
with  me  had  discharged  his  shots.  Six  of  us  fired  over  30  shots. 

Our  loss  was  Sergeant  Marshall,  wrounded  in  the  thigh  badly,  and 
one  horse  killed.  The  enemy’s  loss  is  not  certainly  known,  but  was  at 
least  4 killed,  7 prisoners,  20  horses,  3 mules,  and  a wagon  laden  with 
provisions  and  forage ; besides  a quantity  of  arms,  accouterments,  sad- 
dles, horses,  equipage,  and  ammunition  was  captured.  The  most  valu- 
able of  the  articles,  or  so  much  as  we  could  transport,  was  brought 


Chap.  XXVI L.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


37 


away.  The  residue,  with  all  the  commissary  and  quartermaster  stores, 
forage,  blankets,  and  camp  equipage,  was  burned  or  otherwise  de- 
stroyed. I brought  with  me  all  the  company  books  and  papers.  It  was 
between  12  and  1 o’clock  when  we  charged  upon  the  camp.  Dinner 
was  just  prepared. 

Not  having  a force  that  would  justify  me  in  pursuing  the  enemy  in 
his  flight,  we  immediately  took  up  our  march  homeward.  We  had  ar- 
rived within  18  miles  of  this  place,  when  about  9 o’clock  p.  m.  two  en- 
filading volleys  were  fired  into  our  rear  from  a point  of  woods  at  the 
turn  of  the  road.  At  the  point  whence  the  fire  proceeded  the  road  turns 
to  the  right,  and  the  left-hand  side  is  skirted  by  woods  with  a thick 
undergrowth.  When  the  firing  opened  the  rear  guard  had  passed. 
The  fire  was  returned  by  them.  We  had  14  prisoners,  20  horses,  and 
a mule  team  laden  with  the  fruits  of  our  capture  to  encumber  us. 
For  a short  time  the  greatest  confusion  prevailed.  The  horses  that 
had  been  ridden  by  the  prisoners,  with  those  being  led  and  others  that 
had  lost  their  riders,  came  dashing  down  the  road  furiously.  For  a 
while  the  men  seemed  panic-stricken,  but  in  five  minutes’  time  we  were 
in  a condition  to  receive  an  attack  if  any  was  contemplated,  which  we 
fully  expected.  In  the  mean  time  we  ascertained  that  the  enemy  fled 
upon  delivering  the  second  volley,  which  was  done  within  fifteen  seconds 
ifter  the  first  volley.  We  gathered  up  our  killed  and  wounded,  and 
3amped  in  the  field  opposite  the  woods.  Our  loss  was  2 killed,  Ham- 
mond Wagner  and  Joseph  Shoener.  The  wounded,  Oliver  S.  Locke, 
oleorge  Haynes,  John  Buckner,  and  Paul  Borne,  together  with  a negro 
whom  we  captured  in  camp  and  who  has  since  died  from  effect  of 
lis  wounds.  Seven  of  the  prisoners  escaped;  2 of  the  guard  over  them 
were  killed,  2 had  their  horses  shot  under  them,  and  2 others  were 
wounded ; 4 of  our  horses  were  killed,  among  them  my  own.  We 
were  not  further  molested,  and  at  sunrise  resumed  our  march,  reaching 
3am  p at  11.30  o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  29th  instant  with  8 prisoners  and 
ill  the  horses  and  other  property,  together  with  our  dead  and  wounded. 
The  property  has  been  properly  disposed  of  by  Captain  Magee. 

We  had  on  reaching  camp  marched  96  miles,  neither  man  nor  horse 
laving  had  a morsel  of  food  for  thirty-two  hours  of  the  time,  and  the 
nen,  with  the  exception  of  three  hours  of  that  time,  constantly  in  the 
saddle. 

Captain  Magee  deserves  the  greatest  praise  for  the  timely  aid  ren- 
lered  when  we  were  attacked  first  by  the  enemy,  and  also  for  his  cool- 
ness during  the  time  we  were  under  fire  at  night  and  for  his  efforts  in 
illaying  the  panic  which  for  a moment  prevailed  among  some  of  his 
nen  at  that  time.  Too  much  credit  cannot  be  given  Sergeants  Mar- 
shall, Parsons,  and  Brown,  and  Private  Miller  for  their  courage  and 
irave  conduct  in  receiving  the  two  volleys  in  the  camp  of  the  enemy 
ind  their  subsequent  conduct  that  night. 

Trusting  that  my  action  in  the  premises  may  meet  your  approbation, 

am,  with  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  KEITH, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Tiventy-Jirst  Indiana  Volunteers. 
James  W.  McMillan, 

Colonel  Twenty-First  Indiana  Vols .,  Comdg.  Post. 


38 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVli 


No.  8. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  Alfred  W.  Ellet , JJ.  IS '.Army,  commanding  Ram  Fleet, 
of  engagement  with  the  Arkansas , July  22. 

• United  States  Eam  Switzerland, 

Off  Vicksburg , July  23,  1862 — 8 a.  m. 

I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that,  in  accordance  with  preconcerted 
arrangements  made  with  Flag-Officers  Farragut  and  Davis,  I,  in  the 
Queen  of  the  West,  made  an  attack  upon  the  rebel  ram  and  gunboat 
Arkansas,  lying  under  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg.  I regret  to  say  that, 
owing  to  failure  upon  the  part  of  the  parties  who  were  to  co-operate 
with  me  in  the  attack  from  some  cause  that  is  yet  unexplained  to  me, 
I did  not  succeed  as  I expected  in  destroying  the  Arkansas.  I did 
succeed,  however,  in  striking  a severe  blow,  and  no  doubt  inflicted 
severe  in  jury  upon  her ; but  being  unsupported  by  the  Essex  and  Sum- 
ter, as  I had  been  led  to  expect,  and  exposed  alone  to  the  united  fire  of 
all  the  upper  batteries,  I was  obliged  to  draw  off  without  accomplishing 
the  full  result  anticipated.  The  position  that  the  Arkansas  occupies 
was  a very  unfavorable  one  for  my  attack.  I could  not  reach  her  vul- 
nerable side  without  rounding  about,  and  thus  lost  much  headway. 
The  consequence  was  that  she  failed  to  receive  the  effects  of  a full  blow. 
In  making  my  retreat,  most  unfortunately  for  me  our  gunboats  had 
retired,  and  I had  the  undivided  attention  of  all  the  enemy’s  batteries 
and  sharpshooters  that  lined  the  river  bank.  The  consequence  was  the 
Queen  was  completely  riddled  with  balls  and  very  much  damaged. 
Most  fortunately  no  one  was  seriously  hurt,  although  several  were  se- 
verely wounded.  I had  taken  the  precaution  to  reduce  my  crew  upon 
the  boat  to  the  smallest  possible  number  of  men  by  which  the  boat 
could  be  handled,  and  to  this  cause  I attribute  the  fact  there  was  no  loss 
of  life. 

I cannot  close  this  communication  without  bearing  testimony  to  the 
cool,  heroic  bravery  of  all  the  officers  and  men  on  the  boat  during  this 
hour  of  severe  trial.  To  Lieut.  J.  M.  Hunter,  of  the  Sixty-third  Illinois' 
Volunteers,  I attribute  in  an  eminent  degree  the  final  escape  of  the  boat 
and  all  on  board.  His  dauntless  behavior  is  worthy  of  all  praise.  The 
engineers  and  pilots  all  cannot  be  too  highly  praised.  When  the  boat 
was  full  of  steam,  and  of  course  so  hot  as  barely  to  be  endurable,  with 
shells  bursting,  one  in  the  pilot-house  and  another  in  the  engine-room, 
with  shot  tearing  the  boat  on  every  side  of  you,  unflinchingly  every  man 
stood  to  his  post.  It  is  with  the  greatest  pleasure  that  I bear  this  testi-f 
mony  to  the  heroic  daring  of  these  officers.  I am  compelled  to  send  the 
Queen  North  to  be  repaired.  She  is  so  much  damaged  she  cannot  be 
put  in  order  here.  My  force  is  greatly  reduced  by  sickness,  so  that  I 
find  it  exceedingly  difficult  to  keep  my  boats  at  ai-  times  ready  for  that 
service. 

I have  in  a previous  dispatch  requested  authority  to  make  a detail 
of  a large  military  force,  so  as  to  man  my  howitzers  and  increase 
my  guard.  It  will  be  necessary  to  keep  part  of  my  boats  constantly 
traversing  this  river  to  disperse  the  guerrilla  bands  that  are  beginning 
to  infest  its  banks.  I shall  be  glad  to  receive  some  instructions  upon 
the  subject  from  you. 

Verv  respectfully, 

ALFEED  W.  ELLET, 
Lieutenant - Colonel , Commanding  Ram  Fleet. 

Hon.  E.  M,  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XXVII.j  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


39 


War  Department,  July  31, 1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  Alfred  W.  Ellet, 

Steam  Ram  Switzerland , off  Vicksburg  : 

Your  dispatch  of  23d  instant,  relating  to  the  engagement  with  the 
Arkansas,  has  just  been  received,  and  I have  referred  it  to  General  Hal- 
leck,  commander-in-chief,  to  give  you  instructions  on  the  points  desired. 
For  your  great  gallantry  I shall  recommend  you  for  nomination  by  the 
President  as  brigadier-general.  You  will  return  to  Lieutenant  Hunter 
and  the  gallant  officers  and  soldiers  and  boatmen  of  your  command  the 
thanks  of  this  Department.  lrou  will  please  make  known  to  me  any- 
thing that  may  be  required  by  your  fleet,  in  order  that  it  may  be 
promptly  supplied.  The  lamented  death  of  your  brother  deprives  the 
country  "of  the  full  report  expected  from  him,  and  I wish  you  would 
supply  it. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War.  ' 


No.  9. 

Report  of  May.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler , U.  S.  Army , commanding  the 
Department  of  the  Gulf  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge , Xu.,  ivith  orders 
and  resulting  correspondence. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  August  10,  1862. 
Sir  : Owing  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  fleet  from  before  Vicksburg  it 
became  necessary  to  return  Williams’  brigade  to  Baton  Bouge.  The 
services  before  Vicksburg  had  weakened  very  much  that  force  by  sick- 
ness. The  overflow  of  the  river  and  the  number  of  dead  animals  in 
the  swamps  made  a fearful  malaria;  but  while  it  caused  illness  in 
almost  the  entire  command  it  did  not  produce  a large  mortality.  The 
healthy  air  and  water  of  Baton  Bouge  rapidly  recruit  the  troops. 

The  cessation  of  operations  at  Vicksburg  allowed  the  enemy  to  con- 
centrate a very  large  part  of  his  available  force  at  Camp  Moore,  about 
60  miles  from  Baton  Bouge.  From  thence  he  marched  to  attack  that 
post,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  instant  appeared  before  our  lines. 
His  force  consisted  of  two  Louisiana  regiments;  two  Mississippi  regi- 
ments; two  Tennessee  regiments;  the  Third,  Fourth,  Fifth,  Sixth, 
Seventh,  and  Eighth  Kentucky  regiments;  an  Alabama  regiment;  a 
Texas  and  a Georgia  regiment;  fourteen  pieces  of  artillery,  and  a large 
force  of  guerrilla  cavalry.  These  were  under  the  command  of  Maj.  Gen. 
John  C.  Breckinridge,  Brigadier-Generals  Buggies,  Benjamin  H.  Helm, 
Allen,  and  Clark.  They  were  supported  by  the  ram  Arkansas,  which 
inspired  them  with  the  greatest  hopes  and  the  utmost  confidence  in  their 
attack. 

To  oppose  this  formidable  force  Brigadier-General  Williams  had  the 
Fourteenth  Maine,  Seventh  Vermont,  nine  companies  of  the  Ninth  Con- 
necticut, the.  Twenty -first  Indiana,  Fourth  Wisconsin,  and  Sixth  Michi- 
gan regiments;  Nims’,  Everett’s,  and  Manning’s  Massachusetts  bat- 
teries, and  Magee’s  company  of  Massachusetts  cavalry.  Nearly  one- 
half  of  all  this  force  were  on  the  sick  list. 

Leaving  two  regiments  in  the  village  for  a reserve,  with  high  chivalry 
General  Williams  formed  his  lines  at  daybreak,  nearly  a mile  beyond 
the  town,  in  an  admirably  chosen  position. 


40  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chai«.  XXVII. 

The  enemy  made  their  attack  in  two  divisions,  on  the  right  and  left, 
and,  massing  their  forces,  endeavored  to  force  our  inferior  numbers 
back,  so  that,  by  extending  his  lines  to  flank  us,  his  first  attack  was  par- 
tially successful  by  the  failure  of  one  regiment  to  do  its  duty.  The 
enemy  were  repulsed,  however,  and  thrice  over  returned  to  the  charge. 
Upon  the  final  repulse,  after  six  hours  of  continuous  fighting,  he  retired 
from  the  field  and  sent  a flag  of  truce  for  leave  to  bury  bis  dead.  A 
copy  of  the  correspondence  is  annexed. 

The  boat  which  brought  down  the  dispatches  to  me  from  Colonel 
Cahill,  upon  whom  the  command  devolved  after  the  death  of  General 
Williams,  collided  with  the  gunboat  Oneida  and  sank,  so  that  I am  not 
able  by  this  mail  to  give  the  details,  as  I hope  to  do  by  the  next  dis- 
patch. 

Our  loss  was  very  heavy,  say  90  killed  and  250  wounded*  Of  general 
and  field  officers  we  mourn  the  loss  of  Brigadier-General  Williams 
and  Colonel  Roberts,  Seventh  Vermont,  killed;  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Keith,  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana,  severely  wounded.  A number  of 
the  line  officers  were  killed  and  wounded,  whose  names  I am  unable  to 
give  for  the  reason  before  stated,  and  upon  such  matters  a mistake 
should  not  be  made. 

The  casualties  of  the  enemy  were  very  much  larger.  They  have  lost 
Brigadier-General  Clark,  wounded,  probably  mortally,  and  a prisoner, 
with  his  aide;  Brigadier-General  Allen,  killed;  Brigadier-General  Helm, 
disabled  by  a fall  from  his  horse.  Brigadier-General  Ruggles  is  re- 
ported dead,  and  a very  large  number  of  field  and  line  officers  killed 
and  wounded.  We  have  buried  already  more  than  300  of  their  dead, 
and  they  have  left  their  wounded  in  every  cabin  on  their  line  of  retreat. 
Their  killed  and  wounded  are  more  than  equal  to  one-half  of  our  men 
actually  engaged  against  them.  The  enemy’s  forces  werer  at  least  6,000 
effective  men,  while  we  had  not  over  2,000  in  this  action. 

The  necessities  of  the  ground  caused  General  Williams  to  form  his 
line  of  battle  in  rear  of  the  camps  of  the  Fourteenth  Maine  and  Twenty- 
first  Indiana  Regiments,  so  that  the  enemy,  for  the  hour,  were  permitted 
to  occupy  these  camps  and  destroy  much  camp  equipage. 

Upon  the  first  report  of  the  engagement  reaching  me  I sent  up  Lieu- 
tenant Weitzel,  of  my  staff,  to  report  the  condition  of  affairs,  and  to  see 
what  further  dispositions  were  necessary  to  meet  a renewed  attack,  if 
any  could  be  feared. 

The  Arkansas,  although  supported  by  the  rebel  steamers  Webb  and 
Music,  did  not  choose  to  come  down  and  attack  our  gunboats,  the  Essex, 
Sumter,  and  Kineo,  and  so  did  not  co-operate  with  the  land  forces. 
Flag-Officer  Farragut  immediately  went  up  the  river  to  attack  the  Ar- 
kansas, but  upon  the  6th  the  Essex  steamed  up  to  the  rebel  fleet.  The 
Webb  and  Music  fled,  and  the  Arkansas,  after  firing  a few  shots,  was 
set  on  fire  and  blew  up. 

Appended  please  find  the  reports!  of  Colonel  Cahill  and  Lieutenant 
Weitzel,  as  well  as  the  general  orders  issued  from  this  department  upon 
the  sad  event  of  General  Williams’  death  and  the  victory  at  Baton 
Rouge.  I trust  the  actions  of  my  brave  men  will  receive  your  appro- 
bation. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


See  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


t See  Reports  Noe.  11  and  12. 


Chap,  xxvil.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA.  41 

General  Orders,  * Hdqrfc  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  56.  f New  Orleans , August  7,  1862. 

The  commanding  general  announces  to  the  Army  of  the  Gulf  the  sad 
event  of  the  death  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Williams,  commanding  Second 
Brigade,  in  camp  at  Baton  Eouge. 

The  victorious  achievement— the  repulse  of  the  division  of  Major- 
General  Breckinridge  by  the  troops  led  by  General  Williams  and  the 
destruction  of  the  mail-clad  Arkansas  by  Captain  Porter,  of  the  Navy— 
is  made  sorrowful  by  the  fall  of  our  brave,  gallant,  and  successful  fel- 
low-soldier. 

General  Williams  graduated  at  West  Point  in  1837;  at  once  joined 
the  Fourth  Artillery  in  Florida,  where  he  served  with  distinction;  was 
thrice  breveted  for  gallant  and  meritorious  services  in  Mexico  as  a 
member  of  General  Scott’s  staff.  His  life  was  that  of  a soldier,  devoted 
to  his  country’s  service.  His  country  mourns  in  sympathy  with-  his 
wife  and  children,  now  that  country’s  care  and  precious  charge. 

We,  his  companions  in  arms,  who  had  learned  to  love  him,  weep  the 
true  friend,  the  gallant  gentleman,  the  brave  soldier,  the  accomplished 
officer,  the  pure  patriot  and  victorious  hero,  and  the  devoted  Christian. 
All  and  more  went  out  when  Williams  died.  By  a singular  felicity  the 
manner  of  his  death  illustrated  each  of  these  generous  qualities. 

The  chivalric  American  gentleman,  he  gave  up  the  vantage  of  the 
cover  of  the  houses  of  the  city — forming  his  lines  in  the  open  field,— 
lest  the  women  and  children  of  his  enemies  should  be  hurt  in  the  fight. 

A good  general,  he  had  made  his  dispositions  and  prepared  for  bat 
tie  at  the  break  of  day,  when  he  met  his  foe. 

A brave  soldier,  he  received  the  death-shot  leading  his  men. 

A patriot  hero,  he  was  fighting  the  battle  of  his  country  and  died  as 
went  up  the  cheer  of  victory. 

A Christian,  he  sleeps  in  the  hope  of  the  blessed  Redeemer. 

His  virtues  we  cannot  exceed — his  example  we  may  emulate — and 
mourning  his  death,  we  pray  u may  our  last  end  be  like  his.” 

The  customary  tribute  of  mourning  will  be  worn  by  the  officers  in 
the  department. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler,  commanding: 

E.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  57.  f New  Orleans , Xa.,  August  9,  1862. 

Soldiers  of  the  Army  of  the  Gulf: 

Your  successes  have  heretofore  been  substantially  bloodless.  Tak- 
ing and  holding  the  most  important  strategic  and  commercial  positions, 
with  the  aid  of  the  gallant  Navy,  by  the  wisdom  of  your  combinations 
and  the  moral  power  of  your  arms,  it  has  been  left  for  the  last  few  days 
to  baptize  you  in  blood. 

The  Spanish  conqueror  of  Mexico  won  imperishable  renown  by  landing 
in  that  country  and  burning  his  transport  ships,  to  cut  off  all  hope  of 
retreat.  You,  more  wise  and  economical,  but  with  equal  providence 
against  retreat,  sent  yours  home. 

Organized  to  operate  on  the  sea-coast,  you  advanced  your  outposts  to 
Baton  Eouge,  the  capital  of  the  State  of  Louisiana,  more  than  250  miles 
into  the  interior. 


42 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chav.  XXVII. 


Attacked  there  by  a division  of  our  rebel  enemies,  under  command 
of  a major-general  recreant  to  loyal  Kentucky  (whom  some  of  us  would 
have  honored  before  his  apostacy),  of  doubly  superior  numbers,  you 
have  repulsed  in  the  open  field  his  myrmidons,  who  took  advantage 
of  your  sickness  from  the  malaria  of  the  marshes  of  Vicksburg  to  make 

a cowardly  attack.  „ , , , 

The  brigade  at  Baton  Rouge  has  routed  the  enemy.  He  has  lost 
three  brigadier-generals,  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners;  many  colonels 
and  field  officers.  He  has  more  than  a thousand  killed  and  wounded. 

You  have  captured  three  pieces  of  artillery,  six  caissons,  two  stand 
of  colors,  and  a large  number  of  prisoners.  You  have  buried  his  dead 
on  the  field  of  battle  and  are  caring  for  his  wounded.  You  have  con 
vinced  him  that  you  are  never  so  sick  as  not  to  fight  your  enemy  it  he 
desires  the  contest.  You  have  shown  him  that  if  he  cannot  take  an 
outpost  after  weeks  of  preparation  what  would  be  his  fate  with  the 


main  body.  . . , . 

If  your  general  should  say  he  was  proud  of  you  it  would  only  be  to 
praise  himself;  but  he  will  say  he  is  proud  to  be  one  of  you. 

In  this  battle  the  Northeast  and  Northwest  mingled  their  blood  on 
the  field,  as  they  had  long  ago  joined  their  hearts  in  the  support  of  the 
Union.  Michigan  stood  by  Maine;  Massachusetts  supported  Indiana: 
Wisconsin  aided  Vermont;  while  Connecticut,  represented  by  the  sons 
of  the  ever-green  shamrock,  fought  as  our  fathers  did  at  Boyne  W aters. 

'While  we  all  mourn  the  loss  of  many  brave  comrades,  we  who  were 
absent  envy  them  the  privilege  of  dying  upon  the  battle-field  for  our 
country  under  the  starry  folds  of  her  victorious  flag. 

The  colors  and  guidons  of  the  several  corps  engaged  m this  contest 
will  have  inscribed  upon  them  “ Baton  Rouge.” 

To  complete  the  victory,  the  iron-clad  steamer  Arkansas,  the  last 
naval  hope  of  the  rebellion,  hardly  awaited  the  gallant  attack  of  the 
Essex,  but  followed  the  example  of  her  sisters,  the  Merrimac,  Manassas, 
Mississippi,  and  Louisiana,  by  her  own  destruction. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

K.  o.  1JA  V lo, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General 


General  Orders, 
No.  62J. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  25,  1862. 

The  commanding  general  has  carefully  revised  the  official  reports  of 
the  action  of  August  5 at  Baton  Rouge,  to  collect  the  evidence  of  the 
gallant  deeds  and  meritorious  services  of  those  engaged  m that  brilliant 

The" name  of  the  lamented  and  gallant  General  Williams  has  already 
passed  into  history. 

Colonel  Roberts,  of  the  Seventh  Vermont  Volunteers,  fell  mortallj 
wounded  while  rallying  his  men.  He  was  worthy  of  a better  disci- 
plined regiment  and  a better  fate. 

Glorious  as  it  is  to  die  for  one's  country,  yet  his  regiment  gave  him 
the  inexpressible  pain  of  seeing  it  break  in  confusion  when  not  pressed 
by  the  enemy  and  refuse  to  march  to  the  aid  of  the  outnumbered  and 
almost  overwhelmed  Indianians.  . . 

The  Seventh  Vermont  Regiment,  by  a fatal  mistake,  had  already 
fired  into  the  same  regiment  they  had  refused  to  support,  killing  and 
wounding  several. 


Chap.  XXVH.}  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA.  43 

The  commanding  general  therefore  excepts  the  Seventh  Vermont 
from  General  Orders,  -No.  57,  and  will  not  permit  their  colors  to  be 
inscribed  with  a name  which  could  bring  tc  its  officers  and  men  no 
proud  thought. 

It  is  further  ordered  that  the  colors  of  that  regiment  be  not  borne 
by  them  until  such  time  as  they  shall  have  earned  the  right  to  them, 
and  the  earliest  opportunity  will  be  given  this  regiment  to  show  whether 
they  are  worthy  descendants  of  those  who  fought  beside  Allen  and 
with  Starke  at  Bennington. 

The  men  of  the  Ninth  Connecticut,  who  were  detailed  to  man  Nims7 
battery,  deserve  special  commendation. 

The  Fourteenth  Maine  Volunteers  have  credit  for  their  gallant  con- 
duct throughout  the  day. 

Colonel  Nickerson  deserves  well  of  his  country,  not  more  for  his  dar- 
ing and  cool  courage  displayed  on  the  field  when  his  horse  was  killed 
from  under  him,  but  for  his  skill,  energy,  and  perseverance  in  bringing 
his  men  in  such  a state  of  discipline  as  to  enable  them  to  execute  most 
difficult  maneuvers  under  fire  with  steadiness  and  efficiency.  His  regi- 
ment behaved  admirably. 

Nims’  battery,  Second  Massachusetts,  under  command  of  Lieutenant 
Trull,  its  captain  being  confined  by  sickness  ; Everett’s  battery,  Sixth 
Massachusetts,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Carruth,  who  fought  his 
battery  admirably ; Manning’s  battery,  Fourth  Massachusetts,  and  a 
section  of  a battery  taken  by  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  from  the  enemy 
and  attached  to  that  regiment,  under  command  of  Lieut.  J.  H.  Brown, 
are  honorably  mentioned  for  the  efficiency  and  skill  with  which  they 
were  served.  The  heaps  of  dead  and  dying  within  their  range  attested 
the  fatal  accuracy  of  their  fire. 

The  Sixth  Michigan  fought  rather  by  detachments  than  as  a regi- 
ment, but  deserves  the  fullest  commendation  for  the  gallant  behavior 
of  its  officers  and  men.  Companies  A,  B,  and  F,  under  command  of 
Captain  Corden,  receive  especial  mention  for  the  coolness  and  courage 
with  which  they  supported  and  retook  Brown’s  battery,  routing  the 
Fourth  Louisiana  and  capturing  their  colors,  which  the  regiment  has  - 
leave  to  send  to  its  native  State. 

Colonel  Dudley,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  has  credit  for 
the  conduct  of  the  right  wing  under  his  command.  The  Thirtieth  Mas- 
sachusetts was  promptly  brought  into  action  by  Major  Whittemore,  and 
held  its  position  with  steadiness  and  success. 

To  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  a high  meed  of  praise  is  awarded.  “Honor 
to  whom  honor  is  due.”  Deprived  of  the  services  of  their  brave  colonel, 
suffering  under  wounds  previously  received,  who  essayed  twice  to  join 
his  regiment  in  the  fight,  but  fell  from  his  horse  from  weakness ; with 
every  held  officer  wounded  and  borne  from  the  field;  its  adjutant,  the 
gallant  Latham,  killed ; seeing  their  general  fall  while  uttering  his  last 
known  words  on  earth,  “Indianians,  your  field  officers  are  all  killed; 

I will  lead  you,”  still  this  brave  corps  fought  on  without  a thought 
of  defeat.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Keith  was  everywhere  cheering  on  his 
men  and  directing  their  movements,  and  even  after  his  very  severe 
wound  gave  them  advice  and  assistance.  Major  Hays,  while  sustain- 
ing the  very  charge  of  the  enemy,  wounded  early  in  tiie  action,  showed 
himself  worthy  of  his  regiment. 

The  Ninth  Connecticut  and  Fourth  Wisconsin  Regiments,  being 
posted  in  reserve,  were  not  brought  into  action,  but  held  their  position. 
Col.  T.  W.  Cahill,  Ninth  Connecticut,  on  whom  the  command  devolved 
by  the  death  of  the  lamented  Williams,  prosecuted  the  engagement  to 


44  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Cha^.  XXVII. 

its  ultimate  glorious  success  and  made  all  proper  disposition  for  a fur- 
ther attack. 

Magee’s  cavalry  (Massachusetts),  by  their  unwearied  exertions  on 
picket  and  outpost  duty,  contributed  largely  to  our  success  and  deserve 
favorable  mention. 

The  patriotic  courage  of  the  following  officers  and  privates,  who  left 
the  hospitals  to  fight,  is  specially  commended : Capt.  H.  0.  Welles,  Com- 
pany A,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts ; Capt.  Eugene  Kelty,  Company  I, 
Thirtieth  Massachusetts  5 First  Lieut.  C.  A.  E.  Dimon,  adjutant  Thir- 
tieth Massachusetts ; Second  Lieut.  Frederick  M.  Norcross,  Company 
G,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts ; Third  Lieut,  William  B.  Allyn,  Sixth  Mas- 
sachusetts Battery;  Second  Lieutenant  Taylor,  Fourth  Massachusetts 
Battery;  Sergeant  Cheever,  Ninth  Connecticut;  Private  Tyler,  Ninth 
Connecticut.* 

The  following  have  honorable  mention  : 

Lieut.  H.  H.  Elliott,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general  to  General 
Williams,  for  his  coolness  and  intrepidity  in  action  and  the  promptness 
with  which  he  fulfilled  his  duties. 

Lieut.  J.  F.  Tenney,  quartermaster  of  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  who 
fell  severely  wounded  while  acting  aide  to  General  Williams. 

Lieut.  W.  G.  Howe,  of  Company  A,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  acting 
aide  to  Colonel  Dudley,  dangerously  wounded  in  five  places  before  he 
quit  the  field. 

Lieut.  C.  A.  E.  Dimon,  adjutant  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  acting  aide 
to  Colonel  Dudley,  behaved  most  gallantly. 

Lieut.  Frederick  M.  Norcross,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  acting  aide  to 
Colonel  Dudley,  for  daring  courage  in  the  field. 

Alfred  F.  Holt,  assistant  surgeon,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  for  hu- 
mane courage,  taking  on  his  back,  under  a hot  fire,  the  wounded  sol- 
diers as  they  fell. 

Lieut.  G.  F.  Whitcomb,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  gallantly  dashing 
into  the  smoke  of  the  enemy’s  musketry,  bringing  off'  a caisson  left  by 
Manning’s  battery. 

The  gallant  officer  and  admirable  soldier  Capt.  Eugene  Kelty,  ot 
Company  I,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  who  was  ordered  to  deploy  his 
brave  and  active  company  of  Zouaves  as  skirmishers  on  the  right,  and 
in  the  performance  of  this  duty  fell  bravely  at  their  head. 

Lieut.  W.  H.  Gardner,  Company  K,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  who  fell 
wounded  severely,  but  entreated  not  to  be  taken  from  the  field  until  the 
battle  should  be  ended. 

Color- Sergeant  Brooks,  Company  C,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  and 
Color-Corporal  Eogers,  Company  K,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  who  lost 
his  left  arm ; both  behaved  admirably  during  the  entire  engagement. 

Private  McKenzie,  Company  B,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  who,  though 
wounded,  with  the  bullet  still  in  his  body,  remained  on  duty  through- 
out the  engagement  and  is  now  at  his  post. 

First  Sergt.  John  P.  Haley,  Company  E,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  com- 
manded his  company  bravely  and  well  in  the  necessary  absence  of  his 
line  officers. 

Capt.  James  Grimsley,  Company  B,  Twenty-first  Indiana,  who  com- 
manded the  regiment  after  Colonel  Keith  was  wounded,  for  his  gallant 
behavior  in  following  up  the  battle  to  its  complete  success. 

Adjt.  Matthew  A.  Latham,  Twenty-first  Indiana,  instantly  killed  while 
in  the  act  of  waving  his  sword  and  urging  on  the  men  to  deeds  of  valor. 

* Cheever  and  Tyler  belonged  to  the  Second  Massachusetts  Battery . 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


45 


Lieut.  Charles  D.  Seely,  Orderly  Sergt.  John  A.  Bovington,  Corpl. 
Isaac  Knight,  and  Private  Henry  T.  Bachelor,  all  of  Company  A, 
Twenty-first  Indiana,  who  were  killed  instantly  while  bravely  contest- 
ing the  ground  with  the  enemy. 

Captain  Koblet,  Twenty-first  Indiana,  detailing  men  from  his  com- 
pany to  assist  in  working  the  guns  in  the  Sixth  Massachusetts  Battery 
after  the  gunners  were  disabled,  for  his  supporting  Lieutenant  Cai- 
ruth  and  his  battery. 

Lieutenant  Brown,  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana,  commanding  a bat- 
tery improvised  from  his  regiment,  for  the  efficient  manner  in  which  he 
handled  the  guns ; he  deserves  promotion  to  a battery. 

Capt.  Charles  E.  Clarke,  acting  colonel  Sixth  Michigan  Regiment, 
prevented  the  enemy  from  flanking  our  right,  bringing  his  command  at 
the  critical  moment  to  the  support  of  Kims7  battery. 

Lieutenant  Howell,  Company  P,  Sixth  Michigan,  and  Lieut.  A.  J. 
Ralph,  acting  adjutant,  for  intrepidity. 

Captain  Spitzer,  Sixth  Michigan,  in  command  of  the  company  of 
pickets  who  handsomely  held  in  check  the  enemy’s  advance. 

The  fearless  conduct  of  Lieutenant  Howell,  Company  E,  and  Ser- 
geant Thayer,  Company  A,  Sixth  Michigan  Regiment,  after  they  were 
wounded,  in  supporting  Lieutenant  Brown’s  battery ; Lieutenant  Rus- 
sey,  Company  A,  for  his  coolness  and  daring. 

Captain  Sould  and  Lieutenant  Fassett,  Company  I,  Sixth  Michigan,  as 
skirmishers,  who  were  wounded,  deserve  special  notice  for  the  steadiness 
of  their  command,  which  lost  heavily  in  killed  and  wounded : First 
Sergt.  B.  Stoddard,  Company  I;  Captain  Smith,  Company  A;  Lieu- 
tenant Chapman,  Company  B ; Capt.  David  Bacon,  Company  K,  pro- 
vost judge. 

Major  Bickmore  and  Adjt.  J.  H.  Metcalf,  of  the  Fourteenth  Maine, 
wounded  while  nobly  discharging  their  duty. 

Captain  French,  Company  K,  Fourteenth  Maine,  who  was  terribly 
wounded  while  leading  on  his  men  to  one  of  the  finest  charges  of  the 
battle.  It  is  sorrowful  indeed  to  add  that  by  the  accident  to  the  steamer 
Whiteman  he  was  drowned. 

Second  Sergt.  J.  A.  Seavey,  Company  C ; Corporal  Edminster,  Com- 
pany D ; Second  Sergeant  Snow,  Company  D ; Private  A.  Blackman, 
Company  F;  Private  Preble,  Company  I,  all  of  the  Fourteenth  Maine, 
are  commended  for  rare  bravery. 

Acting  Ordnance  Sergeant  Long,  Quartermaster  Sergeant  Gardiner, 
and  Commissary  Sergeant  Jackman,  all  of  the  Fourteenth  Maine,  and 
all  of  whom  borrowed  guns  and  entered  the  ranks  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  action. 

Capt.  Charles  H.  Manning,  Fourth  Massachusetts  Battery,  who  fought 
his  battery  admirably  and  established  his  reputation  as  a commander. 

John  Donoghue,  Fourth  Massachusetts  Battery,  who  brought  oft’ 
from  the  camp  of  the  Seventh  Vermont  Regiment  their  colors  at  the 
time  of  their  retreat. 

Private  John  R.  Dutfee,  Fourth  Massachusetts  Battery;  Private 
Ralph  A.  Rowley,  of  Magee’s  cavalry,  who  together  went  into  the  field, 
hitched  horses  under  a battery  wagon  of  the  Sixth  Massachusetts  Bat 
tery,  and  brought  it  off  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy. 

Lieut.  William  B.  Allyn,  who  had  two  horses  shot  under  him;  Lieut. 
Frank  Bruce,  Ordnance  Sergeant  Baker,  Sergeant  Wachter,  Corporal 
Wood,  and  Private  George  Andrews,  all  of  the  Sixth  Massachusetts 
Battery,  for  especial  bravery,  gallantry,  and  good  conduct. 


46 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

Sergeant  Cheever  and  Privates  Tyler,  Shields,  and  Clogston,*  of  the 
Ninth  Connecticut,  for  the  skill  and  bravery  with  which  they  worked 
one  of  their  guns, 

Capt.  S.  W.  Sawyer,  of  Company  H,  Ninth  Connecticut,  for  his  daring 
reconnaissance  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  during  which  he  found  and 
secured  three  of  the  enemy’s  caissons,  filled  with  ammunition. 

Bv  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

WM.  H.  WIEGEL, 

First  Lieutenant  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

N’etc  Orleans , La.,  September  14,  1862. 

Brigadier- General  Thomas,  Adjutant-  General : 

General  : I inclose  the  somewhat  anomalous  application  of  Major 
Holbrook,  commanding  the  Seventh  Begiment  Vermont  Volunteers, 
with  a copy  of  the  general  order  complained  of. 

It  will  be  seen  that  I only  give  the  result  of  official  reports,  so  that  I 
do  not  feel  personally  touched  by  the  matter  or  manner  of  the  commu- 
nication. Of  the  conduct  of  Major  Holbrook  there  is  no  complaint; 
being  field  officer  of  the  day  of  the  post,  he  was  not  in  the  action. 

If  consistent  with  the  rules  of  the  service  to  inquire  into  the  resume  ! 
by  the  commanding  general  of  the  events  of  an  action,  I should  be  glad 
to  have  it  done.  For  if  the  regiment  has  been  unjustly  treated  it  could 
give  no  one  more  pleasure  than  myself  to  see  it  righted.  As  there  has 
been  some  rivalry  of  feeling  I do  not  think  it  would  be  best  to  detail  a 
court  from  the  officers  of  the  regiments  at  Baton  Bouge. 

I may  further  say  that  I suggested  to  Major  Holbrook  that  he  might 
select  his  court  of  inquiry  from  any  of  the  officers  here  not  of  that  bri- 
gade. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  E.  BUTLEB, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


[lnclosnre.] 


Exhibit  l.t 


- 


Gamp  Williams,  La. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas,  Adjutant- General,  Washington: 

In  justice  to  the  regiment  which  I have  the  honor  to  command,  the 
Seventh  Begiment  of  Vermont  Volunteers,  I find  myself  under  necessity 
of  calling  for  an  examination  into  the  statements  made  by  the  major- 
general  commanding  the  department  in  Orders,  No.  62  [62 J],  dated 
August  15, 1862,  which  are  calculated,  in  my  opinion,  to  bring  unmerited 
disgrace  upon  the  regiment  and  the  State  from  which  it  comes. 

I respectfully  request  that  a court  of  inquiry  may  be  assembled  as 
soon  as  convenient  to  investigate  and  report  upon  the  battle  of  Baton 
Bouge  and  the  part  taken  in  that  engagement  by  my  regiment,  with 
the  view  that  justice  may  be  done  to  it  and  the  service. 

Begretting  exceedingly  to  find  myself  impelled  to  ask  for  the  scru- 
tiny of  a victory  which  should  fill  all  generous  hearts  only  with  grati- 

* Cheever,  Tyler,  and  Clogston  belonged  to  the  Second  Massachusetts  Battery. 

t For  Exhibit  2,  see  General  Orders,  No.  62£,  p.  42. 


Chav.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


47 


tude  and  pride,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your 
obedient  servant, 

W.  C.  HOLBROOK, 

Major , Commanding  Seventh  Regiment  Vermont  Volunteers . 

[Indorsements.] 

Hdqrs.  Fifth  Brigade,  Department  of  the  Gulf, 
Camp  Williams , La.,  September  2,  1862. 

Received  September  1,  1862,  and  respectfully  forwarded  to  Adjutant- 
General’s  Department,  Washington,  D.  0. 

N.  A.  M.  DUDLEY, 

Acting  Brigadier- General. 

Camp  Parapet,  La.,  September  2,  1862. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  a regiment  in  this  quarter  should  be 
compelled  to  defend  itself  against  unmerited  dishonor  from  its  com- 
manding general  as  well  as  against  the  enemy  and  extraordinary  ex- 
posure and  disease  ; but  I concur  with  Major  Holbrook  in  the  necessity 
of  an  investigation  into  the  facts  connected  with  the  battle  of  Baton 
Rouge  by  a court  of  inquiry,  with  the  view  of  doing  justice  to  the 
Seventh  Vermont  Volunteers  and  to  the  service. 

J.  W.  PHELPS, 
Brigadier- General. 


Washington,  October  3,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  New  Orleans : 

General  : Your  letter  of  September  14,  inclosing  the  application 
of  Maj.  W.  C.  Holbrook  for  a court  of  inquiry  on  the  conduct  of  the 
Seventh  Vermont  Volunteers  at  the  battle  of  Baton  Rouge,  has  been 
received  and  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  War.  No  officer  can  at  this 
time  be  sent  to  New  Orleans  to  constitute  such  a court.  The  course 
suggested  by  you  in  regard  to  the  proposed  investigation  seems  unob- 
jectionable in  all  respects.  You  have  full  authority  to  adopt  it. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-  in-  Chief. 


Montpelier,  Vt.,  October  13,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton  : 

I wrote  you  a few  weeks  since  of  the  charges  of  General  Butler  in  his 
order  No.  62  [62^]  against  the  Seventh  Vermont  Regiment  in  the  battle 
at  Baton  Rouge.  These  charges  are  believed  to  be  grossly  unjust,  and 
have  stirred  up  the  people  of  Vermont.  Nothing  short  of  an  entirely 
impartial  court  of  inquiry,  to  be  appointed  at  and  sent  on  from  Wash- 
ington, will  satisfy  our  people.  They  are  brave,  loyal,  and  patriotic  to 
the  core,  and  for  that  very  reason  will  not  quietly  sit  down  under 
charges  which  reflect  upon  the  State.  May  I have  assurances  that 
action  will  be  taken  at  Washington? 

FRED’K  HOLBROOK, 

Governor  of  Vermont. 


48 


W.  FLA.,  8.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , November  15,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Governor  Holbrook,  Montpelier , Vt. : 

Governor  : I have  the  pleasure  to  inclose  you  a copy  of  the  pro- 
ceedings of  a court  of  inquiry  in  the  case  of  the  Seventh  Vermont  Regi- 
ment. When  the  request  for  such  a board  was  sent  to  me  I informed 
Major  Holbrook,  then  commanding,  that  I would  order  the  court,  and 
he  might  choose  any  officers  of  my  command  who  were  not  engaged 
in  the  battle  to  compose  the  board.  For  reasons  which  he  judged 
sufficient  he  declined  the  offer,  and  requested  that  I would  forward  the 
papers  to  Washington,  which  I did. 

The  major-general  commanding  was  kind  enough  to  approve  my  ac- 
tion, but  informed  me  that  no  officers  could  be  detailed  from  Washing- 
ton to  compose  the  court.  I then  renewed  my  offer  to  the  commander 
of  the  Seventh  Vermont,  and  he  selected  the  officers  who  composed  the 
board.  I added  as  recorder  a gentleman  of  considerable  legal  expe- 
rience, who  was  not  even  present  in  the  department  at  the  time  of  the 
matter.  The  result  is  before  you.  I trust  that  when  you  read  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  court  of  inquiry  you  will  see  that  no  injustice  has  been 
done  to  the  regiment  which  has  not  been  repaired  [save]  in  the  single 
particular  of  its  colors. 

I shall  rely  upon  you  to  see  that  justice  is  done  to  me  in  the  premises, 
knowing  your  high  sense  of  right  and  honor. 

I have,  dear  Governor,  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding . 

- 

Department  of  the  Gulf, 

City  of  New  Orleans , October  23,  1862. 

Pursuant  to  special  orders  from  department  headquarters,  viz : 

Special  Orders,  \ Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  462.  ) New  Orleans,  October  21,  1862. 

A board  of  inquiry,  consisting  of  the  following  officers:  Col.  H.  C.  Deming,  presi- 
dent ; Col.  J.  W.  Turner,  Lieut.  Col.  A.  B.  Farr,  Lieut.  W.  L.  G.  Greene,  recorder,  is 
ordered  to  examine  and  report  upon  the  facts  and  circumstances  relative  to  the  con- 
dition as  to  discipline  and  efficiency  of  the  Seventh  Regiment  Vermont  Volunteers  at 
the  time  of  the  battle  of  Baton  Rouge  and  the  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  in  that 
action. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler : 

R.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

# # # # * # # 


Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , November  3,  1862. 

The  board  met  pursuant  to  adjournment.  Present,  all  the  members. 

The  board,  having  fully  weighed  and  considered  the  evidence,  report 
as  follows : 

It  appears  from  the  evidence  that  when  the  Seventh  Regiment  Ver- 
mont Volunteers  was  called  upon  to  participate  in  the  battle  of  Baton 
Rouge  it  had  been  very  much  reduced  in  numbers  and  doubtless  in 
morale  by  the  severities  of  the  campaign  at  Vicksburg  and  by  long  con- 


Chav.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


49 


finement  on  board  transports.  On  the  morning  of  the  battle  the  regi- 
ment had  present  for  duty  about  250  men,  about  520  men  sick,  of  whom 
200  were  in  hospital.  About  225  men  were  in  line  early  in  the  action. 

The  commanding  officer  of  the  regiment,  Colonel  Eoberts,  fell  under 
the  sharpest  volley  that  was  fired  that  day,  and  shortly  after  his  fall 
the  regiment  fled  about  100  feet  to  the  rear  and  to  the  cover  of  some 
gullies  in  a disorderly  manner.  About  two-fifths  of  the  men  present 
for  duty  did  not  return  to  the  position  in  line  of  battle  during  the  day. 

It  appears  that  early  in  the  action  Lieutenant-Colonel  Fullam  had 
been  dispatched  by  his  colonel  to  see  to  the  firing  of  a battery  which 
was  endangering  the  regiment;  that  Major  Holbrook  was  officer  of  the 
day.  Upon  the  fall  of  the  colonel,  therefore,  the  command  of  the  regi- 
ment devolved  temporarily  upon  Captain  (now  Major)  Porter,  who  seems 
to  have  behaved  creditably  in  a trying  position.  When  the  lieutenant- 
colonel  returned  he  assumed  command  of  the  regiment.  The  only  tes- 
timony before  the  board  discreditable  to  him  is  the  following,  from 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Elliott’s  deposition: 

I did  see  something  in  the  conduct  of  officers  which  1 thought  deserving  of  censure. 
I saw  Colouel  Fullam,  after  they  had  fallen  back,  seeking  protection,  drawing  his 
regiment  up  in  a ravine.  I asked  him  what  he  was  doing  there  He  said  he  was 
getting  his  men  into  a sheltered  position.  I saw  no  other  officers  show  a disposition 
to  evade  duty.  I think  the  regiment  was  over  200  yards  in  the  rear  of  their  camp. 

So  far  as  any  evidence  appears  it  would  seem  that  the  line  officers 
behaved  well  during  the  day. 

It  appears  that  the  Seventh  Vermont  Eegiment,  or  a part  of  it,  did 
fire  into  the  Twenty-first  Indiana,  but  there  is  an  exculpation  to  be 
found  in  the  testimony  of  the  commanding  officer  of  the  Indiana  regi- 
ment, Captain  Grimsley,  to  wit: 

Occupying  the  position  they  did  the  Seventh  had  no  means  of  knowing  where  we 
were.  * * * My  impression  is  that  when  we  received  the  volleys  from  the  Seventh 
Vermont  we  ran  under  a fire  which  was  already  going  on. 

It  appears  also  from  the  testimony  of  various  witnesses  that  the  field 
was  covered  by  dense  fog  and  smoke,  so  that  it  was  quite  impossible  to 
distinguish  a friend  from  a foe  at  the  distance  the  two  regiments  were 
apart;  and,  moreover,  that  the  position  of  the  Indiana  regiment  was 
very  frequently  changed. 

It  does  not  appear  that  any  orders  were  communicated  to  the  Ver- 
mont regiment  during  the  day  which  they  disobeyed. 

It  appears  that  the  colors  of  the  regiment  were  retained  by  the  color 
guard  during  the  action,  and  were  brought  off  the  field  by  the  guard 
when  the  regiment  fell  back. 

It  appears  that  the  camp  colors  alleged  by  Captain  Manning,  of  the 
Fourth  Massachusetts  Battery,  to  have  been  brought  from  the  camp  of 
the  Seventh  Vermont  by  John  Donoghue  were  two  markers  of  the  form 
in  common  use  and  one  small  United  States  flag,  which  had  been  used 
for  no  military  purpose  for  a long  time  previously. 

HENEY  C.  DEMIEG, 

Colonel  Twelfth  Regt.  Conn.  Vols.,  President  of  the  Court. 

JNO.  W.  TUENEE, 

Colonel  and  C.  S. 

A.  B.  FA  EE, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel  Twenty-sixth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Vote . 

William  L.  G.  Greene, 

TAeutenant  Second  Louisiana  Volunteers , Recorder. 

4 E r — vol  xv 


50 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chat.  XXVIL 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , November  6, 1862. 

The  commanding  general  has  examined  with  care  the  findings,  pro- 
ceedings, and  testimony  of  the  court  of  inquiry,  whereof  Col.  Henry  C. 
Deming  is  president,  in  the  matter  of  the  Seventh  Eegiment  Vermont 
Volunteers,  and  approves  the  proceedings  and  findings. 

It  is  apparent  that  every  conclusion  arrived  at  by  the  court  is  sup- 
ported by  the  test  imony  of  the  witnesses  called  on  behalf  of  the  regiment. 

The  general  is  constrained  to  find  that  the  charge  against  the  regi- 
ment of  breaking  in  disorder  before  the  enemy  is  fully  proved.  Two- 
fifths  of  the  regiment  never  returned  to  the  line  of  battle  after  they 
broke  and  fled;  that  the  regiment  did  fire  upon  the  Indiana  regiment, 
and  that  that  was  the  only  firing  done  by  the  regiment  that  day,  al- 
though they  held  the  center  of  the  line,  which  was  most  hotly  pressed. 

The  general  is  glad  to  find  that  most  of  the  line  officers  behaved  well, 
and  that  the  official  reports  which  led  him  to  believe  that  the  regimental 
colors  were  lost  by  the  regiment  were  mistakes,  and  therefore  he  has 
pleasure  in  ordering  the  colors  of  the  regiment  to  be  restored  to  the 
regiment  with  privilege  to  carry  them,  but  he  cannot  order  them  to  be 
inscribed  with  the  name  of  the  glorious  battle  of  Baton  Rouge. 

The  general  doubts  not  that  now,  having  an  officer  as  commander  who 
will  not  form  them  out  of  sight  for  shelter  in  a ravine  during  an  action 
as  did  their  late  lieutenant-colonel,  the  regiment  will  in  its  next  action 
retrieve  its  position  and  earn  a proud  name  for  itself  and  State. 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


General  Ordeks,  » Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  98.  ( New  Orleans , November  20,  1862. 

The  commanding  general,  upon  the  finding  of  the  board  of  inquiry 
upon  the  conduct  of  the  Seventh  Regiment  Vermont  Volunteers  at  the 
battle  of  Baton  Rouge,  learns  that  he  was  led  into  a mistake  by  the  of- 
ficial reports  of  that  action  as  to  the  loss  by  that  regiment  of  its  colors, 
it  proving  to  have  been  the  camp  color  left  in  camp  and  not  the  regi- 
mental color  that  was  brought  off  the  field  by  the  Massachusetts  battery. 
He  therefore  has  pleasure  in  ordering  the  regimental  colors  to  be  re- 
stored to  the  regiment,  not  doubting  that  it  will  in  its  next  action  earn 
for  itself  a position  and  name  which  will  be  a credit  to  itself,  its  State, 
and  country. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  G.  STRONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


51 


No.  10. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  <kc.] 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured  or 
missing. 

1 

Aggregate. 

Remarks. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

General  officers 

1 

1 

T$ri  o*  n.  rH  a r-G  a n a t a 1 

A-'1 1 5 £1)  U I D JL  V*  Ollul  nil 

W illiams. 

9th  Connecticut 

1 

9 

4 

14 

21st  Indiana : 

2 

22 

7 

91 

4 

126 

TilAnf  Q MolfVinw  A 

uicuio.  in  (tunc  w /a  . 

Latham  and  Charles 

D.  Seely  killed. 

14th  Maine 

36 

7 

64 

12 

119 

30th  Massachusetts 

1 

■ 2 

3 

12 

18 

Capt.  Eugene  Kelty 

6th  Michigan 

15 

4 

40 

1 

5 

65 

killed. 

7th  Vermont 

1 

9 

5 

15 

Massachusetts  Cavalry,  Second 

1 

1 

unattached  company. 
Massachusetts  Light  Artillery, 

4 

1 

5 

Second  Battery. 

Massachusetts  Light  Artillery, 

1 

5 

6 

Fourth  Battery. 

Massachusetts  fight  Artillery, 

3 

1 

8 

1 

13 

Sixth  Battery. 

Total 

4 

80 

23 

243 

1, 

32 

383 

No.  11. 


Reports  of  Lieut.  Godf  rey  Weitzel , U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers,  Chief  Engi- 
neer Department  of  the  Gulf. 

Headquarters,  Baton  Rouge , La.,  August  7,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  favor 
of  yesterday.  Your  troops  at  this  place  have  won  a glorious  victory. 
I do  not  consider  that  there  is  the  least  danger  of  an  attack  for  the 
present,  because  one  of  the  several  reconnoitering  parties  sent  out  this 
morning,  and  which  has  returned,  reports  five  abandoned  caissons  on 
the  Green  well  Springs  road.  We  have  sent  out  to  bring  them  in. 
This  indicates  a hasty  retreat  on  the  part  of  the  enemy.  Our  forces 
could  not  pursue.  One-half  of  the  men  who  left  the  hospital  to  fight 
could  not  march  a mile.  The  conduct  of  these  men  was  magnificently 
glorious.  The  attack  was  undoubtedly  made  upon  representations  of 
rebels  within  our  lines  that  our  troops  were  nearly  all  sick  and  demoral- 
ized, and  General  Breckinridge  undoubtedly  expected,  in  conjunction 
with  the  ram  Arkansas,  to  make  a successful  dash.  It  was  a complete 
failure.  The  ram  is  blown  up.  Their  troops  were  repulsed. 

General  Williams  disposed  of  his  forces  as  follows,  viz : The  Fourth 
Wisconsin  on  the  extreme  left,  on  the  right  bank  of  Bayou  Gross,  with 
two  pieces  of  Manning’s  battery  on  the  Arsenal  grounds,  on  the  left 
bank  of  Bayou  Gross,  to  sweep  the  grounds  on  the  left  of  the  Fourth 
Wisconsin.  The  Ninth  Connecticut  was  posted  on  the  right  of  the 
Fourth  Wisconsin,  with  two  pieces  in  rear  of  center  and  two  pieces  in 
rear  o I the  right.  All  of  these  pieces  were  of  Manning’s  battery,  and 
were  posted  on  either  side  of  the  knoll  in  the  Government  Cemetery. 


52 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  * [Chat.  XXVII. 

Next  came  the  Fourteenth  Maine,  posted  in  rear  of  the  Bayou  Sara 
road  and  to  the  left  of  the  Greenwell  Springs  road.  Next  came  the 
Twenty-first  Indiana,  posted  in  the  woods  in  rear  of  Magnolia  Cemetery, 
with  four  pieces  of  Everett’s  battery,  under  the  command  of  Lieuten- 
ant Carruth,  on  their  left,  on  the  Greenwell  Springs  road.  The  Indiana 
battery,  of  two  pieces,  came  up  to  the  support  of  these  pieces  after  the 
battle  commenced.  Next  came  the  Sixth  Michigan,  posted  across  the 
country  road  on  the  right  of  Magnolia  Cemetery  and  across  the  Clay 
Cut  road,  their  left  supporting  two  pieces  of  Everett’s  battery,  posted 
on  the  road  on  the  right  of  the  Magnolia  Cemetery.  The  Seventh  Ver- 
mont was  posted  in  the  rear  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  and  Sixth  Michi- 
gan on  the  right  of  the  Catholic  Cemetery.  The  Thirtieth  Massachu- 
setts came  next,  forming  the  right,  and  posted  about  one-half  a mile  in 
the  rear  of  the  State-House,  supporting  Nims’  battery. 

This  disposition  of  the  forces  was  made  with  the  supposition  that  the 
enemy  would  attack  our  left  flank  under  the  cover  of  the  ram  Arkansas. 
The  right  flank  depended  upon  gunboat  support.  The  only  fault  of  dis- 
position, perhaps  rendered  unavoidable  by  the  formations  of  the  ground, 
was  that  the  camps  of  the  Fourteenth  Maine  and  Twenty-first  Indiana 
were  pitched  in  front  of  their  position  in  line  of  battle,  and  consequently 
came  into  the  possession  of  the  enemy  for  a short  time.  The  enemy 
formed  line  of  battle  on  the  open  grounds  bordering  on  the  Greenwell 
Springs  road  and  attempted  to  draw  our  forces  out.  Failing  in  this, 
they  advanced  rapidly  on  the  ground  between  the  Clinton  and  Clay  Cut 
roads.  The  whole  brunt  of  attack  consequently  fell  upon  the  Fourteenth 
Maine,  Twenty-first  Indiana,  and  Sixth  Michigan.  As  soon  as  it  became 
apparent  that  this  was  the  real  point  of  attack  General  Williams  ordered 
up  the  Ninth  Connecticut,  Fourth  Wisconsin,  and  one  section  of  Man- 
ning’s battery  to  support  the  left  and  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  and  two 
sections  of  Nims’  battery  to  support  the  right.  You  will  therefore 
see  that  the  disposition  (with  the  slight  exception  hinted  at)  and  the 
maneuvering  were  faultless. 

The  conduct  of  our  troops  was  excellent.  The  Twenty-first  Indiana 
particularly  distinguished  itself.  I saw  a number  of  the  dead  of  the 
enemy  to-day  in  front  of  the  grounds  they  occupied  ; but,  not  content 
with  the  check  they  gave  the  enemy,  this  regiment  pursued  him  quite 
a distance,  strewing  the  ground  with  his  dead. 

The  brave  General  Williams  fell  in  front  of  the  Sixth  Michigan  to- 
ward the  end  of  the  conflict,  while  giving  his  men  a noble  example  of 
reckless  and  daring  bravery.  He  was  killed  by  a rifle-ball  in  the  chest. 

The  enemy’s  forces  consisted  of  two  Louisiana  regiments,  the  Fourth 
and  Thirtieth ; two  Mississippi;  the  Third,  Fourth,  Fifth,  Sixth,  Sev- 
enth, and  Eighth  Kentucky  ; two  Tennessee  ; one  Alabama  regiment, 
thirteen  guns,  and  a large  guerrilla  force.  Their  attacking  force  num- 
bered fully  6,000  men.  Our  actual  force  engaged  was  not  over  2,000. 

Three  companies  of  the  Sixth  Michigan  covered  themselves  with 
glory  in  recovering  from  a large  force  two  guns  posted  on  the  right  of 
the  Magnolia  Cemetery,  which  temporarily  were  left  by  our  forces.  These 
same  three  companies  captured  the  colors  of  the  Fourth  Louisiana,  but 
only  after  they  had  shot  down  four  successive  color-bearers.  The  exact 
loss  on  our  side  is  not  yet  reported,  but  certain  it  is  that  it  is  much  less 
than  that  of  the  enemy. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ G.  WEITZEL, 

Lieut.,  U.  8.  Engrs.  and  Chief  Engr.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


53 


Baton  .Rouge,  La.,  August  7, 1862. 

General  : As  soon  as  I arrived  here  this  morning  I examined  the 
position  of  our  troops  (which  were  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle),  although 
it  was  at  1 a.  m.  I was  convinced,  after  hearing  everything  I could,  that 
the  enemy  met  with  a bad  repulse,  and  was  certain  that  he  would  not 
again  attack  soon.  I recommended  to  Colonel  Paine  to  send  out  recon - 
noitering  parties  in  every  direction,  so  as  to  ascertain  exactly  the  posi- 
tion of  the  enemy.  Up  to  this  moment  (3.30  p.  m.)  but  one  of  the  five 
parties  sent  out  has  returned,  bringing  with  it  five  abandoned  caissons 
of  the  enemy,  partially  filled  with  ammunition.  Our  forces  cannot 
pursue.  Only  about  1,200  men  of  the  2,500  engaged  could  march  5 
miles.  I send  you  a truthful  account  of  the  battle.  I ascertained  all 
these  facts  by  actually  examining  the  grounds  and  all  truthful  men.  I 
send  this  in  such  a manner  as  to  be  fit  for  publication  in  the  Delta  or  in 
any  paper.  I did  not  state  what  is  true,  that  the  Seventh  Vermont 
behaved  very  badly.  The  colonel  is  an  exception.  He  fought  bravely 
and  was  mortally  wounded.  I have  advised  Colonel  Paine  to  send  down 
all  the  sick  and  wounded. 

Be  sure,  general,  to  send  back  all  these  transports  at  once. 

The  difficulty  about  burning  this  town  is  there  is  a large  orphan 
asylum  and  a tremendous  insane  asylum,  both  of  which  humanity  for- 
bids us  to  destroy. 

Colonel  Cahill  did  well,  and  I have  not  the  least  doubt  from  what  I 
have  seen  from  him  that  he  was  equal  to  the  emergency. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WEITZEL, 
Lieutenant  Engineers. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Baton  Rouge , August  8,  1862 — 6.15  p.  m. 

Captain  : I have  just  heard,  as  the  boat  is  starting,  from  two  intelli- 
gent deserters  that  the  following  was  the  plan  of  the  rebels : 

Breckinridge  was  to  take  Baton  Rouge ; the  ram  to  clear  out  the 
gunboats  here ; he  then  would  march  down  to  attack  Phelps,  assisted 
by  a large  force  which  was  in  waiting  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river 
and  some  parties  from  the  city.  This  is  from,  I consider,  very  good 
authority. 

We  have  already  buried  over  250  rebels.  Their  wounded  are  contin- 
ually reported  to  us  by  scouting  parties  as  lying  around  in  great  num- 
bers in  negro  cabins  and  houses  on  the  outskirts.  We  are  getting  them 
iu.  We  have  besides  a large  number  in  the  city  in  the  hands  of  rebel 
friends. 

Our  total  loss  is  95  killed,  265  wounded,  and  about  40  missing.* 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WEITZEL, 
Lieutenant , IT.  S.  Engineers. 

Capt.  R.  S.  Davis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


But,  see  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


54 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xxvn. 


No.  12. 


Reports  of  Col.  Thomas  W.  Cahill,  Ninth  Connecticut  Infantry,  commanding 
Second  Brigade,  and  resulting  correspondence. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Baton  Rouge , La.,  August  5,  1862. 

Captain  : We  are  attacked  by  a very  superior  force,  probably  15,000. 
They  are  determined  to  take  the  city  at  all  hazards.  General  Williams 
is  killed  and  a number  of  field  officers  are  badly  wounded.  If  it  is  possi- 
ble to  send  us  re-enforcements  let  it  be  done  with  all  dispatch.  The 
Navy  is  threatened  by  the  ram  Arkansas,  which  will  divert  them  from 
our  service  ’,  therefore  if  more  gunboats  can  be  sent  they  will  be  oi 

great  use.  THOS.  W.  OAHILL, 

Colonel  Ninth  Connecticut  Volunteers,  Commanding. 


Attacked  this  morning  at  3.45  o’clock.  Breckinridge  lost  his  right 
arm.  Lovell  killed.  Colonel  Allen,  Captain  Chinn,  of  Baton  Rouge, 
and  a lieutenant  killed.  This  is  reported  by  all  the  prisoners  taken. 
Our  loss  250,  including  General  Williams  and  several  officers.  Re- 
ported that  we  lost  two  guns  and  captured  three.  Last  report  is  that 
we  have  lost  no  guns  and  have  repulsed  the  rebels.  Expect  another 
attack  to-night  or  to-morrow  morning.  William  Blount,  captain  of 
artillery,  from  Texas,  says  Lovell  is  not  present.  Thinks  rebel  loss 
greatest. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  6,  1862. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  an  attack  was  made  early 
yesterday  morning  by  a Confederate  force  of  about  ten  regiments,  undei 
command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Breckinridge,  and  that  after  a fight  of  four 
hours’  duration  and  of  great  severity  the  enemy  was  repulsed.  I re- 
gret to  state  that  Brigadier-General  Williams  was  killed  on  the  field  by 
a rifle-ball  through  the  chest.  During  the  battle  our  forces  were  obliged 
to  retire  about  a quarter  of  a mile  from  our  original  position,  and  the 
enemy  were  thus  able  to  occupy  temporarily  the  camps  of  the  Twenty  - 
first  Indiana,  Seventh  Vermont,  and  Fourteenth  Maine  Regiments,  and 
to  destroy  much  of  the  baggage  and  camp  equipage.  They  were,  how- 
ever, driven  out,  but  our  number  being  much  lessened  by  sickness,  and 
the  men  on  the  field  being  much  exhausted  by  fatigue  and  heat,  it  was 
deemed  inexpedient  to  pursue.  I am  unable  as  yet  to  give  a report  of 
our  casualties,  which  I am  sorry  to  say  are  considerable. 

The  enemy  has  retired  several  miles,  and  from  all  I can  learn  are 
still  retiring.  I am  expecting  it  possible  they  may  receive  re-enfoi ce- 
ments, and  am  disposing  my  troops  in  the  strongest  positions.  Our 
force  engaged  numbered  less  than  2,500.  The  enemy  had  at  least  5,000, 
with  twelve  or  fourteen  field  pieces  and  some  cavalry. 

The  ram  Arkansas  approached  with  the  intention  of  engaging  our 
gunboats,  but  grounded  above  the  point  at  a distance  of  about  6 miles, 
and  to-day  was  engaged  by  the  iron-clad  Essex  and  destroyed. 

Inclosed  is  a copy  of  a communication  received  by  a flag  of  truce 
from  Major-General  Breckinridge  and  my  reply  thereto.  You  will 
see  by  the  latter  that  Brigadier-General  Clark  and  his  aide-de-camp 


Ohap.  XXVIl',1  VTOKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


55 


have  delivered  themselves  up  as  prisoners  of  war.  I have  also  full} 
70  wounded  prisoners,  that  were  left  on  the  held ; also  about  30  cap- 
tured. I would  like  instructions  as  to  the  disposition  you  wish  made  ol 
them.  Some  of  them  express  a wish  to  be  paroled. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

y 1 THOS.  W.  CAHILL, 

Colonel , Commanding  Post.  ■ 

Capt.  E.  S.  Davis,  _ + „ 7, 

Aetg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf. 


Hdqrs.  Confederate  Forces  in  the  Field, 

Near  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  6,  18G2. 

Sir-  I have  sent  Major  De  Baiiu  with  a flag  of  truce,  with  the  re- 
nuest  that  he  will  be  allowed  to. attend  to  the  burial  of  our  dead  who 
may  have  been  left  within  your  lines.  Major  Haynes,  accompanying, 
desires  to  communicate  with  Brig.  Gen.  Charles  Clark,  that  he  may 
supply  him  with  money  and  clothing  and  such  articles  as  may  contnb 

ute  to  his  comfort. 

Respectfully,  sir,  bed^^r^EEOKINRIDGE, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 

Commanding  Officer  of  the  U.  S.  Forces, 

Baton  Rouge , La. 


Headquarters  TJ.  S.  Forces, 

Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  6,  1862. 

General  : In  reply  to  your  communication  of  this  morning,  under 
a flag  of  truce,  I have  the  honor  to  say  that  we  are  now  engaged  m the 
burial  of  your  dead  within  our  lines  and  that  we  shall  soon  finish  the 
new  nearly  accomplished  work. 

General.  Clark  and  his  aide-de-camp,  Lieutenant  Yerger,  have  sur- 
rendered themselves  as  prisoners  of  war,  and  are  being  cared  lor  by 
our  surgeons.  A friend  of  General  Clark  from  this  city  will  attend  to 
his  pecuniary  wants. 

Respectfully,  your  obedieut  servant,^^  ^ CAmLL 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Breckinridge, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forces. 


Baton  Kouge,  La.,  August  9,  1862. 

Sir  : Being  called  to  the  command  of  the  forces  at  Baton  Rouge  on 
the  occasion  of  the  action  of  August  5 by  the  unfortunate  death  o 
General  Williams,  it  becomes  my  duty  to  report  the  circumstances  ot 

the  glorious  victory : .,  , - 

Burnors  of  an  advance  of  the  enemy  in  heavy  force  had  prevailed  toi 
some  days.  On  the  afternoon  of  August  4 General  Williams  called  the 
attention  of  the  commandants  of  regiments  and  batteries  to  the  proba- 
bility of  an  attack  at  an  early  hour  in  the  morning.  The  Fourteenth 


56  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  IChap.  XXVTI 

Maine,  Colonel  Nickerson ; the  Twenty-first  Indiana,  under  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Keith ; the  Sixth  Michigan,  under  acting  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Clarke,  and  the  Seventh  Vermont,  Colonel  Roberts,  were  encamped— 
the  first  with  its  right  resting  on  the  intersection  of  the  Greenwell 
Springs  road  and  fronting  on  a road  running  to  the  intersection  of  the 
Bayou  Sara  and  Clinton  roads.  These  encampments  were  in  heavy  tim- 
ber. The  Twenty-first  Indiana  was  encamped  on  about  the  same  line 
front  and  on  the  right  of  the  Greenwell  Springs  road.  On  nearly  the 
same  line  front,  but  still  farther  to  the  right,  at  the  intersection  of  the 
Clay  Cut  and  Perkins  roads,  was  the  Sixth  Michigan.  The  Seventh 
Vermont  was  some  distance  to  the  rear  and  between  the  positions  of 
the  Sixth  Michigan  and  Twenty-first  Indiana,  with  the  camp  fronting 
the  city.  Everett’s  battery,  under  Lieutenant  Carruth,  was  in  bivouac 
on  the  right  of  the  Fourteenth  Maine  and  on  the  right  of  the  Twenty- 
first  Indiana.  Still  farther  to  the  right  were  the  guns,  in  charge  of 
[Lieut.  Brown],  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana.  On  the  extreme  right  the 
guns  of  Nims’  battery,  under  Lieutenant  Trull,  were  brought  into  posi- 
tion early  in  the  action  on  the  right.  The  Thirtieth  Massachusetts, 
under  Colonel  Dudley,  was  brought  up  from  their  quarters  in  the  Capi- 
tol, on  the  right  of  the  Fourth,  and  took  position  on  the  left  of  the  Sixth 
Michigan.  On  the  extreme  left,  in  advance  of  the  left  bank  of  the 
Bayou  Gross,  with  an  oblique  front  toward  the  intersection  of  the 
Bayou  Sara  and  Clinton  roads,  with  two  pieces  of  Manning’s  battery, 
were  the  Ninth  Connecticut  and  Fourth  Wisconsin.  The  remaining 
guns  of  Manning’s  battery  were  in  position  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
bed  of  the  Bayou  Gross.  * This  was  the  real  line  of  defense  for  the  left 
flank,  covering  the  north  and  east  of  the  Arsenal  grounds. 

General  Williams,  in  his  instructions  to  myself  and  Lieutenant- Colonel 
Bean,  commanding  Fourth  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  was  very  clear  and 
positive  in  his  orders  to  hold  this  position  at  all  hazards,  as  he  antici- 
pated the  enemy  would  advance  (under  cover  of  the  fire  from  the  ram 
Arkansas,  with  the  gunboats  from  the  Red  River)  through  the  open 
grounds  of  the  saw  mill  and  Dougherty’s  plantation  and  take  posses- 
sion of  the  Arsenal  grounds.  The  above-mentioned  advance  on  the  left 
bank  of  the  bayou  was  only  ordered  by  General  Williams  after  a lengthy 
consideration,  on  the  evening  of  the  4th  instant,  with  the  intention  of 
checking  an  advance  on  the  same  position  by  the  Bayou  Sara  and  Clin- 
ton roads,  and  for  that  reason  we  only  brought  forward  the  light  how- 
itzers of  Manning’s  battery  to  the  advance  position,  leaving  the  heavy 
guns  on  the  original  lines. 

At  early  daylight  on  the  morning  of  August  5 the  enemy  threw  his 
entire  force  on  the  camps  of  the  Fourteenth  Maine,  Twenty-first  Indi- 
ana, and  Sixth  Michigan,  with  the  batteries  attached  to  each  regiment. 
These  troops  stood  their  ground  nobly,  meeting  the  tremendous  force 
thrown  upon  them  with  unflinching  bravery. 

On  looking  over  the  battle  ground  since  the  engagement  I cannot  con- 
ceive how  it  was  possible  for  so  many  men  to  have  engaged  on  so  small 
a piece  of  ground.  The  attack  was  nearly  simultaneous,  but  the  first 
fire  in  line  from  the  enemy’s  right  was  directed  on  the  Fourteenth 
Maine,  and  instantly  answered  by  that  regiment  by  a solid  line  volley, 
which  must  have  done  terrible  execution.  The  companies  of  the  Twen- 
ty-first Indiana  which  were  in  advance  as  pickets  had  fallen  back  in 
order.  The  whole  regiment  advanced  toward  the  Magnolia  Cemetery 
and  east  of  it.  At  this  time  Major  Hays  was  seriously  wounded  and 
was  taken  from  the  field.  The  regiment  worked,  advancing  and  retir- 
ing and  changing  front  as  the  enemy  showed  himself  through  the  smoke. 


0HA1’  XXVII.  1 VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


57 


M nearly  tlie  close  of  the  action  Lieutenant-Colonel  Keith,  command- 
inp-  Bad  to  leave  the  field,  badly  wouuded,  leaving  the  regiment,  with- 
out’ a field  officer,  in  command  of  Captain  Grimsley . It  was  at  this  stage 
of  the  battle  that  General  Williams  fell  mortally  wounded  He  had 
inst  said  to  the  boys  of  the  Twenty-first : “ Boys,  your  held  officers  are 
all  gone ; I will  lead  you,”  the  men  answering  with  three  cheers  for  the 
general.  ’ The  sound  had  scarce  died  away  when  he  fell.  The  general 
had  nreviously  issued  an  order  for  the  line  to  tall  back,  and  the  artillery 
having  done  so,  the  regiments  retired  in  good  order  to  the  position  now 

°CFor  details  of  movements  and  conduct  of  regiments  and  batteries  I 
would  refer  you  to  the  accompanying  reports.  I will  not  trespass  on 
the  patience  of  the  commanding  general  further  than  to  say  what  the 
officers  commanding  regiments  and  corps  cannot  well  say  for  themselves, 
that  more  undaunted  bravery,  coolness,  and  skill  in  the  handling  of  then 
commands  has  not  been  displayed  on  any  battle-field  than  on  that  ot 
Baton  Rouge,  and  that,  too,  by  officers  who  never  before  handled  troops 
in  a fight  From  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  and  Sixth  Michigan  myself 
in  common  with  others  expected  a great  deal,  and  were  not  disappointed. 
But  when  I look  back  a few  short  months  and  bring  back  to  my  mind 
the  arrival  of  the  Fourteenth  Maine  at  Ship  Island  and  to  day  consider 
the  work  done  by  that  regiment  in  the  action,  the  smoothness  and  steadi- 
ness of  its  evolutions  in  difficult  ground* and  under  fire  from  the  vet- 
erans of  the  Confederate  service,  I can  only  say  that  for  his  efforts  in 
building  up  his  regiment,  the  most  serious  task  of  a commander,  and 
his  conduct  in  the  field,  Colonel  Nickerson,  of  the  Fourteenth  Maine, 

deserves  the  highest  praise.  . _ , _ m ~ 

To  the  impetuous  Lieutenant -Colonel  Keith,  of  the  Twenty -first  In- 
diana, no  language  of  mine  can  do  justice.  He  was  everywhere,  in  every 
place,  working  his  men  through  tents,  trees,  and  underbrush  like  a vet- 
eran, and,  when  seriously  wounded  and  taken  from  the  field,  he  would 
not  give  up,  but  drove  around  among  his  officers  and  men,  counseling 
them  and  assisting  in  everything,  to  the  injury  and  irritation  of  his 

wounds.  , „ , , , 

Colonel  Roberts,  of  the  Seventh  Vermont,  fell  mortally  wounded  and 
has  since  died.  He  was  a gentleman  of  a generous  nature  and  of  cul- 
tivated mind.  Colonel  Nickerson,  of  the  Fourteenth  Maine,  had  his 
horse  shot  under  him  by  a discharge  of  grape.  He  sprang  from  under 
his  dying  steed  and  waving  his  sword  called  upon  his  men  for  one  more 
charge.  The  men  sprang  forward  with  three  rousing  cheers  and  drove 
back  the  advancing  foe.  At  this  time  the  gallant  Captain  French,  of 
Company  K,  Fourteenth  Maine,  received  liis  terrible  wound,  This 
charge  was  madein  the  presence  of  General  Williams,  who  complimented 
the  men  highly.  Captain  French  was  placed  on  board  the  unfortunate 
steamer  Whiteman,  ahd  was  lost  when  she  went  down.  His  name  de- 
serves special  mention. 

The  conduct  of  officers  and  men  of  the  several  batteries  was  every- 
thing that  could  be  looked  for  by  the  commanding  general.  The  vari- 
ous batteries  were  very  much  reduced  by  sickness  and  deaths,  and 
even  with  the  assistance  of  details  from  infantry  were  worked  short- 

handed.  , 

Lieutenant  Hall,  in  command  of  the  second  piece  of  Nuns7  battery, 
wishes  special  mention  made  of  the  successful  rally  by  men  ot  the 
Twenty-first  Indiana  and  3 men  of  the  Ninth  Connecticut,  who,  with 
the  assistance  of  Private  Tyler  (who  left  his  sick  bed  and  acted  as 
sergeant,  gunner,  &c.),  and  Privates  Shields  a 


and  Clogston,  as  also 


58 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  xxvn. 

Sergeant  Cheever  (who  lelt  the  hospital  sick  to  do  his  duty),  lallied 
and  brought  oft*  the  gun,  when  every  man  and  horse  was  shot  down 
and  the  piece  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  The  names  of  the  privates  i 
of  infantry  engaged  in  this  gallant  exploit  will  be  forwarded  as  soon 
as  ascertained.  The  Ninth  Connecticut  and  Fourth  Wisconsin  Volun- 
teers were  brought  up  from  their  positions  early  in  the  action,  and  were 
placed  by  General  Williams’  order  in  line  across  the  grounds  of  the 
orphan  asylum,  immediately  in  rear  of  the  camps  of  the  Twenty-first 
Indiana  and  Fourteenth  Maine.  The  regiments  moved  with  alacrity 
and  obeyed  all  orders  promptly. 

Oapt.  Silas  W.  Sawyer,  of  Company  H,  Ninth  Regiment  Connecticut 
Volunteers,  deserves  mention  for  his  bold  reconnaissance  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  6th.  Going  out  on  the  Bayou  Sara  road  3 miles  and  finding 
no  trace  of  the  enemy,  he  took  a cattle  path  through  the  woods,  coming 
out  on  the  Clinton  road,  beyond  the  original  line  of  our  pickets.  He 
scoured  the  country  to  Bird’s  plantation,  in  scouting  around  which  he 
found  one  of  the  enemy’s  caissons  and  near  by  another.  In  a short 
time  he  discovered  all  four.  Crossing  over  to  Bernard’s  plantation  he 
found  another  and  a damaged  ambulance.  Returning  to  headquarters, 
he  proceeded  (by  order  of  Colonel  Paine,  commanding)  with  a detach- 
ment of  men  and  horses  from  Manning’s  battery  and  a platoon  of  his 
own  company  and  brought  them  in. 

In  conclusion  I would  beg  to  call  the  attention  of  the  general  com- 
manding to  the  services  of  Lieut.  H.  H.  Elliott,  Ninth  New  York  Vol- 
unteers, acting  assistant  adjutant- general  on  General  Williams’  staff. 
For  his  coolness  and  intrepidity  in  action  every  officer  in  the  action 
can  bear  witness,  as  also  to  the  more  trying  duties  of  the  details  of  his 
official  business.  I am  under  deep  obligations  to  him  for  his  cheerful 
and  zealous  services  for  the  time  I remained  in  command. 

I inclose  copies  of  correspondence  between  myself  and  Lieutenant 
Elliott.*  Colonel  McMillan,  of  the  Twenty -first  Indiana,  has  been  un- 
well for  some  time.  His  counsel  and  advice  have  been  freely  offered  on 
every  occasion. 

Ail  of  whicli  is  respectfully 


Capt.  R.  S.  Davis,  , _ 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Dept  of  the  Gulf. 


No.  13. 

Deport  of  Col.  Nathan  A.  M.  Dudley , Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Infantry , 
commanding  right  wing  Second  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Right  Wing  2d  Brig.,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf, 
Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  7,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose,  for  the  information  of  the  com- 
manding officer,  the  reports  of  commanding  officers  of  regiments  and 
batteries  who  served  under  my  command  in  the  right  wing  of  this 
brigade  in  the  battle  before  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  on  the  morning  of  the 
5th  instant,  as  follows : „ A 

Captain  Clarke,  acting  colonel  Sixth  Michigan  Volunteers;  Maj.  H.  O. 


submitted. 

THOS.  W.  CAHILL, 
Colonel,  Commanding  at  Baton  Rouge. 


Not  found. 


HAP.  xxvir.l  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


59 


Vhittewore,  commanding  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Volunteers;  First 
iieuten ant  Trull,  commanding  Nims’  Massachusetts  Battery;  Captain 
tanning,  commanding  Fourth  Massachusetts  Battery ; First  Lieutenant 
frown,  commanding  three  pieces  Indiana  battery ; * Lieutenant-Colonel 
fillam,  commanding  Seventh  Vermont  Volunteers ; First  Lieut.  Will- 
em W.  Carruth,  commanding  Everett’s  Sixth  Massachusetts  Battery. 

I forward  the  individual  reports,  so  that  the  commanding  officer  may 
now  to  what  extent  each  command  participated  in  the  events  of  the 
ay.  It  cannot  be  expected  that  I should  mention  all  the  brave  ex- 
ploits of  persons  or  even  regiments,  particularly  on  an  occasion  when 
11  did  so  well.  Our  lines  were  very  much  extended,  and  I frequently 
ecessarily  found  myself  separated  from  each  regiment ; but  on  no  occa- 
ion  did  J see  a single  regiment  misbehave.  All  seemed  to  act  with  a 
oolness  and  determination  that  surprised  even  ourselves  after  the  ex- 
itement  of  the  action  was  over. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  4th  instant  Brigadier-General  Williams  ordered 
ae  forward,  with  my  own  regiment  and  three  pieces  of  light  artillery, 
lelonging  to  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  Begiment,  under  First  Lieuten- 
nt  Brown,  to  a point  about  2 miles  from  the  river,  for  the  purpose  of 
upporting  the  Sixth  Michigan  Regiment  Volunteers.  After  making  a 
areful  reconnaissance  of  the  grounds,  accompanied  by  Captain  Clarke, 
acting  lieutenant  colonel,  in  front  and  on  the  right  flank,  I posted  one 
>iece  on  the  Greenwell  Springs  road,  the  second  on  the  road  leading  to 
[firkins’  plantation,  and  the  third  at  the  head  of  Boulevard  street,  the 
irst  two  supported  by  the  Sixth  Michigan,  and  the  latter  by  the  Thir- 
tieth Massachusetts  Volunteers,  then  under  the  command  of  Maj.  H.  O. 
vVhittemore,  its  left  resting  on  the  flank  of  Nims’  battery,  which  was 
)osted  in  the  woods  to  the  left  of  Boulevard  street.  Our  pickets  re- 
)orted  nothing  during  the  night  to  warrant  the  belief  that  we  should 
)e  attacked  in  the  morning. 

At  3.30  a.  m.  the  enemy  sounded  the  assembly,  which  we  took  at  first 
;o  be  the  long  roll.  On  finding  it  to  be  only  the  assembly  I ordered  it 
repeated,  supposing  it  to  have  been  sounded  by  our  regiments  on  the  left, 
which  promptly  called  all  our  troops  on  the  right  to  their  feet.  Reveille 
roll  call  was  hardly  over  when  firing  commenced  simultaneously  on  the 
left  and  center  of  our  front,  shortly  followed  by  the  discharge  of  artil- 
lery on  the  extreme  right.  The  latter  was  most  promptly  responded  to 
by  Lieutenant  Brown  with  his  two  pieces  and  with  great  effect,  as  the 
scores  of  dead  rebels  that  laid  thickly  strewn  in  his  front  after  the  battle 
gave  evidence. 

The  engagement  on  the  whole  line  now  became  general.  I imme- 
diately ordered  Kims’  battery,,  under  the  command  of  its  brave  and 
excellent  first  lieutenant,  Trull,  to  the  left  and  considerably  to  the 
front,  so  as  to  clear  the  thick  woods 'in  its  front,  supported  by  the 
Thirtieth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers.  This  battery  went  into 
action  within  250  yards  of  a Kentucky  regiment,  sheltered  by  a fence 
and  corn  field,  where  it  remained,  doing  excellent  service,  until  ordered 
to  change  position.  Officers  and  men  could  not  behave  better.  More 
coolness  could  not  be  expected  from  old  veterans  than  the  officers  and 
men  of  this  battery  displayed.  They  changed  position  four  times  under 
my  own  observation,  and  on  each  occasion  its  gallant  commander  dis- 
played his  perfect  competency  for  the  prominent  part  he  acted  in  this 
severest  part  of  this  well-contested  field. 

At  this  period  of  the  action  the  fire  on  Manning’s  battery  and  the  In- 


* Not  found. 


60 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


diana  regiment,  under  command  of  Captain  Noblet,  was  very  close  and 
severe ; so  much  so  that  Manning’s  battery  was  compelled  to  fall  back, 
which  it  did  with  considerable  confusion,  leaving  one  piece  and  caisson, 
the  horses  having  been  either  killed  or  disabled.  Lieutenant  Whit- 
comb, Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  gallantly  dashed  through 
the  smoke  of  the  enemy  and  succeeded  in  bringing  off  the  caisson. 
The  fearless  Indianians  secured  the  piece,  and  both  were  turned  over 
to  the  battery  on  the  field.  Captain  Manning  quickly  rallied  his  men 
and  went  into  battery  on  the  right  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana,  well 
supported  on  the  right  by  the  Seventh  Vermont,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Fullam  (Colonel  Boberts  having  been  mortally  wounded),  and  with  this; 
battery  did  good  service.  In  the  mean  time  the  enemy  appeared  in 
strong  force  directly  in  front  of  the  Twenty -first  Indiana,  Seventh  Ver- 
mont, and  Thirtieth  Massachusetts.  At  one  time  these  three  brave 
regiments  stood  face  to  face  with  the  enemy  within  40  yards  of  each 
other.  For  full  one  hour  the  contest  for  this  piece  of  wood  was  terrific. 
At  one  moment  the  rebel  Tennesseeans  would  seem  to  have  success  on 
their  side.  The  tide  would  then  turn,  and  the  brave  Twenty-first  Indi- 
ana and  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  would  exchange  a yell  with  each  other, 
quickly  advance,  and  drive  the  enemy  back  to  the  fence  and  into  the 
corn  field. 

While  this  brisk  work  was  going  on  directly  in  front  the  undaunted 
Trull,  with  his  battery,  was  hotly  engaged  on  the  right  with  a full  bat- 
tery of  the  enemy  that  had  cut  its  way  through  a belt  of  thick  timber 
and  approached  within  150  yards.  This  is  supposed  to  have  been 
Semmes’  celebrated  battery.  The  Sixth  Michigan,  under  Captain  Clarke, 
acting  lieutenant-colonel,  moved  up  to  the  support  of  Mins’  battery  in 
elegant  order.  Its  assistance  came  most  fortunately,  for  it  was  clear 
the  enemy  intended  to  outflank  us  at  that  point.  Nobly  did  Captain 
Clarke  and  his  command  discharge  their  duty  here,  as  their  list  of 
killed  and  wounded  shows.  This  regiment  did  good  service  on  more 
than  one  occasion  this  day.  For  individual  acts  of  gallantry  I refer 
the  commanding  officer  to  Colonel  Clarke’s  report. 

At  this  juncture  of  the  contest  I ordered  Lieutenant  Trull  to  fire 
his  three  left  pieces  obliquely  across  the  front  of  the  Twenty-first 
Indiana,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  and  Seventh  Vermont.  This  was 
the  turning  point  on  the  right  wing.  This  galling  fire  of  canister,  with 
the  terrible  discharge  of  the  musketry  of  three  regiments,  effectually 
silenced  the  enemy’s  fire,  and  they  withdrew  again  to  the  fields  in  the 
rear. 

For  the  valuable  aid  given  by  Lieutenant  Brown  and  his  pieces  of 
artillery  on  the  right  in  the  early  part  of  the  engagement,  which  pre- 
vented our  being  outflanked  on  the  right,  I refer  to  Acting  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Clarke’s  report. 

To  the  report  of  First  Lieut.  Wm.  W.  Carruth,  commanding  Everett’s! 
battery,  marked  G-,*  I respectfully  solicit  the  attention  of  the  colonel 
commanding.  His  battery  did  not  form  part  of  my  command  in  the  i 
morning,  but  from  the  fact  that  one  section  was  sent  to  me  it  did  after- 
ward and  the  other  fact  of  its  having  been  supported  by  troops  from 
the  right  wing  (Twenty-first  Indiana)  you  will  account  for  his  sending 
his  report  through  me.  The  number  of  dead  in  front  of  his  position  indi- 
cate the  valuable  aid  his  battery  rendered  on  the  left. 

There  were  very  many  acts  of  bravery  which  could  not  come  under 
my  own  observation ; therefore  I respectfully  solicit  a careful  perusal 


See  Report  No.  16. 


Chai>.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


61 


of  the  several  reports  made  by  the  several  commanders  of  regiments  and 
batteries. 

I canuot  close  this  report  without  noticing  the  conduct  of  Captain 
Kelty,  of  the  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  who  fell  at  the  head 
of  his  brave  and  active  company  of  Zouaves.  Once  before  he  had  been 
sent  forward  to  reconnoiter  the  position  of  the  enemy,  drew  their  fire, 
and  then  fell  back  with  the  same  coolness  and  precision  that  he  ever  ex- 
hibited at  drills.  He  was  killed  within  50  yards  of  the  enemy’s  line. 
His  loss  I feel  especially  and  personally.  Lieutenant  Gardner,  Com- 
pany K,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  fell  severely  wounded,  yet 
requested  to  be  left  on  the  field. 

The  command  of  the  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  fell  on  Major  Whitte- 
more  by  its  colonel  being  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  right  wing, 
and  most  honorably  did  he  acquit  himself  of  his  responsible  duties.  He 
was  probably  more  frequently  under  my  eye  than  any  other  officer  in 
the  wing,  and  circumstances  requiring  me  to  move  his  regiment  more 
often,  he  displayed  coolness,  tact,  and  military  knowledge  throughout 
the  day  which  well  fit  him  to  command  in  the  field.  As  for  the  conduct 
of  the  officers  and  men  of  his  regiment,  I refer  you  to  his  minute  and 
careful  report. 

I am  especially  indebted  to  the  following  officers,  who  served  on  my 
staff  during  the  day : Lieutenant  Tenney,  who  made  a reconnaissance, 
by  my  order,  at  the  commencement  of  the  action,  was  detailed  to  serve 
on  the  commanding  general’s  staff*.  He  fell  seriously  wounded  by  the 
general’s  side.  In  ten  minutes  after  Lieutenant  Howe,  acting  assistant 
adjutant-general,  also  fell  mortally  wounded.  Both  of  these  officers 
were  shot  in  the  thickest  of  the  engagement.  First  Lieut.  C.  A.  R. 
Dimon,  who  acted  during  the  rest  of  the  day  as  chief  of  my  staff,  and 
Second  Lieutenant  Norcross  also  rendered  me  every  possible  aid  in  the 
transmittal  of  my  orders  from  one  section  of  the  field  to  another.  Lieu- 
tenant Dimon  joined  me  after  the  action  commenced  from  the  hospital, 
where  he  had  been  confined  for  days.  Lieutenant  Clarke,  Sixth  Michi- 
gan, also  acquitted  himself  handsomely. 

I should  forget  one  obligation  did  I fail  in  my  report  to  mention  the 
conduct  of  Surg.  A.  F.  Holt.  He  was  by  my  side  constantly,  when  not 
engaged  in  his  professional  duties,  ready  to  transmit  any  order  or 
transport  to  the  rear,  as  he  did  on  several  occasions  under  a hot  fire 
on  his  own  back,  the  wounded,  or  discharge  any  duty  that  would  con- 
tribute toward  the  success,  of  the  day. 

The  enemy  having  retired,  I ordered  the  troops  composing  the  right 
wing  to  take  up  a more  desirable  position  out  of  the  woods  near  the 
penitentiary  grounds. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  A.  M.  DUDLEY, 

Col.  30 th  Regt.  Mass.,  Comdg.  Right  Wing  Army , Baton  Rouge , La. 

Lieut.  H.  H.  Elliott, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Second  Brigade. 

[Indorsements.] 

Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  8,  1862. 

The  attention  of  Col.  N.  A.  M.  Dudley  is  called  to  General  Orders,  No. 
2,  which  directs  that  reports  of  the  battle  of  Baton  Rouge,  August  5, 
1862,  shall  be  made  to  Colonel  Cahill. 

I would  also  say  that  I was  not  aware  that  Colonel  Dudley  was  in 
command  of  any  troops,  save  tfie  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  during  the 


62 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


actual  engagement,  after  which  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the 
right  wing,  on  the  second  line  of  defense,  by  General  Orders,  No.  253. 

THOS.  W.  CAHILL, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Baton  Rouge,  August  10,  1862. 

In  answer  to  the  foregoing  indorsement  Col.  N.  A.  M.  Dudley  submits 
statements  from  several  officers  that  they  received  orders  from"  him  dur- 
ing the  action,  Colonel  Dudley  himself  stating  that  he  was  placed  in 
command  of  the  Sixth  Michigan  Volunteers,  Niros’  battery,  and  the 
battery  attached  to  the  Twenty- first  Indiana  by  general  orlers  from 
General  Williams.  Orders,  No.  253,  was  issued  by  myself  after  assuming 
command  on  the  second  line  of  positions. 

THOS.  W.  CAHILL, 

Colonel , Commanding  at  Baton  Rouge  August  5,  6,  and  7. 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Lieut.  George  G.  Trull , Second  Battery  Massachusetts  Light 

Artillery. 

In  accordance  with  your  order  I submit  a report  of  the  part  taken 
in  the  late  action  by  the  battery  under  my  command. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th  I received  an  order  from  General  Williams 
to  get  the  battery  under  arms  and  prepare  for  instant  action,  as  an 
attack  might  be  expected  at  any  moment,  the  enemy  being  reported  in 
large  force  on  this  side  of  the  Amite  River.  On  mustering  the  men  1 
found  only  21  men  fit  for  duty,  the  others  being  in  the  different  hos 
pitals  of  the  brigade.  I applied  to  Colonel  Cahill,  of  the  Ninth  Con 
necticut,  for  men,  and  he  at  once  sent  me  a detail  of  30  men,  which 
enabled  me  to  bring  the  whole  battery  through  with  diminished  detach 
ments  and  only  four  horses  on  a team.  I instantly  commenced  a 
vigorous  drill  on  the  piece,  without  changing  posts,  the  new  men  prov 
ing  intelligent.  Before  night  I reported  a full  battery,  of  six  pieces, 
fit  for  duty.  I received  an  order  at  dark  to  act  in  connection  with  the 
Sixth  Michigan  Regiment  in  case  of  action  on  the  morrow. 

At  3.30  o’clock  the  next  morning  the  rattle  of  musketry  announced 
that  an  attack  had  been  made  on  our  pickets.  I immediately  got  the 
battery  under  arms  and  sent  the  orderly  to  the  commander  of  the  Sixth 
Michigan  for  orders.  The  plan  of  action  had  been  changed  during  the 
night  and  the  regiment  had  changed  its  position.  The  Thirtieth  Massa 
chusetts  had  bivouackeel  near  the  camp  of  the  battery,  and  were  now 
stan eling  in  column,  awaiting  orders.  I soon  received  an  order  to  take 
the  battery  to  the  left  and  rear  of  the  camp  and  to  fire  as  soon  as  I sav 
an  enemy,  being  supported  by  the  Thirtieth.  The  firing  now  became 
very  heavy  on  the  left  and  the  rifle-balls  began  to  whistle  thick  aroune 
and  over  us.  The  smoke  was  so  thick  that  we  could  see  nothing 
Just  at  this  time  a caisson,  belonging  to  Manning’s  battery,  came  dash 
ing  down  from  the  front,  the  drivers  having  left  it.  It  ran  against  one 
of  my  caissons,  and  crushed  one  of  the  hind  wheels  and  the  spar< 
wheel,  and  also  bruising  one  man  badly.  Without  waiting  for  order; 
I now  went  in  battery,  and  commenced  firing  shell  and  canister,  Avhicl 
in  about  ten  minutes  appeared  to  have  completely  silenced  the  enemy 

I now  received  au  order  from  General  Williams  to  retire,  he  stating 


CHAP,  xxvn.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


63 


that  the  enemy  was  outflanking  us  on  the  right.  I retired  back  about 
300  yards  and  again  went  into  battery,  supported  on  the  left  by  the 
Thirtieth  Massachusetts.  The  infantry  were  just  ordered  to  lie  down, 
and  had  but  executed  the  movement  when  a perfect  volcano  of  fire 
opened  from  a piece  of  wood  on  our  left  and  front  and  at  the  same  time 
a battery  opened  on  the  right  and  front.  I fired  on  the  infantry  on  the 
left  with  canister  and  on  the  battery  with  shell.  The  Thirtieth  at  the 
same  time  commenced  a sharp  fire  on  the  infantry.  The  enemy’s  bat- 
tery was  soon  silenced,  but  the  infantry  attempted  to  charge  three 
times,  but  were  as  often  driven  back,  and  at  length  retired  wholly  from 
the  field.  We  were  now  ordered  to  fall  back  to  a new  position,  which 
we  did  in  good  order.  All  of  the  horses  on  the  second  piece  being  killed 
or  wounded,  it  was  drawn  off  by  hand.  The  men  are  in  excellent  spirits 
and  ready  for  another  brush  with  the  enemy. 

The  enemy  fired  very  badly,  nearly  all  their  shots  passing  over  our 
heads.* 

Very  respectfully, 

GEOEGE  G.  TEULL, 

Lieutenant , Comdg.  Company  B,  Mass.  Light  Arty. 

Col.  N.  A.  M.  Dudley, 

Comdg.  Bight  Wing  Second  Brig.,  Baton  Bouge , La. 


No.  15. 

Beport  of  Capt.  Charles  R.  Manning , Fourth  Battery  Massachusetts  Liight 

Artillery. 

Baton  Eouge,  La.,  August  6,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  casual- 
ties and  incidents  attending  the  Fourth  Battery  Massachusetts  Volun- 
teers, under  my  command,  in  the  action  with  the  enemy  on  the  5th  in- 
stant : 

At  the  commencement  of  the  engagement  we  were  about  1 mile  from 
the  point  of  attack,  and,  by  order  of  General  Williams,  the  right  sec- 
tion, under  Lieutenant  Beinhard,  advanced  to  the  right  of  the  Twenty  - 
first  Indiana  Eegiment,  Colonel  McMillan,  where  it  lost  1 man  killed  and 
4 wounded.  Three  horses  were  killed  and  6 wounded.  The  Twenty- 
first  Indiana  aided  in  bringing  off  one  of  the  guns,  when  they  retired, 
by  order  of  General  Williams.  The  center  section,  under  Lieutenant 
Davidson,  advanced  with  the  Ninth  Connecticut  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Cahill,  and  did  good  service  in  shelling  the  enemy.  They  had  one  horse 
wounded.  The  battery  was  then  united,  and  took  position  under  Colonel 
Dudley,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  where  we  had  one  man 
wounded  and  one  gun  disabled  by  the  smashing  of  a wheel  (in  crossing 
a ditch),  which  was  replaced  by  a spare  one  and  the  gun  brought  off. 
Here  we  were  much  exposed  to  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  who  had  flanked 
us.  We  retired  in  good  order  under  Colonel  Dudley.  Then,  under  the 
order  of  Colonel  Cahill,  the  battery  took  position  on  a hill,  shelling  the 
enemy  at  intervals  throughout  the  remainder  of  the  day,  who  returned 
the  fire,  two  of  their  shells  going  directly  over  us. 


•Nominal  list  of  casualties  omitted;  losses  embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


64 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII 

John  Donogliue  brought  off  from  the  camp  of  the  Seventh  Vermont 
Regiment  their  camp  colors  at  the  time  of  the  retreat.  J ohn  R.  Duffee, 
of  the  Fourth  Battery,  accompanied  by  Ralph  A.  Rowley,  of  Magee’s 
cavalry  (acting  orderly  for  Captain  Manning),  went  onto  the  field  and 
hitched  his  horses  to  the  battery  wagon  of  the  Sixth  Battery  Massa- 
chusetts Volunteers,  and  brought  it  off  from  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy. 
The  battery  brought  off  three  caissons,  a gun-carriage  and  limber,  and 
a forge  wagon  belonging  to  the  Sixth  Massachusetts  Battery.  Also, 
accompanied  by  Captain  Sawyer,  of  the  Ninth  Connecticut,  they  brought 
off  four  caissons  and  two  limbers  (first  discovered  by  Captain  Sawyer) 
of  the  enemy’s ; also  one  ambulance  wagon  and  one  horse  with  artil- 
lery harness  on.  Lieutenant  Taylor,  of  the  Fourth  Battery,  left  the 
hospital  and  attended  to  duty  until  obliged  to  return  to  the  hospital 
from  sickness. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

CHARLES  H.  MANNING, 
Captain  Fourth  Battery  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

Colonel  Cahill, 

Commanding  Second  Brigade , Department  of  the  Gulf. 


No.  16. 

Report  of  Lieut.  William  W.  Carruth , Sixth  Battery  Massachusetts  Light 

Artillery. 

Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  6,  1862. 

Sir:  On  Monday  afternoon,  the  4th  instant,  being  then  in  command 
of  a section  of  Indiana  Light  Artillery,  I was  ordered  by  Brigadier- 
General  Williams  to  go  immediately  to  rhe  Sixth  Massachusetts  Bat- 
tery (Everett’s)  and  assume  command  of  that  company  in  anticipation 
of  an  attack.  In  obedience  to  that  order  I that  afternoon  took  com- 
mand of  the  battery.  I found  the  whole  number  of  men  for  duty  to  be 
40.  Captain  Everett  was  absent  in  New  Orleans  on  duty  connected  with 
the  company;  First  Lieutenant  Phelps  was  sick  of  fever  in  the  hospital, 
and  Second  Lieutenant  Allyn  was  confined  to  quarters  by  the  same 
disease.  The  latter  officer  expressed  himself  ready  for  duty  in  case  of 
action,  and  I therefore  assigned  him  to  the  command  of  the  left  section 
of  the  battery.  The  center  section  was  placed  in  charge  of  Lieutenant 
Bruce,  while  I took  the  right  section  under  my  immediate  command,  i 
The  small  number  of  men  for  duty  rendered  it  necessary  for  me  to  dis- 
mount the  drivers  of  the  caissons  in  order  to  obtain  men  to  work  the 
guns.  The  same  cause  made  it  necessary  to  have  only  four  horses  to  a 
gun  instead  of  six.  Brigadier-General  Williams  had  informed  me  that 
he  had  sent  an  order  to  the  colonel  of  the  Fourteenth  Regiment  Maine 
Volunteers  to  detail  30  men  to  report  to  me  to  work  the  guns.  These 
men  never  reported. 

A little  before  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  instant  I heard 
firing  in  the  direction  of  our  pickets  in  our  front,  and  immediately 
moved  forward  in  that  direction,  being  on  the  left  of  the  line.  Coming 
into  battery  a short  distance  in  front  of  our  camp,  the  six  guns  opened 
fire  and  covered  the  retreat  of  our  pickets,  who  came  in  closely  followed 
by  the  enemy,  who  at  once  directed  volleys  of  musketry  on  us  with  no 
more  damage  than  to  wound  a few  horses.  Being  entirely  without  sup- 
port, and  the  enemy  in  force,  in  danger  of  outflanking  us,  I ordered  the 
battery  to  fall  back  slowly  up  the  road  onto  a line  formed  by  the  Four- 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


65 


teenth  Maine  and  one  company  of  the  Twenty -first  Indiana,  Captain 
Noblet.  At  this  time  I took  command  of  the  rear  section,  and  having 
arrived  on  this  line  opened  fire  with  these  two  guns,  the  narrow  road 
permitting  the  use  of  no  more  of  the  battery.  Here  Lieutenant  Allyn, 
after  having  two  horses  shot  under  him  and  being  twice  slightly  wounded 
by  my  side  and  suffering  from  sickness,  reluctantly  quitted  the  field. 
The  fight  now  raged  furiously,  the  enemy  pouring  on  us  volleys  of 
musketry,  which  we  returned  with  shell  and  canister.  Three  cannoneers 
were  shot  dead  and  3 more  wounded  at  these  guns,  leaving  only  the  two 
sergeants  to  work  them,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  bravery  of  these  two 
sergeants  and  the  gallant  conduct  of  some  of  Captain  Noblet’s  company, 
who  in  answer  to  my  appeal  came  forward  and  acted  as  artillerymen,  it 
is  probable  that  the  left  flank  of  our  whole  line  wrould  have  been  turned. 
I now  dispatched  Lieutenant  Bruce,  with  the  right  and  center  sections, 
to  a road  on  our  right  parallel  with  the  one  on  which  we  then  were, 
with  instructions  to  keep  the  enemy  in  check  on  that  part  of  the  line. 

After  a rapid  consultation  with  Captain  Goblet  I limbered  to  the 
rear  and  moved  slowly  back  with  our  little  band  of  supporting  infantry, 
at  the  same  time  sending  orders  to  Lieutenant  Bruce  to  fall  back  on 
line  with  me.  This  movement  was  executed  with  great  order  by  all 
concerned,  though  in  the  course  of  it  three  of  my  men  were  wounded 
(two  of  them  fatally)  and  four  out  of  eight  horses  were  shot,  rendering 
it  necessary  to  rearrange  the  teams.  We  now  fell  back  to  the  first  rise 
of  ground,  and  here  maintained  our  position  till  our  whole  line  fell  back 
into  a much  better  position  than  that  first  occupied.  The  enemy  showed 
no  further  inclination  to  come  within  range  of  our  canister,  and  during 
the  remainder  of  the  day  our  shell  alone  were  used. 

A ride  over  the  field  this  morning  shows  the  execution  done  by  the 
handful  of  men  who  composed  the  Sixth  Massachusetts  Battery.  The 
rebel  dead  lie  thick  in  front  of  every  position  we  took,  and  our  own 
dead  and  wounded,  our  broken  and  disorganized  teams,  our  shattered 
limbers  and  shot-pierced  carriages  bear  witness  to  the  accuracy  of  the 
enemy’s  fire.* 

In  the  afternoon  our  whole  battery  was  in  line  along  the  front,  which 
threw  four  pieces  into  the  left  wing.  The  care  of  these  pieces  was  in- 
trusted to  Lieutenant  Bruce,  while  I retained  the  section  of  rifled  guns 
under  my  command  in  the  right  wing.  Up  to  the  present  time  we  re- 
main in  that  position. 

I desire  to  make  mention  of  the  following  names  for  especial  bravery, 
gallantry,  and  good  conduct:  Second  Lieut.  Frank  Bruce;  Orderly  Ser- 
geant Baker;  Sergeant  Wachter;  Corporal  Wood,  and  Private  George 
Andrews.  Corporal  and  Acting  Quartermaster- Sergeant  Hinneman 
was  faithful  in  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  his  department,  removing 
the  dead  and  wounded  and  bringing  rations  and  water  to  our  exhausted 
men. 

I desire  to  express  my  appreciation  of  the  services  rendered  by  those 
men  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  who  so  bravely  took  the  places  of  my 
fallen  men  at  our  guns. 

I am,  sir,  with  the  greatest  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  CARRUTH, 

First  Lieutenant , Comdg.  Sixth  Massachusetts  Battery. 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General  Dimon, 

Bight  Wing  Second  Brigade. 

* Nominal  list  of  casualties  omitted;  embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  51. 

5 R R — VOL  XV 


66 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


No.  17. 

Report  of  Maj.  Horace  0.  Whittemore , Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Thirtieth  Begiment  Massachusetts  Vols., 

Baton  Rouge , La .,  August  6,  1862. 

1 have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  colonel  com- 
manding the  right  wing,  that  the  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Volunteers, 
Colonel  Dudley  commanding,  received  orders  on  the  afternoon  of  August 
4,  at  3 o’clock,  or  thereabouts,  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to  march 
at  6 p.  m.,  as  an  attack  from  the  enemy  was  anticipated. 

Accordingly  at  the  hour  designated  the  regiment  took  up  the  line  of 
march,  proceeded  to  a position  at  the  right  of  Nims’  battery,  about  1 
mile  from  the  Capitol,  and  immediately  in  rear  of  the  camp  of  the  Sixth 
Michigan  Volunteers;  a section  of  artillery,  under  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant Brown,  Twenty-first  Indiana,  supporting  our  right  flank.  Here 
we  bivouacked  during  the  night.  About  an  hour  before  daylight  we 
were  aroused  by  the  drums  of  the  enemy  and  immediately  formed  in 
line  of  action.  At  4 o’clock,  or  thereabouts,  the  enemy  commenced  his 
attack  near  the  camp  of  the  Fourteenth  Maine  Volunteers,  on  our  ex- 
treme left,  and  immediately  thereafter  the  action  became  general  along 
the  whole  line,  and  was  particularly  vigorous  on  our  right  flank,  which 
was  bravely  defended  by  the  Sixth  Michigan.  Immediately  after  the 
commencement  of  the  battle  Colonel  Dudley  assumed,  by  orders  of  the, 
general  commanding,  the  command  of  the  Sixth  Michigan,  Nims’  bat- 
tery, the  section  of  artillery  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Brown,  and 
the  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  leaving  the  command  of  the  latter  regi- 
ment to  the  undersigned.  The  regiment  maneuvered  constantly  under 
a heavy  fire,  moving  now  to  this  point  and  now  to  that,  by  orders  from 
the  general  commanding,  wherever  its  services  seemed  to  be  most 
needed,  until  finally  it  made  a stand  in  front  of  the  camp  of  the  Seventh 
Vermont,  and  directly  in  rear  of  the  camp  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana, 
which  was  then  occupied  by  the  enemy.  Nims’  battery  was  now  on 
our  right  flank  and  the  Seventh  Vermont  on  our  left.  Here  the  contest 
was  very  severe.  No  sooner  had  we  occupied  the  ground,  immediately 
in  front  of  which  were  thick  woods  filled  with  smoke  and  the  sun  di- 
rectly in  our  faces,  than  we  received  a most  galling  fire  from  the  enemy’s 
infantry,  accompanied  by  messengers  from  their  artillery.  The  ordei 
had  been  given  to  lie  down,  and  thus  but  few  casualties  occurred  on 
our  side,  though  we  were  not  more  than  50  yards  from  the  enemy’s  line, 
and  the  tents  immediately  in  our  rear  were  riddled  with  bullets. 

Captain  Kelty,  of  Company  I,  was  ordered  to  deploy  his  company 
as  skirmishers  on  the  right,  and  in  the  performance  of  his  duty  fell 
bravely  at  the  head  of  his  company.  No  truer  soldier  ever  drew  his 
sword,  and  no  words  of  mine  in  this  report  can  do  justice  to  his  memory. 
In  him  the  regiment  lost  a model  officer,  and  one  whose  example  and 
soldierly  conduct  will  never  be  forgotten.  His  company  immediately 
retired  to  its  place  in  line  in  good  order  under  Lieutenant  Dean, 
and  the  enemy’s  fire  was  returned  most  vigorously  by  the  regiment 
and  Nims’  battery  on  the  right.  This  latter  was  most  admirably 
handled  by  Lieutenant  Trull,  who  commanded  in  the  absence  of  the 
captain,  who  was  prevented  by  sickness  from  being  on  the  field.  Un 
der  the  management  of  Lieutenant  Trull  the  battery  added  laurels  t( 
its  already  well-deserved  reputation,  and  its  terrible  fire  of  shell  anc 
canister,  together  with  the  well-directed  fire  of  the  Thirtieth  Massa 
chusetts,  soon  filled  the  woods  with  the  dead  and  dying  and  put  th< 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


67 


enemy  entirely  to  rout.  They  fled  in  the  utmost  confusion  and  did 
uot  return.  We  immediately  moved  to  the  rear  a few  yards  in  order 
to  reform  our  line,  forthwith  faced  about,  and  reoccupied  our  position  in 
front  of  the  Vermont  camp.  The  enemy  not  reappearing  we  withdrew 
at  our  leisure,  after  searching  for  and  bringing  off  our  dead  and  wounded 
to  the  ground  in  the  rear  of  the  penitentiary,  where  we  bivouacked 
during  the  remainder  of  the  day  and  the  succeeding  night,  and  in  the 
forenoon  to-day  I marched  the  regiment  back  to  the  quarters  in  the 
capitol,  where  it  remained  until  10  p.  m.,  when  it  was  reformed  and 
marched  back  to  the  rear  of  the  penitentiary,  where  it  now  remains. 

The  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  is  worthy  of  all  praise,  coming, 
as  they  did,  a large  number  of  them,  from  their  sick  beds  to  serve  their 
country  and  maintain  their  previously  well-earned  reputation.  It  is 
well  known  that  the  severe  and  protracted  tour  in  the  swamps  before 
Vicksburg,  from  which  the  regiment  had  returned  only  a few  days  ago, 
had  greatly  reduced  the  strength  and  spirits  of  the  men,  but  they  did 
their  whole  duty  without  flinching,  and  with  cheerful  determination 
to  scatter  the  enemy  along  their  front.  The  ground  was  held,  the  enemy 
driven  back,  and  with  but  trifling  loss  on  our  side. 

During  the  engagement  I was  constantly  aided  and  advised  by 
Colonel  Dudley,  who  needs  no  commendation  for  his  admirable  skill 
and  composure,  and  a great  part  of  our  success  at  the  critical  moment 
of  the  fight  is  attributable  to  his  previous  instructions  and  strict  system 
of  discipline. 

Lieutenant  Whitcomb,  with  Company  C,  under  a hot  fire,  brought 
off  one  of  the  pieces  of  Manning’s  battery  which  was  temporarily 
abandoned,  having  lost  its  men  and  horses,  and  deserves  honorable 
mention.  Early  in  the  action,  which  lasted  from  4 a.  m.  till  9 a.  m., 
Lieutenant  Howe,  acting  adjutant,  had  his  horse  shot  under  him,  and 
was  himself  dangerously  wounded.  Quartermaster  Tenney  was  severely 
wounded,  as  was  also  Lieutenant  Gardner,  of  Company  K ; Sergeant 
Brooks,  of  Company  C,  color-bearer,  and  Color  Corporal  Bogers,  of 
Company  K,  who  lost  his  left  arm,  deserve  honorable  mention  for  brav- 
ery and  good  conduct  during  the  entire  engagement.  Private  McKenzie, 
of  Company  B,  though  wounded  and  with  the  bullet  still  in  his  body, 
remained  on  duty  throughout  the  entire  engagement  and  is  now  at  his 
post.  First  Sergt.  John  P.  Haley,,  of  Company  E,  had  command  of  a 
detachment  of  his  company  (the  captain  being  on  detached  duty  and 
the  lieutenant  being  sick),  and  carried  himself  bravely.  I append  a list 
of  casualties.* 

Very  respectfully, 

H.  O.  WHITTEMOBE, 

Major , Commanding. 

Lieutenant  Dimon,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  18. 

Report  of  Capt.  Charles  E.  Clarice,  Sixth  Michigan  Infantry. 

Baton  Bouge,  La.,  August  7,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  make  to  you  the  following  report  in  regard  to 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  51, 


68 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xxvn. 


the  participancy  of  the  Sixth  Regiment  Michigan  Volunteer  Infantry  in 
the  action  before  Baton  Rouge  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  instant : 

The  camp  of  the  regiment  was  at  the  junction  of  the  Olay  Out  and 
Jenkins’  roads,  on  the  extreme  right  of  the  line.  A section  of  Brown’s 
battery  was  in  position  on  the  former  road  a little  in  advance,  and 
supported  by  Companies  A,  B,  and  F,  under  the  command  of  the  veteran 
Capt.  John  Corden,  of  Company  F,  acting  lieutenant-colonel.  At  the  com- 
mencement of  the  action  Companies  I,  H,  G,  and  K,  under  my  command, 
assisted  by  Acting  Major  Captain  Bassett,  were  ordered  by  General  Will- 
iams to  go  to  the  support  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana,  which  was  then 
in  position  in  front  of  the  Magnolia  Cemetery.  Soon  after  taking  this 
position  we  were  assailed  by  a furious  fire  of  the  enemy,  who  found 
cover  under  a fence  a little  in  advance  and  to  the  right  of  the  road 
leading  by  the  south  side  of  the  cemetery.  Their  fire  was  briskly  re- 
turned by  the  men  under  my  command,  and,  as  the  boards  of  the  fence 
offered  but  slight  resistance  to  our  rifle  balls,  the  attacking  party  was 
severely  punished  and  soon  retired.  I then  received  an  order  to  sup- 
port Niros’  battery,  which  position  I occupied  during  the  remainder  of 
the  engagement.  The  part  of  the  regiment  left  with  Captain  Corden 
repelled  an  attack  of  a far  superior  force,  driving  the  enemy,  taking 
20  prisoners,  50  stand  of  arms,  and  one  rebel  flag  of  the  Fourth 
Louisiana,  and  most  nobly  discharged  the  duty  to  which  they  had  been 


assigned. 

I particularly  desire  to  notice  the  cool  intrepidity  and  daring  cour- 
age of  Lieutenant  Howell,  of  Company  F,  and  Acting  Adjutant  Lieut. 
A.  J.  Ralph,  who  by  their  gallant  conduct  aided  greatly  in  infusing  an 
unyielding  spirit  into  the  minds  of  the  men. 

Company  C,  Captain  Spitzer,  occupied  a picket  line  in  advance  of  the 
camp  of  my  regiment,  and  first  engaged  the  advance  of  the  force  sent 
against  it.  Owing  to  the  dense  fog  prevailing  at  the  time  Captain 
Spitzer  was  unable  to  distinguish  the  enemy  until  they  were  close  upon 
him.  He,  however,  gave  them  a warm  welcome,  and,  aided  by  his  very 
efficient  second  lieutenant  (Thompson),  his  first  lieutenant  being  sick, 
held  them  well  in  check,  and,  when  compelled  to  retreat,  rallied  hand- 
somely on  the  main  body.  Company  D,  under  command  of  Lieutenants 
Clarke  aod  Elljs,,  was  occupying  outposts  at  the  Perkins  and  Bernard 
plantations,  and  did  not  arrive  in  time  to  participate  in  the  action, 
though  they  rallied  on  the  main  body  by  the  route  prescribed  for  them 
in  the  shortest  possible  time. 

Captain  Soule,  with  his  company  (I),  was  greatly  exposed  while  doing- 
duty  as  a skirmishing  party.  The  wounds  of  the  brave  captain  and  his 
second  lieutenant  (Fassett)  and  the  list  of  the  killed  of  his  company 
fully  attest  their  indomitable  courage. 

It  is  difficult  to  give  especial  praise  where  all  behaved  so  well, 
though  justice  requires  particular  mention  of  the  fearless  conduct  of 
Lieutenant  Howell,  of  Company  F,  and  Sergeant  Thayer,  of  Company 
A,  in  their  gallant  defense  of  Brown’s  battery  after  being  themselves 
wounded.  You  are  referred  to  abstract  marked  A for  a list  of  killed, 
wounded,  and  missing.* 

Very  respectfully, 

CHAS.  E.  CLARKE, 

Capt.  and  Actg.  Col.  of  the  Sixth  Regt.  Mich.  Vols. 

N.  A.  M.  Dudley, 

Col.  30 th  Mass.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Right  Wing  Army , Baton  Rouge,  La. 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


3HAp.  XXVII  ] VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA.  09 

No.  19. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Volney  S.  Fullam , Seventh  Vermont  Infantry . 

Headquarters  Seventh  Vermont  Infantry, 

Baton  Rouge , La .,  August  8,  18G2. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No.  2, 1 liave  the  honor  to  sub- 
mit the  following  report,  viz : . , ^ ^ 

On  account  of  the  regiment  having  received  no  definite  orders  tor  its 
operations,  as  I understood,  and  owing  to  the  fact  of  Colonel  Roberts 
liaving  been  mortally  wounded  in  the  action,  I am  not  able  to  give  a 
connected  account  of  the  participation  of  this  regiment,  having  been 
sent  forward  to  reconnoiter,  and  for  other  purposes,  and  was  absent 
when  Colonel  Roberts  fell,  but  assumed  command  immediately  after, 
md  can  only  say  that  the  regiment  had  not  far  from  250  officers  and 
nen  in  action  ; that  it  was  several  times  under  sharp  fire ; that  several 
nen  in  camp  and  some  from  hospital,  who  were  not  fit  for  duty,  were 
n the  ranks,  and  that  both  officers  and  men,  so  far  as  I know,  behaved 
vith  coolness  and  courage.  The  following  list  shows  the  names  and 
*ank  of  the  wounded  and  missing  in  action  so  far  as  ascertained  to  this 
late.* 

Respectfully  submitted. 

V.  S.  FULLAM, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Comdg.  Seventh  Regiment  Vermont  Volunteers. 


No.  20. 

Report  of  Col.  Frank  S.  Nickerson , Fourteenth  Maine  Infantry , command- 
ing left  wing  Second  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Fourteenth  Maine  Volunteers, 
Baton  Rouge , La.,  August  8,  1862. 

In  accordance  with  Orders,  No.  2,  I herewith  submit  a report  of  the 
part  borne  by  my  regiment  in  the  affair  of  the  5th  instant : 

We  were  encamped  at  the  forks  of  the  Bayou  Sara  and  Clinton 
Cross-Roads,  in  advance  and  on  the  left. 

At  4 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  our  pickets  (Companies  B and 
H)  were  attacked  and  driven  in,  reporting  four  regiments  advancing, 
two  in  front  and  two  on  the  left  flank.  Our  line  of  battle  was  formed 
to  the  front  of  our  encampment.  Finding  their  skirmishers  approach- 
ing through  the  corn  field  on  our  left  flank,  we  changed  front  to  the 
rear  on  the  right  company,  and  then  moved  cautiously  forward  through 
tlie  timber  to  meet  them.  The  fog  was  so  dense  that  it  was  impossible  to 
see  twenty-five  yards  in  advance.  They  were  well  advised  of  the  exact 
location  of  our  camps,  but,  misjudging  their  distance  in  the  fog,  fired  oyer 
us.  We  received  some  five  or  six  rounds  from  them  without  reply iug 
(still  out  of  sight  of  them),  until  they  arrived  within  less  than  100  yards 
of  us.  We  then  gave  them  a volley  by  battalion.  After  about  five 
rounds  they  broke,  and  their  fire  entirely  ceased  at  this  point.  We 
then  rested  in  place  for  about  ten  minutes,  being  completely  concealed 
from  them  by  a fence  in  front  and  the  morning  fog.  I sent  skirmishers 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


70 


W.  FLA,,  S.  ALA  , S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.;  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIT. 


in  the  mean  time  to  the  right  and  left  to  watch  them.  It  was  then  re 
ported  that  a battery  and  a considerable  force  of  infantry  had  taken 
position  a short  distance  in  front  of  our  camp,  directly  on  the  right  of 
our  line.  A few  discharges  from  their  battery  confirmed  this.  I im- 
mediately changed  front  by  file  to  the  right  and  opened  fire  on  them, 
and,  with  our  battery  posted  in  the  road  a little  to  the  right  and  rear 
of  us,  held  them  completely  in  check.  In  the  mean  time  a heavy  fire 
was  pouring  through  the  cemetery,  in  the  front  of  the  Twenty-first  In- 
diana. We  changed  front  once  more,  and  gave  the  right  the  advantage 
of  one  well-directed  fire.  Then  came  some  most  terrific  yells  from  the 
right,  which  indicated  the  success  of  the.  enemy,  and  led  the  general  to 
suppose,  as  he  informed  me,  that  they  were  attempting  to  turn  our 
right.  We  were  then  ordered  to  the  right,  the  battery  on  our  right  re- 
tiring about  50  rods.  As  the  enemy  had  a battery  in  the  road  directly 
in  front  of  us,  which  would  have  exposed  the  men  to  its  fire,  we  were 
obliged  to  demolish  a strong  board  fence  and  move  through  a corn  field 
to  a lane  in  the  rear  of  our  camp,  up  which  we  passed,  and  formed  our 
line  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  road.  We  were  then  ordered  up  with 
the  Twenty-first  Indiana,  which  had  fallen  back  to  the  position  then 
occupied  by  us.  The  attack  was  then  resumed.  The  Twenty-first  In- 
diana was  deployed  as  skirmishers  on  our  right  and  left.  We  formed 
our  line  of  battle  just  in  rear  of  their  camp,  and  moved  up  with  hearty 
cheers.  Here  we  had  the  most  severe  fight  of  the  day.  At  this  time 
my  horse  was  shot  under  me,  and  I lost  some  of  my  best  officers  and 
men.  We  maintained  our  position  for  half  an  hour  or  more  amidst  a 
perfect  shower  of  bullets,  when  General  Williams  rode  up,  said  the 
enemy  were  giving  away,  and  asked  if  we  could  advance  on  them  once 
more.  The  men  answered  with  three  cheers  and  moved  forward.  This 
was  under  a most  deadly  fire. 

In  this  connection  I must  mention  Captain  French,  of  Company  K, 
who  was  the  first  to  follow  and  place  himself  by  my  side.  The  men, 
without  exception,  came  up  nobly.  The  battery  in  this  road  had  then 
retired.  Just  in  our  rear  General  Williams  fell  in  sight  of  our  men. 
This  did  not  dampen  their  ardor.  We  then  moved  a little  to  the  left, 
discovering  the  enemy’s  right  flank  exposed.  A few  rounds  silenced 
their  fire  at  this  point.  We  then  left  the  field  in  perfect  order,  and 
leaving  my  men  in  a ravine  on  the  right  of  the  penitentiary,  where  1 
found  most  of  the  other  regiments  posted,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Col. 
T.  W.  Porter,  of  this  regiment ; being  myself  at  this  time  assigned  tc 
the  command  of  the  left  wing,  consisting  of  the  Fourth  Wisconsin. 
Seventh  Vermont,  Fourteenth  Maine,  and  Manning’s  battery.  We  irn 
mediately  thereafter  reoccupied  our  ground,  buried  our  own  dead  and 
those  of  the  enemy,  and  cared  for  their  wounded. 

Our  killed  are  36;  missing,  12;  wounded,  71;  total,  119.  Among 
the  wounded  are  7 who  have  since  suffered  amputation  of  a leg. 

I beg  leave  to  mention  especially  Lieut.  Col.  T.  W.  Porter,  who  dur 
ing  the  whole  engagement  was  brave  and  cool,  and  rendered  me  valu 
able  aid  and  assistance.  Maj.  C.  S.  Bickmore  was  severely  woundec 
early  in  the  engagement.  His  conduct  on  the  field  merits  special  men 
tion.  My  adjutant,  J.  H.  Metcalf  (slightly  wounded),  proved  himsel: 
a most  faithful  and  valuable  officer.  My  chaplain,  G.  W.  Bartlett 
was  everywhere  present,  watching  our  flank  and  carrying  orders,  anc 
proved  that  he  was  the  right  man  in  the  right  place.  My  quartermas 
ter,  J.  H.  Crowell,  rendered  similar  assistance,  and  was  ready  to  per 
form  whatever  was  necessary  to  be  done.  Surgeon  Adams,  without  ai 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


71 


assistant,  did  Bis  duty  nobly.  You  will  see  by  the  report  that  he  has 

h^t^s8veryS' difficult  to  make  special  mention  where  all  did  so  well. 
Considering  the  suddenness  of  the  attack  on  raw  troops,  posted  in  the 
front  I trust  that  they  acquitted  themselves  to  your  satisfaction.  How 
wed  you  can  perhaps  judge  better  than  I.  If  any  mistook  the  nature 
ofa  real  conflict  they  will  know  it  hereafter,  I trust.  They  know,  if  any 
such  there  were,  that  the  country  this  time  cannot  aflord  to  keep  men 
in  commission  or  in  the  ranks  who  are  not  at  all  times  reliable. 

I must  make  especial  mention  of  Capt.  J.  P.  French,  Company  K, 
before  spoken  of.  Capt,  E.  W.  Mullen,  Company  B ; First  Lieut.  I.  B. 
Gardner,  Company  I;  First  Lieut.  George  Blodget,  Company  A;  First 
Lieut  J.  M.  Wiswell,  Company  G ; First  Lieut.  J.  H.  Spencer,  Com- 
pany B : Second  Lieut.  B.  B.  Glidden,  Company  F ; Second  Lieut.  Aaron 
II.  Keene,  Company  E ; Second  Sergt.  James  A.  Seavey , Company  C; 
Sergeant  Snow,  Company  D ; Corporal  Edmmster,  Company  D , Pri- 
vate A.  Blackman,  Company  F,  and  Private  Preble,  Company  I,  ex- 
hibited rare  bravery.  Our  color-sergeant  lost  a leg,  and  eyer;y 
of  the  color  guard  save  2 was  either  killed  or  wounded.  It  is  impossible 
to  be  entirely  accurate  at  present,  and,  fearing  I may  do  injustice  to 
some,  whenever  the  facts  shall  warrant  I will  make  this  matter  the  sub- 

iect  of  a further  report.  _ , . « 

I feel  that  I should  do  injustice  in  this  report  did  I not  especially 
mention  Sergeant-Major  Adams,  Acting  Ordnance-Sergeant  Long, 
Quartermaster-Sergeant  Gardiner,  and  Commissary- Sergeant  Jackman, 
who  borrowed  guns  and  entered  the  ranks  at  the  commencement  ot  the 

a°We  captured  6 prisoners  (1  lieutenant  of  Thirty-first  Alabama) 
also  took  28  stand  of  arm,  which  await  your  order  in  my  camp. 

I have  the  houor  to  be,  yours,  very  r^pectfoUy^^^Q^ 

Colonel , Commanding  Fourteenth  Maine  Volunteers 

Lieut.  H.  H.  Elliott,  3 _ . , 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General , Second  Brigade. 


We 


No.  21. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Richard  Fitz  Gibbons , Ninth  Connecticut  Infantry. 

Baton  Eouge,  La.,  August  8, 1862. 

In  accordance  with  General  Orders,  No.  2,  I herewith  submit  my  re- 
port of  the  engagement  of  the  5th  instant:  n .... 

The  Ninth  Eegiment  Connecticut  Volunteers,  Col.  Thomas  W.  Cahill 
commanding,  marched  out,  according  to  previous  orders,  about  6 a.  m. 
on  the  morning  of  the  5th  instant  and  took  position  on  the  lelt  ot  t e 
line  of  defense,  having  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  Regiment  on  its Hett,  and 
a section,  consisting  of  two  howitzers  of  Manning’s  Fourth  Massa- 
chusetts Battery,  on  its  right.  The  position  was  one  admirably  calcu- 
lated for  military  movements,  being  situated  on  a hill  overlooking  tne 
Bayou  Gross  and  about  half  way  between  the  river  and  the  Bayou 
Sara  road.  At  about  4 a.  m.  picket  firing  was  heard  on  the  right,  to  - 
lowed  by  heavy  volleys  of  musketry  and  artillery.  The  tog  at  this 

^Nominal  list  of  casualties  omitted ; embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


72 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVn. 

time  was  very  dense,  and  the  maneuvers  of  the  enemy  only  to  be  de- 
termined from  the  tiring,  which,  being  principally  upon  the  center  and 
very  severe,  it  was  thought  advisable  to  move  the  regiment  to  the  sup- 
port of  the  center.  This  was  done,  reaching  the  north  road,  along 
which  it  marched  until,  coming  within  range  of  the  enemy’s  guns  and 
receiving  a shower  of  grape  and  canister,  the  regiment  filed  off  and 
formed  line  of  battle  in  a corn  field  on  the  right  of  the  road,  while  the 
battery  took  position  oil  the  road  and  opened  fire,  when  the  enemy  fell 
back.  The  order  then  being  given  to  fall  back,  and  it  appearing  that 
our  left  flank  was  exposed,  we  marched  by,  filed  to  the  left,  and  re- 
sumed our  position  of  the  morning,  and  afterward  took  occupation  of 
a cemetery,  ready  to  support  when  called  upon;  while  at  the  same 
time  covering  the  left  flank,  ably  supported  on  the  left  by  the  Fourth 
Eegiment  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  who  had  been  with  us  in  our  movements 
throughout  the  entire  day.  At  this  time  Colonel  Cahill  sent  Major 
Frye,  of  this  regiment,  to  the  right  for  orders,  who  shortly  returned 
with  the  melancholy  intelligence  of  the  death  of  Brigadier- General 
Williams,  and  Colonel  Cahill,  as  senior  field  officer  present  on  duty, 
by  order  of  Lieut,  and  Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  H.  H.  Elliott,  took  com- 
mand of  the  brigade;  and,  by  his  after  order,  the  left  wing,  including 
this  regiment,  was  under  command  of  Colonel  Nickerson,  of  the  Four- 
teenth Maine  Volunteers. 

At  this  time,  the  firing  having  ceased  on  the  right  and  center,  word 
was  sent  us  that  the  left  wing  was  about  to  be  attacked,  and  a section 
of  Everett’s  battery  was  sent  to  its  support,  to  which  were  detailed 
from  this  regiment,  as  artillerists,  5 men,  30  men  having  been  previously 
detailed  to  Mins’  battery.  The  section  of  Manning’s  battery  having  also 
come  up  on  our  right  the  attack  was  not  renewed,  but  the  regiment 
remained  in  position  for  the  remainder  of  the  day  and  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  6th  instant  Capt.  S.  W.  Sawyer,  of  Company 
H,  with  a detachment,  captured  and  brought  in  five  caissons,  loaded  , 
with  ammunition,  belonging  to  the  enemy. 

Our  loss  is  comparatively  small,  owing  to  the  overshooting  of  the 
enemy.  The  officers  and  men  of  the  regiment  deserve  great  credit  for 
their  good  conduct  and  discipline,  laboring,  as  they  did,  under  the  dis- 
advantage of  having  but  12  line  officers  in  the  field,  the  others  being 
on  detached  service  or  previously  sick  in  the  hospitals.  Adjutant  Kat- 
tenstroth  and  Sergeant-Major  Curtis  also  rendered  efficient  service. 

We  captured  24  prisoners  (one  a commissioned  officer),  mostly  be- 
longing to  the  Fourth  Louisiana  Eegiment,  14  of  whom  were  wounded. 
Our  casualties  were  as  follows:  Killed  1,  wounded  9,  missing  4. 
Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EICHAED  FITZ  GIBBONS, 
Lieutenant- Colonel  Ninth  Connecticut  Volunteers. 

Lieut.  H.  H.  Elliott, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  22. 

Report  of  Capt.  James  Grimsley , Twenty -first  Indiana  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Twenty-first  Indiana, 

Baton  Rouge , La.,  August  7,  1862. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  order,  with  reference  to  the  part  in  action 


CHAP.  XXVII.)  VICKSBURCx,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA.  73 

taken  by  the  Twenty  first  Indiana  Volunteers  on  August  5,1862,  in  the 
battle  of  Baton  Rouge,  I have  the  honor  to  report  : 

That  at  about  2 o’clock  in  the  morning  a party  of  scouts  of  the.enemy, 
mounted,  supposed  to  be  20  in  number,  made  their  appearance  at  picket 
post  Ko.  5,  held  by  Company  I,  Oapt.  R.  Campbell,  Twenty-first  Indiana 
Volunteers,  on  the  Greenwell  Springs  road,  about  1 mile  in  advance  of 
the  camp  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  Regiment.  Captain  Campbell 
had  also  as  support  and  to  act  as  messengers  two  men  of  Magee’s  cav- 
alry. By  order  of  Captain  Campbell  they  went  forward  to  ascertain 
the  force  present.  In  a few  minutes  they  returned,  reporting  that  by 
a sudden  dash  into  their  number  they  had  succeeded  in  scattering  all 
but  one,  whom  they  took  prisoner.  Company  F,  Capt.  F.  W.  Noblet, 
was  detailed  to  go  to  the  support  of  Captain  Campbell  early  in  the 
night.  At  about  3 o’clock  in  the  morning  the  enemy’s  advance  guard 
reached  this  station,  when  the  first  firing  was  done,  the  rebels  retreat- 
ing. Soon  after  a larger  force  appeared,  when  Captain  Campbell  dis- 
patched a messenger  to  the  headquarters  of  the  regiment  to  inform 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Keith  of  the  certainty  of  an  attack.  Brisk  firing 
began  by  the  enemy  at  about  4 o’clock,  which  was  returned  with  spirit 
by  the  two  companies  named,  who  retired  in  the  order  of  skirmishers, 
deployed  on  both  sides  of  the  road.  Colonel  Keith  immediately  sent 
out  Company  A,  Charles  D.  Seely,  first  lieutenant,  in  command  as  an 
advance  guard,  to  feel  for  the  enemy,  while  our  regiment,  composed  of 

, was  forming.  As  the  gray  of  the  morning  approached  we 

marched  at  double-quick  out  in  the  direction  of  the  firing.  After  an 
advance  down  the  Greenwell  Springs  road  some  600  yards  we  found 
an  open  space  to  our  right,  and  hearing  firing  in  that  direction  we  moved 
out  under  cover  of  some  undergrowth  and  formed  in  line  of  battle. 
Company  C,  under  command  of  First  Lieut.  William  Baugh,  was  sent 
to  the  right  to  ascertain  the  position  of  the  left  wing  of  the  enemy. 
Just  then  Company  A,  Lieutenant  Seely,  was  opened  upon  by  a desper- 
ate fire  fiom  a whole  regiment  in  ambush,  when  he  rallied  upon  the  bat- 
talion. Immediately  after  the  whole  left  wing  of  the  enemy  delivered  a 
most  destructive  fire  upon  our  right,  killing  instantly  Charles  D.  Seely, 
first  lieutenant  Company  A ; Orderly  Sergt.  J.  A.  Bovington,  Company 
A;  Corpl.  Isaac  Knight,  Company  A;  H.  T.  Bachelor,  Company  A. 
Also  killing  3 of  the  skirmishers  deployed  by  Company  C;  wounding 
Major  Hays  badly  in  the  foot.  We  returned  their  fire  with  deadly 
effect,  which  parted  their  center  and  threw  large  forces  upon  our  flanks. 
At  this  time,  some  distance  to  our  left,  a regiment  of  the  enemy  had 
'advanced  to  a point  beyond  our  rear,  and  fearing  a flank  movement  on 
their  part,  and  desiring  to  draw  out  the  forces  in  our  front  from  cover, 
we  retired  back  some  few  hundred  yards,  where  we  made  a stand  to 
await  their  approach. 

We  succeeded  in  our  last  design,  though  they  did  not  move  upon 
our  front,  but  took  a corn  field  to  our  left,  which  is  immediately  back 
of  the  cemetery,  east  of  our  camp.  We  immediately  changed  our  posi- 
tion to  the  front  of  the  cemetery,  where  we  took  position,  and  in  a few 
minutes,  through  the  slight  picket  fence  on  the  front  of  the  cemetery, 
we  saw  them  coming.  At  the  sight  of  us  they  opened  a heavy  fire,  but 
with  little  effect,  for  we  laid  flat  down  upon  the  ground.  We  returned 
their  compliments  with  the  most  terrible  slaughter  to  them,  and  here 
the  general  fight  began.  The  contest  at  this  point  was  a hot  one,  and 
they  fought  with  not  only  bravery  but  perfect  desperation.  Finally, 
however,  they  gave  way,  and  reformed  off  to  our  left.  When  their 
last  movement  was  discovered  our  regiment  was  broken  into  column 


74 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


of  companies,  left  in  front,  and  we  hurriedly  took  another  position 
diagonal  across  the  northeast  part  of  our  camp.  For  the  moment 
firing  had  ceased  in’  every  direction.  In  a short  time,  however,  we 
discovered  a regiment  (through  the  smoke  and  fog,  which  was  densely 
black)  of  Louisiana  troops  moving  by  the  right  flank  upon  the  next 
street  to  our  front  at  double-quick.  Toward  the  city  and  down  to 
our  right  was  a battalion  deployed  as  skirmishers  and  taking  position 
uncomfortably  near  to  us. 

We  made  a dash  at  the  head  of  the  regiment  moving  into  the  city. 
Time  would  not  allow  much  order  in  the  movement,  but  we  succeeded 
in  giving  them  a most  destructive  fire,  which  we  repeated  before  they 
could  recover  from  their  surprise  and  ascertain  o.ur  position 5 and, 
finally,  after  a short  stand,  they  broke  in  utter  confusion  and  left  the 
ground. 

During  this  time,  however,  the  Twenty -first  Indiana  suffered  the 
most. 

At  the  moment  we  started  for  the  attack  last  mentioned  the  battalion 
of  skirmishers  upon  our  right  opened  upon  us  a most  galling  fire  with 
desperate  effect.  Another  or  two  regiments  had  formed  in  our  camp 
and  opened  upon  our  rear  a hot  fire.  Our  position  was  an  awkward 
one,  to  say  the  least,  when  we  had  driven  the  first  regiment  back,  and 
consequently  our  fighting  now  became  upon  the  principle  of  “ every 
man  for  himself.”  Our  men  took  cover  behind  trees  and  such  things 
as  would  shield  them.  To  add  to  the  danger  and  desperation  of  our 
situation,  the  Seventh  Vermont,  from  their  camp  back  of  us,  opened  a 
fire  in  the  direction  of  all  engaged,  which  killed  many  of  our  own  men 
outright  and  wounded  several  more.  At  this  we  gave  back,  when  we 
met  General  Williams  and  acquainted  him  with  the  fact.  He  gave  the 
Vermonters  a severe  reprimand,  and  ordered  them  forward  to  our  sup- 
port. We  reformed  and  moved  down  to  our  old  position. 

Some  regiment  (I  think  the  Thirtieth  Massachusetts)  at  this  moment 
came  to  our  assistance  with  a part  of,  perhaps,  the  Fourteenth  Maine, 
and  from  that  on  our  combined  forces  punished  the  enemy  most  terribly. 
Finally,  under  the  most  determined  resistance  and  desperately  destruct- 
ive fire  from  us,  they  left  the  field,  only  taking  a part  of  their  wounded, 
and  leaving  our  camp  and  the  ground  immediately  north  covered  with 
their  dead. 

At.  the  most  critical  period  of  the  fight,  when  the  Seventh  Vermont 
Regiment,  which  was  ordered  by  General  Williams  to  support  us,  re- 
fused to  do  so,  waving  his  sword  and  cheering  us  on  to  deeds  of  duty 
and  daring,  our  accomplished,  gallant,  brave,  and  long-to-be-mourned  • 
adjutant,  Matthew  A.  Latham,  was  killed.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Keith, 
who  had  been  brave,  cool,  calm,  and  most  energetic  for  success,  while 
passing  through  the  hottest  of  the  fire  and  thickest  storm  of  bullets, 
dispensing  orders  and  cheering  on  his  men,  was  badly  wounded  in  the 
right  shoulder. 

For  the  brave,  gallant  officers  and  men  of  the  Twenty -first  Indiana 
I cannot  say  too  much.  Under  the  first  fire  and  under  the  intermediate 
fires  to  the  last  they  tasted  the  most  desperate  circumstances  of  the 
battle.  They  were  continually  at  their  post,  and  ever  ready  and  ambi- 
tious to  do  the  full  measure  of  their  duty.  The  battle  was  fought  in 
and  around  our  camp,  and  we  defended  it — let  the  rebel  forces  them- 
selves certify  how  nobly. 

After  Lieutenant-Colonel  Keith  was  wounded  your  humble  servant 
and  subscriber,  being  the  senior  officer  present,  took  command  of  the 
battalion. 


chap,  xxvn.] 


VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


75 


For  particulars  of  casualties  I refer  you  to  paper  marked  A;*  com- 
panies engaged,  with  their  commanders,  see  paper  marked  B. 

Most  respectfully  submitted.  JAMEg  GEIMgLEY) 

Captain  Company  B,  Commanding  Regiment. 

Colonel  Cahill,  ^ ~ 7 . 

Comdg.  Second  Brigade , Dept,  of  the  Gulf 

[Inclosnre  B.] 

Statement  of  Companies  of  Twenty-first  Indiana  Volunteers  engaged  m 
action  at  Baton  Rouge , La .,  August  5,  looA 


Company  A,  Lieut.  Charles  D.  Seely  commanding, 
advance  guard. 

Company  B,  Capt.  J.  Grimsley  commanding. 

Company  C,  Lieut.  William  Baugh  commanding. 
Company  D,  Lieut.  William  Harper  commanding. 
Company  E,  Capt.  W.  M.  Skelton  commanding. 
Company  F,  Capt.  Francis  W.  Noblet  commanding, 
picket  night  before  battle. 

Company  G,  Sergt.  John  Adams  commanding. 
Company  H,  Capt.  J.  T.  Campbell  commanding. 
Company  I,  Capt.  Bichard  Campbell  commanding, 
picket  night  before  battle. 

Company  K,  Lieut.  Thomas  Grinstead  commanding. 


Sent  out  as 


Sent  out  on 


Sent  out  on 


No.  23. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Sidney  A.  Bean,  Fourth  Wisconsin  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Wisconsin  Regiment, 

August  9, 1862. 

Colonel:  In  obedience  to  General  Orders,  No.  2,  I have  the  honor 
to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  movement  of  the  regiment  under 

my  command  in  the  late  action:  _ . 

At  3 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  instant  I marched  the  legi- 
ment  across  the  bayou  north  of  the  Arsenal  grounds,  and  formed  it  in 
line  of  battle  on  the  ridge  beyond,  the  Nintli  Connecticut  and  a part  ol 
Manning’s  battery  being  on  my  right,  I made  this  movement  under 
order  from  General  Williams,  who  instructed  me  to  act  m conjunction 
with  yourself,  and  in  every  event  to  protect  the  left  flank  of  our  posi- 
tion. A few  moments  after  the  first  musketry  was  heard  the  general 
ordered  them  forward  in  the  direction  of  the  firing,  which  order  i im- 
mediately put  in  execution,  marching  in  line  with  the  Ninth  Connectn 
cut.  The  movements,  however,  had  hardly  been  commenced  when  1 
received  orders  to  march  by  the  right  flank  to  the  Greenwell  Spuugs 
road.  I here  formed  a line,  my  right  resting  on  the  road,  and  waited 
for  orders.  The  fog  was  so  dense  that  we  could  learn  nothing  ol  tne 
position  of  the  forces  nor  discern  friend  from  foe  a rod  distant.  Our 
own  troops  falling  back  over  our  lines  and  filing  down  the  road,  wa^ 
in  momentary  expectation  that  the  enemy  would  attempt  to  follow  ana 

*NominaI  list  omitted;  embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  51. 


76 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


force  their  way  into  the  town.  If  such  an  attempt  had  been  made, 
there  was  no  better  position  from  which  we  could  have  repulsed  them. 
Great  as  was  the  chagrin  of  our  officers  and  men  at  being  so  held  in 
reserve,  I did  not  think  it  consistent  with  my  duties  to  abandon  the 
position  contrary  to  the  last  orders  Of  the  general  and  leave  exposed 
the  whole  open  country  on  our  left. 

After  the  troops  and  artillery  had  all  passed  to  our  rear,  and  it  be- 
came evident  that  the  enemy  was  not  advancing  on  this  point,  I marched 
to  the  cemetery  across  the  bayou,  and  opposite  to  the  position  I first 
occupied.  At  this  time  the  firing  had  all  ceased  except  on  the  extreme 
right,  where  it  continued  for  a few  moments  only,  and  the  action  was 
ended.  The  men  of  my  command  displayed  the  greatest  eagerness  to 
meet  the  enemy,  and  our  only  regret  was  that  the  attack  had  not  fallen 
on  our  line. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  A.  BEAN, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Commanding  Fourth  Wisconsin  Regiment. 

Colonel  Cahill,  Commanding  Forces  in  the  Action. 


No.  24. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Breclcinridge,  C.  8.  Army , commanding  expe. 
dition , of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge  and  occupation  of  Fort  Hudson. 

Headquarters  Breckinridue’s  Division, 

k September  30,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  operations  of  a portion  of  my 
division  recently  ordered  from  Vicksburg  to  Camp  Moore  and  Baton 
Rouge,  La.,  by  Major-General  Van  Dorn. 

I left  Vicksburg  on  July  27  with  somewhat  less  than  4,000  men,  and 
arrived  at  Camp  Moore  the  evening  of  the  28th.  The  major-general 
commanding  the  district  having  received  intelligence  that  the  enemy 
was  threatening  Camp  Moore  in  force,  the  movement  was  made  sud- 
denly and  rapidly  by  railroad,  and  having  but  few  cars,  nothing  could 
be  transported  except  the  troops,  with-  their  arms  and  ammunition. 
Brig.  Gen.  Charles  Clark,  who  had  reported  for  duty  a few  days  before 
our  departure  from  Vicksburg,  promptly  and  kindly  consented  to  accom- 
pany the  expedition.  Brigadier-General  Buggies  was  already  at  Camp 
Moore,  in  command  of  a small  force,  with  which  he  had  kept  the  enemy 
in  check.  The  troops  were  immediately  organized  in  two  divisions, 
General  Clark  taking  command  of  the  First  and  General  Buggies  of  the 
Second  Division.  The  rumor  of  an  advance  of  the  enemy  in  force  upon 
Camp  Moore  proved  to  be  unfounded. 

On  July  30,  in  obedience  to  a dispatch  of  the  29th  from  the  major-gen- 
eral commanding  the  district,  the  troops  were  put  in  motion  for  Baton 
Rouge.  During  the  inarch  I received  information  that  the  effective  force 
of  the  enemy  was  not  less  thah  5,000  men,  and  that  the  ground  was  com- 
manded by  three  gunboats  lying  in  the  river.  My  own  troops  having 
suffered  severely  from  the  effects  Of  exposure  at  Vicksburg,  from  heavy 
rains  without  shelter,  and  from  the  extreme  heat,  did  not  now  number 
more  than  3,400  men.  Under  these  circumstances  I determined  not  to 
make  the  attack  unless  we  could  be  relieved  from  the  fire  of  the  fleet. 
Accordingly  I telegraphed  to  the  major-general  commanding  the  condi- 


CHAP.  XXVH.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


77 


tion  and  number  of  the  troops  and  the  reported  strength  of  the  enemy, 
but  said  I would  undertake  to  capture  the  garrison  if  the  Arkansas  could 
he  sent  down  to  clear  the  river  or  divert  the  fire  of  the  gunboats.  He 
promptly  answered  that  the  Arkansas  would  be  ready  to  co-operate  at 

daylight  on  Tuesday,  August  5.  _ . , , 

On  the  afternoon  of  Monday,  the  4th,  the  command  having  reached 
the  Comite  Eiver,  10  miles  from  Baton  Bouge,  and  learning  by  an  ex- 
nress  messenger  that  the  Arkansas  had  passed  Bayou  Sara  in  time  to 
arrive  at  the  proper  moment,  preparations  were  made  to  advance  that 
nioht  The  sickness  had  been  appalling.  The  morning  report  of  the 
4th  showing  but  3,000  effectives,  and  deducting  those  taken  sick  during 
the  day  and  the  number  that  fell  out  from  weakness  on  the  night  march 
I did  not  carry  into  the  action  more  than  2*,600  men.  This  estimate 
does  not  include  some  200  Partisan  Bangers,  who  had  performed  effi- 
cient service  in  picketing  the  different  roads,  but  who,  from  the  nature 
of  the  ground,  took  no  part  in  the  action;  nor  about  the  same  number 
of  militia  hastily  collected  by  Col.  D.  C.  Hardee  in  the  neighborhood  of 
Clinton,  who,  though  making  every  effort,  could  not  arrive  in  time  to 

PaThe  command  left  the  Oomite  at  11  l>.  in.  and  reached  the  vicinity  of 
Baton  Rouge  a little  before  daybreak  on  the  morning  of  the.5th.  borne 
hours  before  the  main  body  moved  a small  force  ol  infantry,  with  a sec- 
tion of  Sernmes’  battery,  under  Lieut.  T.  K.  Fauntleroy,  the  whole  com- 
manded by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Shields,  of  the  Thirtieth  Louisiana,  was 
sent  by  a circuitous  route  to  the  road  leading  from  Clinton  to  Baton 
Bouge,  with  orders  to  drive  in  any  pickets  of  the  enemy  and  attack  his 
left  as  soon  as  the  action  should  begin  in  front.  This  service  was  well 
performed,  but  for  details  reference  is  made  to  the  report  of  Brigadier- 
General  Buggies,  from  whose  command  the  force  was  detached. 

While  waiting  for  daylight  to  make  the  attack  an  accident  occurred 
which  deprived  us  of  several  excellent  officers  aud  enlisted  men  and 
two  pieces  of  artillery.  The  Partisan  Bangers  were  placed  in  rear  of 
the  artillery  and  infantry,  yet  during  the  darkness  a few  of  them  leaked 
through,  and  riding  forward  encountered  the  enemy,  causing  exchange 
of  shots  between  the  pickets.  Galloping  back,  they  produced  some 
confusion,  which  led  to  rapid  firing  for  a few  moments,  during  which 
Brigadier-General  Helm  was  dangerously  injured  by  the  fall  ot  his 
horse ; Lieut.  A.  H.  Todd,  his  aide-de-camp,  killed ; Captain  Boberts,  of 
the  Fourth  Kentucky,  severely  wounded;  several  enlisted  men  killed 
and  wounded,  and  two  of  Captain  Cobb’s  three  guns  rendered  for  the 
time  wholly  useless.  After  General  Helm  was  disabled  Col.  Thomas 
H.  Hunt  assumed  command  of  his  brigade.  Order  was  soon  restored, 
and  (he  force  placed  in  position  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  Green  well 
Springs  road.  I was  obliged  to  content  myself  with  a single  line  ot 
battle  and  a small  regiment  of  infantry,  with  one  piece  of  artillery,  to 
each  division  as  a reserve.  The  enemy  (expecting  the  attack)  was 
drawn  up  in  two  lines,  or  rather  in  one  line,  with  strong  reserves  dis- 
tributed at  intervals.  At  the  moment  there  was  light  enough  our  troops 
moved  rapidly  forward.  General  Bugglesfcommanding  the  left,  brought 
on  the  engagement  with  four  pieces  of  Sernmes’  battery,  the  h ourth  and 
Thirtieth  Louisiana,  and  Boyd’s  Louisiana  battalion,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Colonel  Allen,  of  the  Fourth  Louisiana,  and  the  Third,  Sixth, 
and  Seventh  Keutucky  and  the  Thirty-fifth  Alabama,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Colonel  Thompson,  of  the  Third  Kentucky.  These  troops  moved 
forward  with  great  impetuosity,  driving  the  enemy  before  them,  while 
their  ringing  cheers  inspired  all  our  little  command.  The  Louisiana 


78 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII.  ; 

troops  charged  a battery  and  captured  two  pieces.  At  this  point 
Colonel  Allen,  commanding  the  brigade,  while  pressing  forward  with  the 
colors  in  his  hand,  had  both  legs  shattered,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Boyd 
received  a severe  wound.  This  produced  confusion,  and  the  enemy  at  the 
same  moment  throwing  forward  a strong  re-enforcement  the  brigade  was 
forced  back  in  some  disorder.  It  was  rallied  by  the  efforts  of  Colonel 
Breaux,  Lieutenant- Colonel  Hunter,  and  other  officers,  and,  although 
it  did  not  further  participate  in  the  assault,  it  maintained  its  position 
under  a fire  from  the  gunboats  and  land  batteries  of  the  enemy.  During 
this  time  Thompson’s  brigade,  which  composed  the  right  of  Buggies’ 
division,  was  behaving  with  great  gallantry,  often  driving  back  superior 
forces,  and  toward  the  close  of  the  action  took  part  in  the  final  struggle 
from  a position  immediately  on  the  left  of  the  First  Division.  Colonel 
Thompson  being  severely  wounded  in  a charge,  the  command  devolved 
on  Colonel  Bobertson,  of  the  Thirty-fifth  Alabama,  whose  conduct  fully 
justified  the  confidence  of  his  troops.  The  Louisiana  [?]  battery,  Captain 
Semmes’,  was  admirably  handled  throughout. 

The  First  Division,  under  General  Clark,  being  the  Second  Brigade, 
composed  of  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  Kentucky,  Thirty-first  Mississippi, 
Thirty-first  and  Fourth  Alabama,  commanded  by  Colonel  Hunt,  of  the 
Fifth  Kentucky,  and  the  Fourth  Brigade,  composed  of  the  Fifteenth 
and  Twenty-second  Mississippi,  and  the  Nineteenth,  Twentieth,  Twenty - 
eighth,  and  Forty-fifth  Tennessee,  consolidated  into  one  battalion,  com- 
manded by  Colonel  Smith,  of  the  Twentieth  Tennessee,  together  with 
the  Hudson  Battery  and  one  piece  of  Cobb’s  battery,  advanced  to  the 
right  of  the  Greenwell  Springs  road.  On  the  right,  as  on  the  left,  the 
enemy  was  constantly  pressed  back,  until,  after  several  hours  of  fight- 
ing, he  was  driven  to  his  last  encampment,  in  a large  grove  just  in  rear 
of  the  penitentiary.  Here  the  contest  was  hot  and  obstinate,  and  it  was 
here  the  First  Division  suffered  the  greatest  loss.  Colonel  Hunt  was 
shot  down,  and  on  the  fall  of  that  excellent  officer,  at  the  suggestion  of 
General  Clark  and  with  the  consent  of  the  officers  concerned,  I placed 
Capt.  John  A.  Buckner,  assistant  adjutant-general  on  my  staff,  in  com- 
mand of  the  Second  Brigade.  In  the  management  of  his  command  he 
displayed  so  high  a degree  of  skill  and  courage  that  I commend  him 
especially  to  the  notice  of  the  Government. 

General  Clark  pressed  the  attack  at  this  point  with  great  vigor  until 
he  received  a wound  which  was  supposed  to  be  mortal,  when,  through 
some  misapprehension,  the  Second  Brigade  began  to  fall  back  down  the 
slope,  but  without  confusion.  Captain  Buckner,  learning  upon  inquiry 
from  me  that  I did  not  desire  a retrograde  movement,  immediately, 
aided  by  Major  Wickliffe,  of  the  Fifth  Kentucky  Begiment  (Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Caldwell,  who  was  injured  by  the  accident  of  the  preceding 
night,  having  been  obliged  to  retire),  and  other  regimental  officers, 
faced  the  brigade  about  and  renewed  the  attack.  At  the  same  time 
Colonel  Smith,  commanding  Fourth  Brigade,  composed  of  the  consoli- 
dated Tennessee  regiments,  and  the  Twenty-second  Mississippi,  Capt.  F. 
Hughes,  was  ordered  forward  and  moved  against  the  enemy  in  fine  style. 
In  a few  moments  Captain  Hughes  received  a mortal  wound  at  the  head 
of  his  regiment. 

Observing  some  troops  on  the  left  partially  sheltered  by  a shallow 
cut  in  the  road  (who  proved  to  be  the  remnant  of  Thompson’s  brigade 
and  out  of  ammunition),  I ordered  them  to  advance  to  the  support  of 
the  First  Division  with  the  bayonet.  The  order  was  promptly  obeyed 
and  in  executing  it  I happened  to  observe,  as  distinguished  for  alacrity 
Colonel  Crossland,  of  the  Seventh  Kentucky;  Lieutenant-Colonel  Good 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


79 


win  of  the  Thirty-filth  Alabama,  and  Lieutenant  Terry,  of  the  Eighth 
Kentucky  on  duty  with  sharpshooters.  At  this  critical  moment  Major 
Brown,  chief  commissary,  and  Captain  Richards,  one  of  my  aides,  were 
conspicuous  in  urging  on  the  troops.  In  this  assault  we  suffered  con- 
siderably from  the  fire  of  the  fleet,  until  the  opposing  lines  approached 
each  other  so  closely  that  a regard  for  their  own  friends  obliged  them 
to  suspend.  The  contest  at  and  around  this  last  encampment  was 
bloody  but  at  the  end  of  it  the  enemy  were  completely  routed,  some  ot 
nnr  men  pursuing  and  firing  at  them  for  some  distance  down  the  street, 
running  in  front  of  the  arsenal  and  barracks.  They  did  not  reappear 

^I^was^ow^  10  o’clock.  We  had  listened  in  vain  for  the  guns  of 
the  Arkansas.  I saw  around  me  not  more  than  1,000  exhausted  men, 
who  had  been  unable  to  procure  water  since  we  left  the  Comite  River. 
The  enemy  had  several  batteries  commanding  the  approaches  to  the 
arsenal  and  barracks  and  the  gunboats  had  already  reopened  upon  us 
with  a direct  fire.  Under  these  circumstances,  although  the  troops 
showed  the  utmost  indifference  to  danger  and  death,  and  were  even  re- 
luctant to  retire,  I did  not  deem  it  prudent  to  pursue  the  victory  further. 
Having  scarcely  any  transportation,  I ordered  all  the  camps  and  stores 
of  the  enemy  to  be  destroyed,  and  directing  Captain  Buckner  to  place 
one  section  of  Sernmes’  battery,  supported  by  the  Seventh  Kentucky,  in 
a certain  position  on  the  field,  withdrew  the  rest  of  the  troops  about  1 
mile,  to  Ward’s  Creek,  with  the  hope  of  obtaining  water.  But  finding 
none  there  fit  for  man  or  beast,  I moved  the  command  back  to  the  field 
of  battle,  and  procured  a very  imperfect  supply  from  some  cisterns  in 
the  suburbs  of  the  town.  This  position  we  occupied  for  the  rest  ot  the 

The  citizens  of  the  surrounding  and  thinly  settled  country  exhibited 
the  warmest  patriotism,  and  with  their  assistance  conveyances  enough 
were  procured  to  carry  off  all  our  wounded  who  could  bear  removal. 
A few  armed  with  shot-guns  and  other  weapons,  had  been  able  to  reach 
the  field  in  time  to  join  in  the  attack.  Having  neither  picks  nor  shovels, 
we  were  unable  to  dig  graves  for  the  burial  of  the  dead. 

I still  hoped  for  the  co  operation  of  the  Arkansas,  and  in  that  event 
intended  to  renew  the  attack.  But  late  in  the  afternoon  I learned  by 
express  that  before  daylight,  and  within  4 miles  of  Baton  Rouge,  her 
machinery  had  become  disabled,  and  she  lay  helpless  on  the  right  bank 
of  the  river.  Upon  receiving  this  intelligence  I returned  with  my 
command  to  the  Comite  River,  leaving  a force  of  observation  near  the 
suburbs  of  the  town.  The  Hudson  Battery,  Lieutenant  Sweaney,  and 
Cobb’s  one  piece,  in  charge  of  Sergt.  Frank  Peak,  played  their  parts 


I am  unable  to  give  the  exact  force  of  the  enemy,  but  by  comparing 
all  my  information  with  the  number  and  size  of  their  camps  and  the 
extent  and  weight  of  their  fire  I do  not  think  they  brought  into  action 
less  than  4,500  men.  We  had  eleven  pieces  of  field  artillery ; they . 
brought  to  bear  on  us  not  less  than  eighteen  pieces,  exclusive  of  the 
guns  of  the  fleet.  In  one  respect  the  contrast  between  the  opposing 
forces  was  very  striking.  The  enemy  were  well  clothed,  and  their  en- 
campments showed  the  presence  of  every  comfort  and  even  luxury. 
Our  men  had  little  transportation,  indifferent  food,  and  no  shelter. 
Half  of  them  had  no  coats,  and  hundreds  were  without  either  shoes  or 
socks;  yet  no  troops  ever  behaved  with  greater  gallantry  and  even 
reckless  audacity.  What  can  make  this  difference  unless  it  be  the  sub- 
lime courage  inspired  by  a just  cause? 


80 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA  , TEX.,  N.  MEX.  IChap.  XXVII. 

The  wound  of  Brig.  Gen.  Charles  Clark  being  thought  mortal,  and 
the  least  motion  causing  great  agony,  he  was  left  on  the  field  at  his  own 
request,  his  aide,  Lieutenant  Yer ger,  remaining  with  him.  The  next 
morning  they  gave  themselves  up  to  the  enemy. 

I cannot  speak  in  terms  too  strong  of  the  skill,  coolness,  and  courage 
of  General  Clark.  He  played  the  part  of  a perfect  soldier.  Brigadier- 
General  Buggies  conducted  the  attack  on  the  left  with  uncommon  rapid- 
ity and  precision,  and  exhibited  throughout  the  qualities  of  a brave  and 

eXIn ^cldi tion^t oTh e officers  of  my  staff  already  mentioned  I desire  to 
express  my  acknowledgments  of  the  zeal  and  gallantry  of  Major  Wil- 
son, chief  of  artillery ; Major  Hope,  inspector-general,  whose  horse  was 
shot  under  him ; Capt.  James Nocquet,  chief  of  engineers;  Lieutenant 
Breckinridge,  aide-de-camp,  and  Dr.  Pendleton,  medical  director,  as- 
sisted by  Dr.  Weatherly,  on  temporary  service.  A number  ot  gentle- 
men from  Louisiana  and  elsewhere  rendered  efficient  service  as  volun- 
teers among  whom  were  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pinkney,  Mr.  Addison, 
and  Captain  Bird,  of  Louisiana;  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brewer,  of  Ken- 
tucky, and  Mr.  William  B.  Hamilton,  of  Mississippi. 

The  thanks  of  the  army  are  due  to  Hon.  Thomas  G.  Davidson  for 
his  attention  to  the  hospitals,  and  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  that  part  of 
Louisiana  for  their  devotion  to  our  sick  and  wounded.  Colonel  Pond 
and  Major  De  Baun,  in  command  of  Partisan  Bangers,  were  efficient 
before  and  after  the  battle  in  observing  and  harassing  the  enemy. 

The  inability  of  General  Clark  and  the  failure  of  several  officers  to 
make  reports  may  prevent  full  justice  to  the  conduct  of  the  First  Divis- 
ion Any  omission  here  will,  when  brought  to  my  notice,  be  embodied 
in  a supplemental  report.  The  report  of  General  Buggies  is  very  full 
as  to  all  that  occurred  on  the  left.  I send  herewith  a list  of  the  officers 
and  men  specially  mentioned  in  the  division,  brigade,  and  regimental 
reports  for  gallant  conduct,  with  the  request  that  it  be  published,  and 
the  names  brought  to  the  favorable  notice  of  the  Government. 

I transmit  also  the  reports  of  the  subordinate  commanders  and  the 
returns  of  the  killed  and  wounded.  It  will  be  seen  that  our  casualties 
amounted  to  467.*  I have  reason  to  believe  that  the  loss  ot  the  enemy 
was  much  greater.  We  captured  two  flags  and  a few  prisoners.  ^N  oth- 
ing was  left  by  us  except  one  caisson,  which  was  so  much  injured  as 
to  be  wholly  unserviceable,  one  of  the  enemy's  being  brought  off  m its 

Til  /1CP  • 

After  the  battle  the  enemy,  who  previously  had  been  plundering, 
burning  houses  and  other  property,  stealing  negroes,  and  seizing  citi- 
zens through  a large  region  of  the  country,  never  ventured  to  send  out 
another  marauding  force.  Our  pickets  continued  to  extend  to  the  im- 
mediate vicinity  of  Baton  Bouge,  and  very  soon  the  enemy  abandoned 
the  place  and  retired  to  New  Orleans. 

A few  days  after  the  engagement,  knowing  the  desire  of  the  major- 
general  commanding  to  secure  a strong  position  on  the  Mississippi 
below  the  mouth  of  Bed  Biver,  I occupied  Port  Hudson  with  a porLon 
of  the  troops  under  the  command  of  Brigadier- General  Buggies.  I he 
next  day  I received  orders  to  remove  all  the  troops  to  that  point. 
Brigadier  General  Bowen,  who  had  just  arrived,  was  left  with  his  com- 
mand on  the  Comite  Biver  to  observe  Baton  Bouge  from  that  quarter,  to 
protect  our  hospitals,  and  to  cover  the  line  of  communication  between 

* The  tabular  statement  compiled  from  the  several  reports  shows  only  446  killed, 
wounded,  and  missing. 


;hap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


81 


Hinton  and  Camp  Moore.  I directed  General  Buggies  to  select  eligible 
Dositions  at  Port  Hudson  for  heavy  batteries,  and  ordered  Captain 
N'ocquet,  chief  engineer,  to  report  to  him  temporarily  for  this  duty. 

Upon  my  arrival  there  I found  that  rapid  progress  had  been  made, 
md  some  of  the  works  under  charge  of  Captain  Nocquet  were  ready 
;o  receive  the  guns,  which  the  major-general  commanding  wrote  me 
vere  on  the  way.  Port  Hudson  is  one  of  the  strongest  points  on  the 
Mississippi  (which  Baton  Bouge  is  not),  and  batteries  there  will  com- 
mand the  river  more  completely  than  at  Vicksburg. 

On  August  19,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  the  headquarters  of  the 
lepartment,  I moved  from  Port  Hudson  for  Jackson,  Miss.,  with  a 
Dortion  of  the  force,  leaving  Brigadier-General  Buggies  in  command, 
vith troops. 

In  concluding  this  report  I have  to  express  my  obligations  for  the 
prompt  and  cordial  support  which  I received  at  all  times  from  the 
najor-general  commanding  the  department. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  C.  BBECKINBIDGE, 

Major-  General . 

Maj.  M.  M.  Kimmel,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

p.  s. — I omitted  to  mention  that  the  Fifteenth  Mississippi,  Major 
Binford,  was  not  brought  into  action.  This  admirable  regiment,  much 
reduced  by  long  and  gallant  service,  was  held  as  a reserve. 

[Inclosure.] 

Officers  mentioned  for  gallant  conduct  at  the  battle  of  Baton  Bouge , La. 

Exhibit  A. — Report  of  First  Division. 

Captain  Hughes,  commanding  Twenty-second  Mississippi  Begiment; 
Brig.  Gen.  Charles  Clark,  and  his  aides,  Lieutenants  Spooner  and 
Merger;  Maj.  H.  E.  Topp,  of  the  Thirty- first  Mississippi  Begiment; 
Major  Brown,  chief  of  subsistence;  Capt.  J.  H.  Millett,  commanding 
Fourth  'Kentucky  Begiment;  Colonel  Crossland,  Seventh  Kentucky 
Regiment;  Maj.  J.  C.  Wickliffe,  of  the  Fifth  Kentucky;  Privates  John 
rhompson,  Company  F,  and  J.  M.  Byrd,  Company  G,  Fourth  Alabama 
Battalion ; Lieutenant-Colonel  Moore,  of  the  Nineteenth  Tennessee  Beg- 
ment;  Adjutant  Fitzpatrick,  Twenty-second  Mississippi  Begiment. 

Officers  and  soldiers  mentioned  in  the  report  of  Brigadier- General  Buggies , 
commanding  Second  Division. 

First  [Brigade]. — Cols.  A.  P.  Thompson  and  H.  W.  Allen,  brigade  com- 
manders, both  severely  wounded ; Third  Kentucky  Begiment,  Captain 
Bowman ; Seventh  Kentucky,  Colonel  Crossland  and  his  color-bearer, 
Joseph  Bollins  ; Sixth  Kentucky  Begiment,  Capts.  Isaac  Smith,  Utter- 
back,  and  Thomas  G.  Page,  and  First.  Lieut.  F.  Harned ; Thirty-fifth 
Alabama,  Colonel  Bobertson  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Goodwin. 

Of  the  Second  Brigade. — The  Fourth  Louisiana,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Hunter;  Lieutenant  Corkern,  Company  B;  Lieutenant  Jeter,  Company 
F,  and  Sergeant-Major  Daniels!  Battalion  of  Stewart’s  Legion,  Lieut. 
Col.  Sam.  Boyd,  who  was  disabled  by  a flesh  wound  in  the  arm;  Capt. 
Chinn  also  was  wounded  ; (the  command  devolved  upon  Capt.  T. 
Bynum,  who  acted  with  gallantry.)  The  battalion  Thirtieth  Louisana 
Volunteer  Begiment,  commanded  by  Col.  G.  A.  Breaux,  who  speaks  in 
high  terms  of  the  officers  and  men  of  his  regiment,  especially  Capt.  N. 
Trepagnier  and  Lieutenant  Dapremont,  both  wounded.  Lieutenant- 

6 r r — vol  xv 


82 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Colonel  Shields,  Thirtieth  Louisiana,  commanding  separate  detach- 
ment, who  speaks  in  high  terms  of  the  intrepidity  of  Lieutenant  Faunt- 
leroy,  commanding  section  of  guns  in  his  detachment.  Captain  Semmes, 
commanding  battery,  and  his  officers,  Lieutenants  Barnes  and  J.  A.  A. 
West,  performed  gallant  service.  Captain  Blount,  brigade  inspector 
of  Second  Brigade,  rendered  gallant  service  in  the  field.  It  is  believed 
he  has  fallen,  as  nothing  has  been  heard  of  him  since. 

I also  have  the  gratification  to  name  the  members  of  my  staff  who 
served  with  me  on  this  occasion,  viz:  Lieut.  L.  D.  Sandidge,  corps 
artillery,  C.  S.  Army,  acting  assistant  adjutant  and  inspector  general ; 
Capt.  George  Whitfield,  chief  quartermaster;  Maj.  E.  S.  Buggies,  act-  j 
ing  ordnance  officer  and  acting  chief  commissary  of  subsistence;  First  1 
Lieut.  M.  B.  Buggies,  aide-de-camp;  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  Jones,  who 
was  severely  wounded,  and*  Col.  J.  O.  Fuqua,  district  judge-advocate 
and  provost- marshal-general,  who  were  all  distinguished  for  efficiency, 
coolness,  and  gallantry  throughout  the  conflict. 

The  following  officers,  attached  to  the  general  staff,  also  rendered 
gallant  service:  Capt.  Samuel  Bard,  on  special  service;  Lieut.  A.  B. 
de  Saulles,  engineers,  and  Lieuts.  H.  H.  Price  and  H.  C.  Holt. 

Other  officers  on  special  service,  among  whom  were  Capt.  Augustus 
Scott,  commanding  squadron  on  temporary  service;  Captains  Cuney 
and  Henderson  and  Lieutenant  Behan  as  volunteer  aides-de-camp  for 
the  occasion,  and  Capt.  J.  M.  Taylor  served  with  zeal  and  gallantry. 


No.  25. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  First  Division , Confederate  forces. 


Wounded. 

1 

Command. 

Killed. 

Mortally. 

Severely. 

Slightly. 

Missing. 

Kemarks. 

SECOND  BRIGADE. 

5th  Kentucky.  ------ 

9 

2 

9 

13 

1 

A -tB  TT  an  In  p.lr\T  

5 

13 

1 

Q1  ot  Miaaiaainni  ......... 

10 

6 

15 

16 

31st)  Alabama*  

2 

9 

1 

3 

3 

3 

16 

Maj.  G.  L.  Alexander  killed. 

U n d oAn^a  Pot+ortr  

3 

3 

iauuovu  o 

Total  .... 

29 

11 

30 

70 

3 

FOURTH  BRIGADE. 

1 OtVi  ToTirmaooA  

1 

1 

Ortth  TarmAaoPA 

1 

1 

Ofith  TamiAfifiPA  ..... 

1 

1 

1 

J^th  TpnnAQSAA 

1 

1 

1 

1 

In  reserve. 

‘)9rl  Micc’iGflinni  ....... 

13 

18 

16 

1 

Total  

15 

22 

19 

3 

BronH  ■f.nhn.l 

44 

11 

52 

89 

6 

* Colonel  Edwards  reports  Lieut.  W.  H.  Boggess  killed  and  3 officers  and  1 man 
wounded  at  Vicksburg,  July  15. 


T.  B.  SMITH, 

Colonel , Commanding  First  Division. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


83 


No.  26. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  A.  Buchner , Assistant  Adjutant  General,  G.  S.  Army , 
commanding  First  Brigade ,*  First  Division. 

Headquarters  in  the  Field, 

Comite  River , Ten  Miles  from  Baton  Rouge , Ya.,  Aw#.  9,  1862. 
General  : In  compliance  with  your  request  I have  the  honor  to  sub- 
mit the  following  report  of  the  late  engagement  at  Baton  Bouge,  so  far 
as  the  First  Brigade  of  the  First  Division  was  concerned,  after  its  com- 
manders, Brigadier-General  Helm  and  subsequently  Col.  Thomas  H. 
Hunt,  were  wounded,  and  I had  the  honor  to  receive  the  command  at 
your  hands:  « 

The  enemy  had  been  repulsed  from  one  of  his  encampments,  and  the 
different  regiments  constituting  the  First  Brigade  were  drawn  up  in 
line  in  one  of  his  camps',  not,  however,  fully  deployed.  After  moving 
the  two  regiments  on  the  left  of  the  brigade  by  the  flank  to  the  left  the 
whole  were  formed  in  line  of  battle  and  were  qrdered  to  advance.  The 
movement  was  spiritedly  made  up  to  the  second  encampment,  through 
a somewhat  sharp  volley  of  musketry,  in  as  good  style  as  the  broken 
and  confined  limits  of  the  ground  would  admit,  and  immediately  the 
enemy  was  hotly  and  determinedly  engaged.  After  a few  volleys  I 
ordered  the  brigade  forward,  which  order  was  being  obeyed  promptly 
by  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  Kentucky  (the  other  regiments  being  just  in 
the  act  of  advancing),  when  I received  from  General  Clark  the  order  to 
face  about  and  retreat.  This  order  was  then  given  by  myself  and  Gen- 
eral Clark’s  aides.  The  troops  fell  back  reluctantly  and  in  not  very 
good  order,  the  general  himself  and  a number  of  others  being  wounded 
in  the  retreat.  I immediately  reported  to  you  to  know  whether  you 
had  ordered  the  retreat  and  was  informed  that  you  had  not. 

The  Second  Brigade,  of  this  division  was  then  ordered  by  yourself 
to  advance.  It  went  up  in  good  style,  Captain  Hughes,  commanding 
Twenty-second  Mississippi  Regiment,  leading  them  gallantly.  By  your 
presence  and  assistance  the  First  Brigade  was  rallied  and  led  by  your- 
self in  person  to  the  same  position  from  which  it  had  fallen  back,  when 
it  joined  with  the*  Second  Brigade  and  moved  conjointly  through  the 
secoud  encampment,  driving  the  enemy  before  them  through  the  third 
and  last  of  their  camps  to  the  river,  under  cover  of  their  gunboats. 
This  being  accomplished,  which  was  all  that  was  expected  of  the  land 
force,  the  Arkansas  failing  to  make  her  appearance,  nothing  remained 
but  to  destroy  what  had  been  captured  (inasmuch  as  no  arrangement 
had  been  made  for  bearing  it  off,  though  the  battle-field  was  in  our 
possession  sufficiently  long),  and  retire  from  the  range  of  the  enemy’s 
heavy  batteries  on  the  river.  Accordingly  you  gave  me  the  order  to 
withdraw  the  division  out  of  range  of  the  fire  of  the  fleet  to  await  the 
movements  of  the  gunboat  Arkansas.  This  was  done  in  good  order, 
though  with  some  degree  of  reluctance,  the  cause  of  the  movement  not 
being  fully  understood.  Your  order  to  fire  the  enemy’s  tents  and  stores 
was  well  executed.  Their  loss  must  have  been  very  heavy  in  quarter- 
master’s and  commissary  supplies,  and  particularly  so  in  sutler’s  stores, 
considerable  quantities  of  new  goods  and  general  equipments  being 
burned. 

The  position  in  which  you  left  me,  near  the  house  where  General 
Clark  lay  wounded,  was  held  more  than  two  hours  after  the  main  body 

* Tn  returns  of  casualties  this  is  called  the  Secoud  Brigade. 


84 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYII.  | 

of  the  troops  were  withdrawn,  with  a section  of  Semmes’  battery  and 
the  remnant  of  the  Seventh  Kentucky  Regiment,  Colonel  Cfosslaud 
commanding,  as  support.  Learning  that  Cobb’s  battery  had  left  its 
position  and  been  ordered  to  the  rear,  the  section,  with  its  support,  under 
my  command  was  removed  to  occupy  the  better  position  left  by  Cap- 
tain Cobb,  at  which  point  it  remained  a half  hour,  and  would  have  re- 
mained the  whole  evening  but  for  erroneous  information  of  the  enemy’s 
advance  in  force  being  given  by  a surgeon  who  was  moving  rapidly  to 
the  rear.  Leaving  pickets  at  this  point,  just  in  the  edge  of  town,  I 
withdrew  the  artillery  and  its  support  slowly  back  to  the  point  at  which 
you  found  me. 

A flag  of  truce  was  hoisted  early  in  the  evening  by  the  enemy,  and 
on  being  met  by  an  officer  whom  I sent  to  the  front,  the  privilege  of 
bearing  off  the  dead  and  wounded  was  requested  and  granted  for  four 
hours  by  yourself,  upon  condition  that  the  agreement  be  reduced  to 
writing.  No  communication  being  received  in  writing  for  some  time 
twenty  minutes  longer  were  given,  shortly  after  the  expiration  of  which 
time  a note  was  received,  signed  by  the  commanding  officer  at  Baton 
Rouge,  disclaiming  the  flag  of  truce. 

I cannot  conclude  my  report  without  speaking  of  the  cool  courage 
and  efficient  skill  with  which  Brig.  Gen.  Charles  Clark  led  his  command 
into  the  action,  and  the  valuable  assistance  rendered  him  by  his  aides, 
Lieutenants  Spooner  and  Yerger ; of  the  efficiency  of  Maj.  H.  E.  Topp, 
of  the  Thirty-first  Mississippi,  in  leading  his  regiment;  of  Major  Brown, 
chief  commissary  of  the  division,  whose  fearless  exposure  of  himselt 
where  the  contest  was  hottest  in  urging  on  the  troops  to  a charge ; of 
Capt.  J.  H.  Millett,  commanding  Fourth  Kentucky  Regiment,  who  dis- 
played conspicuous  gallantry  in  leading  his  regiment;  of  Colonel  Cross- 
land, commanding  Seventh  Kentucky  Regiment,  whose  regiment,  after 
being  in  the  front  and  assisting  in  bearing  the  brunt  of  the  battle  re- 
mained upon  the  field  while  the  shells  from  the  enemy’s  gunboats  were 
falling  thickly  around  them,  and  of  the  valuable  service  rendered  me 
by  Maj.  J.  C.  Wickliffe,  of  the  Fifth  Kentucky,  toward  the  close  of  the 
engagement,  where  his  constant  presence  at  the  head  of  his  regiment 
inspired  confidence  and  courage,  not  only  among  his  own  men,  but  all 
who  were  near  him  in  the  closing  contest,  which  decided  the  engage- 
ment so  favorably  and  so  gloriously  for  the  Confederate  arms. 

For  list  of  casualties  I would  refer  you  to  papers  A*  and  B,*  concern- 
ing late  battle. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 

JOHN  A.  BUCKNEB, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  27. 


Report  of  Col.  Jeptlia  Edwards , Thirty-first  Alabama  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Thirty-first  Alabama  Regiment, 

Gamp  near  Comite  River , La.,  August  8,  186-j.  j 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  part  taker 
by  the  Thirty-first  Alabama  Regiment  in  the  action  at  Baton  Rouge. 
La.,  on  the  5th  instant:  | 


* Embodied  in  No.  25,  p.  82. 


Chap.  XXVH.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


85 


At  early  dawn  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  instant  the  different  regi- 
ments composing  the  Second  Brigade,  of  which  my  regiment  formed  a 
part,  were  assigned  their  positions  in  line  of  battle.  After  having  ad- 
vanced for  considerable  distance  over  very  difficult  ground  my  regi- 
ment, with  the  Thirty-first  Mississippi  and  Fourth  Kentucky,  was  or- 
dered to  commence  the  attack  on  the  enemy’s  left,  which  order  was 
executed  vigorously  but  cautiously,  skirmishers  being  thrown  out  at 
different  times  and  places,  the  fog  hovering  over  the  field  rendering  it 
impossible  to  discover  what  was  in  our  front  at  a distance  of  but  few 
paces.  The  enemy  retired  slowly  before  the  well-directed  fire  which  we 
constantly  poured  upon  them,  falling  back  from  their  first  encampment. 
On  reaching  that  encampment  my  regiment  was  exposed  to  a galling 
fire  in  front  and  on  the  left  flank,  when  we  were  ordered  to  fall  back. 
At  this  point  Lieutenant  Childress,  of  Company  K,  was  mortally,  and 
Lieutenant  Hays,  of  Company  G,  and  Sergeant  Loughlin,  of  Company 
B,  were  severely  wounded,  while  gallantly  fighting,  and  left  on  the  field. 

Having  fallen  back  to  a small  ravine,  the  line  was  reformed  and  ad- 
vanced to  dislodge  the  enemy  from  their  last  encampment  to  our  left, 
which  was  gallantly  done  after  a severe  contest.  The  order  then  being 
given  for  us  to  retire,  it  was  executed  in  good  order.  Sickness  and 
death  had  thinned  my  ranks  to  such  an  extent  that  I only  carried  into 
action  97  rank  and  file,  of  which  number  2 were  killed  and  9 wounded. 

I take  pleasure  in  saying  that  although  neither  of  my  field  officers 
was  with  me,  both  being  absent  sick,  I found  but  little  or  no  difficulty 
in  rallying  my  men.  I saw  not  a single  instance  in  my  regiment  amidst 
all  the  galling  fires  from  the  enemy,  which  they  withstood,  of  any  officer 
or  soldier  being  disposed  to  shrink  from  his  duty,  but  all  seemed  to  vie 
with  each  other  in  the  stern  determination  to  conquer  or  die.  In  the 
last  charge  made  upon  the  enemy,  when  they  were  driven  from  their 
last  encampment,  I am  proud  to  say  my  regiment  was  side  by  side  with 
the  foremost  in  the  charge,  and  when  the  work  was  accomplished  of 
driving  the  enemy  from  their  position  and  we  were  ordered  to  fall  back 
they  did  so  in  perfect  order. 

Very  respectfully, 


J.  EDWARDS, 

Colonel , Commanding  Thirty -first  Alabama  Regiment. 

Maj.  John  A.  Buckner, 

Assistayit  Adjutant- General. 


Ko.  28. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  Snodgrass , Fourth  Alabama  Battalion. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Alabama  Battalion, 

August  6,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by 
the  Fourth  Alabama  Battalion  in  the  battle  of  Baton  Rouge  on  the  5tli 
instant: 

When  the  positions  of  the  various  regiments,  &c.,  were  assigned,  the 
battalion,  with  the  Fifth  Kentucky  Regiment,  was  ordered  to  support 
the  Hudson  Battery,  which  position  it  occupied  until  between  7 and  8 
a.  m.,  when  I was  ordered  to  advance  to  the  support  of  our  forces,  then 
engaging  the  enemy  at  their  second  encampment.  The  battalion  con- 


86 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVn. 


tinned  in  the  engagement  until  the  enemy’s  infantry  were  driven  from 
the  field  and  their  batteries  were  playing  heavily  upon  the  position  we 
occupied,  when  we  were  ordered  to  withdraw. 

I take  pleasure  in  calling  your  attention  to  the  gallant  and  enthusi- 
astic conduct  of  Privates  John  Thompson,  Company  F,  and  J.  M.  Byrd, 
Company  G,  who  boldly  moved  in  advance  of  the  command  and  dis- 
charged their  arms  with  due  caution  and  alacrity.  They  were  the  first 
to  open  fire  and  last  to  quit  the  field,  and  I am  happy,  while  report- 
ing the  especially  worthy  conduct  of  these  two  privates,  to  not  have  a 
solitary  instance  of  cowardice  or  wavering  to  report,  the  whole  com- 
mand having  advanced  and  stood  under  the  fire  from  which  older  troops 
and  greater  numbers  had  retired.* 

Very  respectfully, 

JOHN  SNOHGBASS, 
Lieutenant^  Colonel  Fourth  Alabama  Battalion . 

Col.  J.  Edwards, 

Commanding  Second  Brigade. 


No.  29. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  H.  Millett , Fourth  Kentucky  Infantry . 

Camp  near  Comite  Biver, 

August  7,  1862. 

Sir  : Through  an  unfortunate  circumstance  I was  placed  in  command 
of  the  Fourth  Kentucky  Begiment  at  about  3 a.  m.  on  5th  instant. 
After  being  placed  in  line  our  brigade  moved  forward  until  it  reached 
the  outskirts  of  Baton  Bouge,  where  we  moved  by  the  left  flank  as  far 
as  the  camp  of  the  Fourteenth  Maine  Begiment.  We  then  moved  for- 
ward ; the  smoke  being  so  dense  my  command  was  here  for  a time  sepa- 
rated from  the  brigade.  Having  thrown  out  my  right  company  as 
skirmishers  I continued  to  move  forward,  but  discovering  that  the  en- 
emy were  on  my  left,  supported  by  a battery,  all  concealed  by  the 
houses  and  fences,  and  not  being  able  to  change  direction  without  plac- 
ing my  regiment  immediately  under  the  fire  of  our  own  troops,  I re- 
joined  the  brigade.  I had  just  taken  my  position  on  the  right  when 
you  took  command  and  ordered  us  forward.  1 moved  my  regiment 
obliquely  to  the  left  until  my  right  had  cleared  the  fence  in  front,  when 
I ordered  them  forward  in  the  direction  of  the  enemy’s  camp,  which 
they  did  with  a cheer.  We  had  advanced  probably  200  yards,  when 
an  aide,  whom  I took  to  be  on  General  Clark’s  staff  (not  being  person- 
ally acquainted  with  any  of  them),  ordered  me  to  fall  back.  Seeing  the 
balance  of  the  brigade  retiring,  I gave  the  command  to  my  regiment, 
which  they  were  very  unwilling  to  execute,  seeing  the  enemy  retiring 
from  their  camps.  After  reforming  my  regiment  I was  again  ordered 
by  you  to  advance.  In  this  charge  the  enemy  were  driven  completely 
from  their  camps.  It  is  not  necessary,  captain,  for  me  to  say  how  my 
command  acted  in  this  charge;  you,  being  in  front  of  my  left,  could 
judge  for  yourself.  I think  that  you  will  agree  that  they  did  not  abuse 


* Nominal  list  of  casualties  omitted  shows  1 officer  and  10  men  wounded  in  the 
“accidental  affair  on  the  road  before  daylight.”  The  losses  in  the  engagement  are 
tabulated  on  p.  82. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


87 


the  confidence  the  commanding  general  lias  in  his  u ragged  Kentuck- 
ians.” 

The  Fourth  Kentucky  lost  in  killed,  5 ; wounded,  14 ; missing,  1 ; 
total,  20. 

Respectfully, 

J.  H.  MILLETT, 

Captain , Comdg.  Fourth  Kentucky  Volunteer  Regiment. 

Capt.  John  A.  Buckner. 


Ko.  30. 

Report  of  Maj.  J.  C.  Wickliffe , Fifth  Kentucky  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Fifth  Kentucky  Regiment, 

Camp  near  Comite  River , La.,  August  7,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  of  submitting  to  you  the  following  report  of 
the  part  taken  by  the  Fifth  Kentucky  Regiment  in  the  action  of  the  5th 
instant,  at  Baton  Rouge.  The  Fifth  Kentucky,  with  the  remainder  of  the 
brigade,  was  placed  in  line  of  battle  early  on  the  morning  of  August  5. 
rhe  line  was  advanced  toward  Baton  Rouge  steadily.  In  obedience  to 
m order  of  my  brigade  commander  my  regiment  was  held  as  a support 
to  the  battery  attached  to  this  brigade,  where  it  remained  until  I re- 
3eived  an  order  in  person  from  Major-General  Breckinridge  to  post  one 
3ompany  as  pickets  to  the  right  and  at  some  distance  from  the  arsenal, 
[n  obedience  to  this  order  I placed  Captain  Gillum,  with  his  company, 
3onsisting  of  1 lieutenant,  4 sergeants,  1 corporal,  and  24  men,  upon  the 
ground  designated  by  the  general,  and  in  obedience  to  another  order 
from  him  left  Captain  Gillum  there,  when  my  command  was  ordered  to 
join  the  brigade  and  engage  the  enemy  in  their  camps.  Captain  Gillum 
remained  at  his  post  until  ordered  away,  when  the  brigade  retired  to 
the  point  where  the  line  of  battle  was  first  formed.  Thus  this  company 
was  prevented  from  engaging  in  the  battle,  and  this  will  account  why 
Qone  were  killed  or  wounded  in  Company  A of  this  regiment.  When 
irdered  by  Major-General  Breckinridge  to  join  the  brigade  to  which  my 
regiment  is  attached  I was  placed  on  the  left  of  the  Fourth  Kentucky 
Regiment,  which  was  the  first  regiment  in  the  brigade.  Immediately 
ifter  this  an  order  from  you  was  given  to  advance.  My  command  did 
so,  and  until  the  fire  was  drawn  from  the  enemy,  who  were  secreted  in 
md  about  the  tents  of  the  third  and  last  encampment.  The  fire  was 
immediately  returned  by  the  men  under  my  command.  It  continued 
warm  and  heavy  for  about  twenty  or  twenty-five  minutes,  our  line  as 
far  as  I could  see  advancing  very  little  but  steadily,  and  the  enemy  as 
slowly  retreating.  At  this  time  an  order  was  given  by  Brigadier-Gen- 
aral  Clark,  commanding  the  division,  to  fall  back  to  a small  ravine  a 
short  distance  in  the  rear  and  reform,  which  was  executed  in  good  order, 
tn  a few  moments  we  were  again  ordered  to  advance  and  did  so,  never 
baiting  until  the  enemy  had  been  driven  from  the  last  of  their  encamp- 
ments. After  the  brigade  line  had  been  formed,  in  obedience  to  an  order 
from  you  we  retired  slowly  and  in  good  order. 

My  command  numbered  222,  rank  and  file.  From  this  deduct  Com- 
pany A,  numbering  31  officers  and  men  and  7 detailed  to  carry  off  the 
wounded,  thus  reducing  the  number  of  men  actually  engaged  in  the 
fight  under  my  command  to  184  men.  The  following  is  a list  of  the 


88 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chap.  XXVII. 


casualties  which  occurred  in  my  regiment:  Killed,  9;  wounded,  24; 
missing,  1;  total,  34. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  stating  that  the  officers  and  men 
under  my  command  discharged  their  duties  in  the  action  at  Baton  Rouge 
in  a manner  creditable  alike  to  themselves  and  the  cause  for  which  they 
are  battling. 

Yery  respectfully, 

J J.  C.  WICKLIFFE, 

Major , Commanding  Fifth  Kentucky  Regiment. 

Maj.  John  A.  Buckner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  31. 

Report  of  Maj.  H.  E.  Topp , Thirty -first  Mississippi  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Thirty-first  Regiment  Mississippi  Yols., 

August  7,  1862. 

Dear  Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report: 

About  the  time  or  immediately  after  the  repulse  of  the  Second  Divis- 
ion a portion  of  our  brigade,  of  which  the  Thirty-first  Mississippi  Regi-  i 
ment  was  a part,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Hunt,  of  the  Fifth 
Kentucky,  was  ordered  forward  through  several  corn  fields,  in  which 
the  enemy  was  discovered  by  my  skirmishers,  thrown  out  for  that  pur- 
pose, toward  the  second  encampment,  to  which  we  approached  within 
200  yards  or  less,  driving  constantly  the  enemy  before  us,  when  a terrific 
fire  froni  the  enemy  in  the  direction  of  the  second  encampment  checked 
our  advance,  and  where  well-nigh  all  of  my  casualties  occurred.  At 
this  point  we  were  ordered  to  fall  back  by  Colonel  Hunt,  and  the  retreat 1 
had  hardly  begun  when  Colonel  Hunt  was  wounded  and  taken  off  the 
field.  Here  I attempted  to  rally  my  regiment,  but  the  confusion  had 
become  so  general  that  I found  it  impossible  to  do  so.  We  then  fell 
back  to  the  ravine  in  advance  of  the  first  encampment  and  formed 
under  the  cover  of  the  ravine. 

General  Clark,  commanding  division,  came  up  at  this  juncture.  I 
told  him  that  we  were  without  a brigade  commander,  Colonel  HuDt 
having  been  wounded,  and  requested  him  to  assign  some  one  to  the 
command  of  the  brigade.  Colonel  Edwards,  of  the  Thirty-first  Alabama, 
having  lost  his  horse  and  expressing  an  unwillingness  to  assume  the 
command,  General  Clark  then  left,  and  very  soon  Major  Buckner,  so  I 
was  informed,  took  the  command,  and  ordered  us  to  march  by  the  left 
flank  in  the  direction  of  enemy’s  second  encampment,  and  having  fairly 
gotten  us  in  a position  to  advance  ordered  us  forward.  The  command 
was  instantly  obeyed,  and  the  brigade,  with  the  exception  of  the  two 
regiments  on  the  right,  was  soon  engaged  with  the  enemy.  My  regi- 
ment was  lying  down  firing,  with  very  little  injury  to  themselves,  and 
gradually  approaching  the  encampment,  when  to  our  surprise  we  ob- 
served the  right  of  our  brigade  falling  back  in  disorder.  I have  no 
idea  who  gave  the  command,  as  I was  on  the  extreme  left.  I then 
ordered  my  regiment  to  fall  back,  which  it  did  in  confusion,  to  the  cut 
in  the  road.  At  this  time  the  two  regiments  held  in  reserve  were 
carried  forward  by  General  Clark,  and  we  rallied  again  in  the  road, 
under  the  direction  of  Major  Buckner.  We  were  a second  time  ordered 


Oha i*.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


80 


forward,  and  this  time  there  was  no  halting  or  falling  back.  We  ad- 
vanced at  a double-quick  to  within  75  yards  of  the  encampment,  fired, 
and  charged  bayonets,  when  the  enemy  began  to  give  way  and  finally 
ended  in  a rout.  We  were  entering  the  encampment,  when  we  were 
ordered  to  halt  by  Major  Buckner,  and  formed  upon  the  color  line  of  the 
second  encampment.  We  remained  in  this  position  some  five  minutes 
or  more,  when  the  same  officer  called  “Attention,”  gave  the  command 
“About  face,  forward  march,”  the  whole  line  marching  in  admirable 
order. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

H.  E.  TOPP, 

Major , Gomdg.  Thirty -first  Regiment  Mississippi  Vols. 

Maj.  John  A.  Buckner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  32. 

Report  of  Col.  T.  B.  Smith , Twentieth  Tennessee  Infantry , commanding 

Fourth  Brigade. 

Headquarters  First  Division, 

Gamp  on  Gomite  River , Louisiana , August  10,  1862. 

Sir:  The  following  is  a correct  report  of  the  part  the  Fourth  Brigade 
took  in  the  late  engagement  in  front  of  the  city  of  Baton  Rouge  on  the 
5th  instant: 

By  order  of  General  Clark  I moved  the  Fourth  Brigade  across  a cane 
field  perpendicular  to  the  road,  throwing  the  Fifteenth  Mississippi  Regi- 
ment in  the  woods,  deployed  as  skirmishers,  to  protect  the  right.  We 
then  moved  forward  across  several  fields  to  the  outskirts  of  the  town, 
when  the  division  was  halted,  till  I was  ordered  to  move  by  the  left 
flank  to  the  road,  and  then  by  the  front  till  they  fired  on  me,  which 
was  returned.  At  that  moment  we  were  not  more  than  20  yards  from 
their  lines.  About  three  rounds  from  our  men  put  them  to  flight,  the 
fog  being  so  thick  we  could  not  see  more  than  twenty  steps.  We  were 
then  on  a line  with  their  camps  on  the  left  of  the  road  and  the  firing 
had  ceased,  when  General  Clark  ordered  me  to  fall  back  in  the  ravine 
some  hundred  yards  to  the  rear.  I about-faced  the  brigade  and  marched 
back  in  good  order,  walking  my  men  in  a gully.  Soon  after  the  Second 
Brigade  moved  obliquely  to  the  left  and  engaged  them  on  the  left  of  the 
road.  The  right  of  the  Second  Brigade  began  to  give  way,  and  in  twenty 
or  thirty  minutes,  I suppose,  I moved  forward  to  their  support  and  to 
their  right,  engaging  the  enemy,  and  a general  forward  movement 
was  made  by  our  division.  About  the  time  we  had  reached  the  tents 
and  top  of  the  hill  orders  came  to  fall  back  to  the  bridge,  where  the 
stampede  had  taken  place  that  morning,  which  we  did  in  as  good  order 
as  we  could  after  having  so  severely  engaged  them. 

I would  beg  leave  to  mention  the  names  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Moore, 
of  the  Nineteenth  Tennessee ; Captain  Hughes,  of  the  Twenty-second 
Mississippi,  and  Adjutant  Fitzpatrick,  of  the  Twenty-second  Mississippi, 
as  acting  gallantly  all  through  the  engagement.  Captain  Hughes  fell  in 
the  last  charge  at  the  head  of  his  men.  The  Fifteenth  Mississippi  was 


90 


W.  FLA,,  S.  ALA.,  S.JMISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


held  in  reserve  with  a battery  and  was  not  in  the  fight.  The  men  be- 
haved well  and  obeyed  the  commands  I gave  them. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

T.  B.  SMITH, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fourth  Brigade. 
Major-General  Breckinridge. 


No.  33. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Buggies , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Second 
Division , with  Return  of  Casualties. 

Hdqrs.  2d  Div.,  1st  Dist.,  Army  East  of  the  Miss., 
Camp  Breckinridge , August  9,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  for  the  consideration  of  the  major- 
general  commanding  the  forces  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken 
by  my  division  in  the  action  of  the  5th  instant  at  Baton  Rouge : 

The  Second  Division  was  composed  of  two  brigades,  the  first  consist- 
ing of  the  Third  Kentucky  Regiment,  Captain  Bowman ; Sixth  Ken- 
tucky, Lieutenant-Colonel  Cofer;  Seventh  Kentucky,  Colonel  Crossland, 
and  Thirty-fifth  Alabama,  Colonel  Robertson.  The  Second  Brigade,  of 
the  Fourth  Louisiana  Regiment,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hunter ; battalion 
Thirtieth  Louisiana  Regiment,  Col.  G.  A.  Breaux ; battalion  of  Stewart’s 
Legion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Boyd,  and  Confederate  Light  Battery,  Capt. 
O.  J.  Semmes,  with  two  companies  mounted  men  and  some  250  Partisan 
Rangers,  detached  on  scouting  and  outpost  service. 

On  the  night  of  August  4 this  division  proceeded  from  Comite  Bridge, 
marching  left  in  front;  Semmes*  light  battery  in  the  rear  of  left  bat- 
talion (Fourth  Louisiana  Volunteers).  A detachment  commanded  by 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Shields,  Thirtieth  Louisiana  Volunteers,  consisting 
of  one  company  from  his  regiment,  commanded  by  Captain  R.  T.  Boyle; 
one  company  Partisan  Rangers,  commarnded  by  Captain  Amaeker;  one 
company  mounted  rangers,  and  a section  of  Semmes’  battery,  under 
Lieutenant  Fauntleroy,  had  preceded  the  march  of  the  division,  having 
left  camp  at  4.30  p.  m.,  to  operate  on  the  plank  road  leading  from  Baton 
Rouge  to  Clinton,  on  our  extreme  right. 

The  head  of  the  division  column,  preceded  by  a company  of  mounted 
rangers  and  advanced  guard,  reached  Ward’s  Creek  Bridge,  on  the  Green- 
well  Springs  and  Baton  Rouge  roads,  about  3 a.  m.,  where  a temporary 
halt  was  called  preparatory  to  the  formation  of  the  division  line  of  battle. 
During  this  halt,  while  the  advance  was  driving  in  the  enemy’s  pickets, 
some  stragglers  from  the  column  were  mistaken  for  enemy’s  pickets  and 
fired  bn ; the  mistake  being  mutual  *in  the  darkness,  a few  shots  were 
exchanged,  unfortunately  disabling  General  Helm  and  killing  Lieuten- 
ant Todd.  This  necessarily  caused  some  confusion.  Order,  however, 
was  soon  restored  and  the  column  marched  to  the  point  whence  the  de- 
ployment was  to  commence. 

The  line  was  formed  a little  before  daylight,  Colonel  Thompson  s 
brigade  (the  First)  with  the  right  resting  near  the  Greenwell  Springs 
road  ; Colonel  Allen’s  brigade  (the  Second)  on  the  left,  his  left  extend- 
ing through  a wood  and  resting  on  a large  field ; Semmes’  battery  (four 
pieces)  in  the  center,  occupying  the  space  between  the  two  brigades. 
A squadron  of  cavalry,  under  command  of  Capt.  Augustus  Scott,  was 


Chap.  XXYII  ] VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA.  91 

ordered  to  proceed  to  the  extreme  left  of  the  line  to  observe  and  en- 
deavor to  prevent  any  attempt  to  outflank  us  in  that  direction. 

At  a little  after  daylight,  during  the  prevalence  of  a thick  fog,  the  or- 
der was  given  to  advance.  The  line  proceeded  but  a few  hundred  yards 
before  it  encountered  a brisk  Are  from  the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  strongly 
posted  on  our  extreme  right,  in  some  houses  surrounded  by  trees  and 
picket  fences.  Almost  simultaneously  a battery  of  the  enemy  opened  on 
our  line  from  the  same  direction.  Semmes’  battery  was  ordered  forward 
to  an  indicated  position  to  drive  off  the  skirmishers  and  silence  the 
enemy’s  battery,  and  the  whole  line  moved  rapidly  forward,  firing  and 
cheering.  The  effect  was  instantaneous  ; the  enemy’s  skirmishers  fled, 
and  his  battery  was  compelled  to  change  position  and  seek  shelter  under 
the  guns  of  the  arsenal  to  prevent  being  captured,  where  it  remained, 
continuing  to  fire  on  our  advancing  line.  Semmes’  battery  took  posi- 
tion on  the  right  of  the  division,  to  keep  up  the  engagement  with  the 
battery  of  the  enemy.  Colonel  Thompson’s  brigade  continued  to  ad- 
vance under  an  occasional  fire  across  an  open  field  and  through  some 
corn  fields,  just  beyond  which  they  encountered  a heavy  fire  from  the 
enemy,  strongly  posted  in  a wood.  Here  the  contest  was  warmly  main- 
tained on  both  sides  for  a considerable  time,  during  which  the  first 
division  succeeded  in  entering  a regimental  camp  on  our  right.  The 
enemy  was  finally  driven  back  into  and  through  another  camp  imme- 
diately in  our  front.  The  enemy  at  this  period  were  strongly  re-enforced, 
and  a heavy  battery  a little  to  the  left  of  the  center  opened  an  oblique 
fire  on  both  brigades.  About  the  same  time  the  enemy  attempted  to 
break  our  center  by  pushing  a column  between  the  two  brigades.  This 
movement  being  discovered,  Semmes’  battery  was  ordered  forward  and 
opened  on  this  column  at  short  range  with  grape  and  canister  with 
marked  effect,  for  a few  rapid  discharges  scattered  the  enemy  and  drove 
him  back  in  confusion.  A similar  attempt  was  made  on  the  right  of  the 
division,  which  was  defeated  with  equal  success  by  a timely  and  well- 
directed  fire  from  the  Thirty-fifth  Alabama  and  Sixth  Kentucky  Regi- 
ments. The  two  brigades,  which  from  the  nature  of  the  ground  had 
become  separated,  were  ordered  in  advancing  to  gain  ground  to  the  left 
and  right  respectively,  in  order  to  subject  the  enemy’s  position  in  front 
to  a converging  fire.  In  executing  this  movement  the  First  Brigade  met 
a portion  of  the  First  Division  falling  back  in  some  disorder.  Colonel 
Thompson  halted  and  was  attempting  to  reform  them,  when  he  was  in- 
formed by  a mounted  officer  that  the  order  was  for  the  whole  line  to  fall 
back.  In  obedience  to  this  supposed  order  he  fell  back  a short  distance, 
but  soon  reformed  his  line  and  charged  the  enemy  under  a galling  fire. 
Unfortunately,  while  leading  his  men  in  this  charge,  Colonel  Thompson 
fell  severely  wounded  and  was  borne  from  the  field ; and  about  the  same 
time  Colonel  Allen  also  fell  dangerously  wounded  while  leading,  with  un- 
surpassed gallantry,  his  brigade  against  a battery  of  the  enemy.  These 
circumstances  prevented  the  further  prosecution  of  this  movement.  About 
this  time  the  major-general  commanding,  arriving  upon  this  part  of  the 
field,  directed  the  final  charge  upon  the  enemy,  which  drove  him  in  con- 
fusion through  his  last  regimental  encampment  to  the  river  under  the 
protection  of  his  gunboats.  His  camps,  containing  a large  quantity  of 
personal  property,  commissary  stores,  and  clothing,  were  destroyed. 

Finding  it  fruitless  to  remain  longer  under  the  fire  of  the  gunboats, 
and  disappointed  in  the  expected  co-operation  of  the  Arkansas,  the 
exhausted  troops  were  withdrawn  in  good  order  to  the  suburbs  of  the 
town,  the  Seventh  Kentucky  Regiment  anil  a section  of  Semmes’  artil- 


92 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVEL 


lery  being  left  on  the  field  to  protect  the  collection  of  the  stragglers  and 
wounded,  which  was  thoroughly  accomplished. 

Colonel  Allen’s  brigade,  on  the  left,  moved  forward  through  a wood 
and  into  some  corn  fields.  They  soon  encountered  the  enemy  in  supe- 
rior force,  protected  by  houses  and  fences.  They  successively  charged 
these  positions,  driving  the  enemy  steadily  back  until  within  a few 
hundred  yards  of  the  river,  where  they  were  subjected  to  a destructive 
fire  from  batteries  before  mentioned  and  the  enemy’s  gunboats.  They 
charged  and  took  a section  from  one  of  the  enemy’s  batteries,  Colonel 
Allen  leading  the  advance  with  the  colors  of  one  of  his  battalions  in  his 
hand.  It  was  at  this  critical  juncture  that,  as  before  stated,  this  gal- 
lant soldier  fell  from  his  horse  severely  wounded,  and  during  the  con- 
fusion which  followed  this  misfortune  the  enemy  succeeded  in  recap- 
turing the  pieces.  The  enemy  pressed  heavily  upon  this  brigade  and 
poured  into  it  such  a galling  fire  from  infantry  and  artillery  that  it  fell 
back  in  some  disorder.  Colonel  Breaux,  who  assumed  command  upon 
the  fall  of  Colonel  Allen,  succeeded,  with  the  aid  of  the  officers  of  the 
brigade  and  two  officers  connected  with  the  staff,  who  were  sent  to  his 
assistance,  in  rallying  a sufficient  number  to  show  front  to  the  enemy 
until  Semmes’  battery  was  brought  up,  as  already  stated,  to  their  sup- 
port, and  succeeded  by  a well-directed  fire  in  preventing  the  enemy’s 
advance.  This  position  was  maintained,  despite  the  heavy  firing  on 
the  brigade  from  the  enemy’s  gunboats  and  land  batteries,  until  the 
troops  were  withdrawn  with  the  rest  of  the  army  to  the  suburbs  of  the 
town. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Shields  had  been  ordered,  as  already  stated,  to 
take  position  on  the  plank  road  leading  from  Clinton  to  Baton  Bouge, 
and  as  soon  as  he  heard  the  fire  of  our  main  body  to  attack  a battery 
of  the  enemy,  said  to  be  stationed  at  the  junction  of  the  Clinton  and 
Bayou  Sara  roads.  This  service  was  promptly  and  gallantly  performed. 
He  drove  in  the  enemy’s  pickets,  followed  them  up,  and  opened  fire 
on  a regimental  encampment  to  the  right  of  the  Greenwell  Springs 
road,  driving  the  enemy  from  it.  He  was  here  met  by  two  regiments 
of  the  enemy,  but  succeeded  in  holding  them  at  bay  till  he  was  fired 
upon  by  our  own  artillery  (fortunately  without  injury,  four  of  the 
artillery  horses  being  disabled),  and  the  infantry,  unable  to  withstand 
the  heavy  fire  of  the  enemy,  he  withdrew  to  his  original  position,  where 
the  wounded  horses  were  replaced  by  others,  when  he  returned  to  his 
advanced  position,  which  he  held  till  General  Clark’s  division  came  up 
on  his  left,  when  the  two  companies  of  infantry  were,  by  order  of  the 
major-general  commanding,  attached  to  the  Twenty-second  Mississippi 
Begiment.  The  section  of  artillery  under  his  command  retained  its 
position  until  the  army  retired,  when  it  rejoined  the  battery  in  the 
suburbs  of  the  town. 

In  concluding  this  report  of  the  battle  I have  the  satisfaction  of 
stating  that  the  conduct  of  both  officers  aud  men  was  gallant  and  dar- 
ing, every  movement  being  performed  with  characteristic  promptitude. 
I respectfully  commend  the  reports  of  commanders  of  brigades,  as  well 
as  those  of  regiments,  battalions,  and  independent  companies,  to  the 
special  consideration  of  the  commanding  general,  and  I also  recom- 
mend the  following  officers  and  soldiers  specially  named  in  these  reports 
to  favorable  consideration.* 

The  entire  division  entering  the  tight  numbered  but  about  1,950 
infantry  and  artillery,  with  a few  irregular  cavalry  and  Partisan  Ban- 


See  inclosure  (p.  81)  to  Breckinridge’s  report. 


Chaf.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA.  93 

gers,  numbering  in  all  some  350  or  400,  the  casualties  (killed,  wounded, 
and  missing)  being  277. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Second  Division. 

John  A.  Buckner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Addenda.] 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Second  Division. 

[Compiled  from  tlie  reports.] 


Command. 


FIRST  BRIGADE. 

35th  Alabama 

3d  Kentucky 

6th  Kentucky 

7th  Kentucky 

Sharpshooters 

Total 


SECOND  BRIGADE. 

4th  Louisiana 

30th  Louisiana 

39th  Mississippi,  Company  I. 

Boyd’s  battalion 

Semmes’  battery 

Total 

Grand  total* 


Ti 

1 

1 

<D 

'd 

s 

.a 

co 

Remarks. 

p 

o 

.2 

b£ 

I 

£ 

a 

<< 

4 

21 

1 

26 

2 

15 

1 

18 

5 

20 

25 

1 

12 

1 

14 

2 

2 

12 

70 

3 

85 

5 

25 

12 

42 

12 

28 

18 

58 

1 

1 

2 

Attached  to  Fourth  Louisiana. 

5 

27 

17 

49 

Lieut.  Z.  R.  Causey  killed. 

5 

10 

15 

28 

91 

47 

166 

40 

161 

50 

251 

* A memorandum  filed  with  reports  gives  the  casualties,  killed,  44;  wounded,  165,  and  missing,  72; 
but  no  details  are  given. 


No.  34. 

Report  of  Col.  J.  W.  Robertson , Thirty -fifth  Alabama  Infantry , command- 
ing First  Brigade. 

Headquarters  First  Brigade,  Second  Division, 
Camp  on  Comite  River , La.,  August  7,  1862. 

Captain:  On  receiving  tbe  order  to  report  the  part  taken  in  the 
action  of  the  5th  instant  by  the  First  Brigade  I referred  the  order  to 
Col.  A.  P.  Thompson,  who  commanded  the  brigade  during  the  action, 
with  the  exception  of  the  closing  half  hour  that  the  troops  were  under 
fire,  when  he  was  borne  from  the  field  severely  wounded,  and  submit,  by 
his  request,  the  following  report : 

On  reaching  the  angle  of  the  main  road  leading  into  Baton  Rouge  the 
brigade  was  formed  in  line  of  battle  in  a common  to  the  left  of  the  main 
road,  the  right  of  the  brigade  resting  on  that  road  and  the  left  near  a 
dense  forest,  into  which  Colonel  Allen’s  brigade  had  passed.  The  brigade 
was  composed  of  the  following  regiments,  positioned  from  right  to  left 
in  the  order  named : Third  Kentucky,  Capt.  J.  H.  Bowman  command- 


94 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVil. 


in g 5 Seventh  Kentucky,  Col.  Edward  Crossland  commanding ; Thirty- 
fifth  Alabama,  Col.  J.  W.  Eobertson  commanding,  and  the  Sixth  Ken- 
tucky, Lieut.  Col.  M.  H.  Cofer  commanding.  As  soon  as  the  line  was 
established  the  command  forward  was  given  by  General  Euggles  in  per- 
son, which  was  promptly  obeyed  by  the  brigade  moving  forward  beyond 
the  dwelling  house  immediately  to  the  front.  The  line  was  at  this  time 
found  to  be  somewhat  deranged,  caused  by  the  numerous  fences  and  out- 
houses over  and  around  which  the  troops  had  to  pass.  The  brigade  was 
consequently  halted  and  the  alignment  rectified,  when  the  command  for- 
ward was  again  given.  The  brigade  moved  directly  to  the  front  parallel 
to  the  main  road,  preceded  by  a company  of  sharpshooters,  deployed  asi 
skirmishers,  and  commanded  by  Lieut.  G.  C.  Hubbard.  At  this  point 
the  firing  commenced  first.  The  line  of  the  enemy  having  been  unmasked 
by  the  skirmishers,  the  firing  was  continued  but  a short  time,  when  an 
order  was  received  for  the  brigade  to  charge,  and  the  troops  rushed  for- 
ward with  a cheer,  the  enemy  breaking  before  them.  Having  reached 
the  middle  of  the  field  the  brigade  was  exposed  to  a fire  from  the  right, 
which  could  not  be  returned  without  exposing  the  troops  of  General 
Clark’s  division  to  the  fire  of  the  brigade,  and  was  consequently  halted 
until  the  firing  ceased.  An  advance  was  made,  skirmishers  covering 
the  front.  The  second  line  of  the  enemy  was  thus  unmasked  and  ex- 
posed to  the  fire  of  the  brigade.  They  gave  way  precipitately  before 
the  steady  advance  of  our  troops.  On  clearing  the  fields  and  reaching 
the  enemy’s  encampment  the  right  wing  was  found  to  be  covered  by  a 
portion  of  General  Clark’s  division.  An  officer  axiproached  from  the 
right  and  stated  that  friends  were  exposed  to  our  fire,  when  the  firing 
ceased  and  a charge  was  immediately  ordered  by  Colonel  Thomx)son,  he 
leading  the  brigade  into  the  encampment  of  the  enemy  to  the  left,  which 
was  nearly  cleared  by  this  brigade,  when  troops  were  met  on  the  right 
retiring  without  any  apparent  cause,  and  were  ordered  by  Colonel  Thomp 
son  to  halt  and  advance,  when  a mounted  officer  informed  Colonel  Thomp 
son  that  it  was  the  order  for  all  the  troops  to  fall  back.  This  movement 
became  general  in  the  brigade.  In  retiring  the  Thirty-fifth  Alabama 
and  Sixth  Kentucky,  forming  the  left  wing,  became  separated  from  the 
right,  and  occupied  a position  in  line  100  yards  to  the  left  and  rear 
The  enemy  reformed  in  heavy  force  behind  their  tents,  rapidly  advanced, 
firing  and  cheering.  The  Third  and  Seventh  Kentucky  Eegiments  were 
thrown  under  cover  and  met  this  advance  with  a steady  fire.  The 
Thirty-fifth  Alabama  and  Sixth  Kentucky  were  ordered  forward,  bul 
advanced  before  the  order  reached  them,  opening  a heavy  fire  on  the 
enemy,  whose  advance  was  thus  checked.  At  this  point  Colonel 
Thompson  was  severely  wounded  and  taken  to  the  rear. 

The  command  devolving  upon  Colonel  Eobertson,  who  being  fron 
complete  exhaustion  in  no  condition  at  that  time  to  assume  command 
finding  the  right  wing  separated  from  the  left,  placed  Colonel  Cross 
land  in  command  of  the  right  and  Lieut.  Col.  E.  Goodwin  in  command 
of  the  left,  with  orders  to  maintain  the  line,  which  was  firmly  held  foi 
nearly  an  hour  in  the  face  of  a terrible  fire  from  musketry  and  artillery 
when  the  charge  which  closed  the  action  was  made  in  person  by  th( 
major-general  commanding. 

It  is  the  request  of  Colonel  Thompson  that  his  entire  approbation  o 
the  conduct  of  all  the  field  and  acting  field  officers  engaged,  and  Capt 
W.  P.  Wallace  and  Lieut.  Charles  Semple,  aides,  and  Acting  Adjt.  E 
B.  L.  Sorey,  of  the  Third  Kentucky,  be  especially  expressed  in  thh 
report.  To  the  deportment  of  the  Thirty  fifth  Alabama  Eegiment  h< 
desires  attention  to  be  called.  This  regiment,  although  for  the  firs 


95 


Chap.  XXVIL]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 

time  under  fire  on  the  5tli  instant,  proved  itself  a worthy  comrade  for 
the  Third,  Sixth,  and  Seventh  Kentucky  Regiments,  who  in  this  action 
sustained  the  enviable  reputations- won  by  them  on  the  field  of  Shiloh. 
Colonel  Robertson  would  call  especial  attention  to  the  gallant  conduct 
of  Col.  E.  Crossland  and  Lieut.  Col.  E.  Goodwin,  who,  the  first  with  his 
regimental  colors  in  hand  and  the  second  with  his  hat  on  his  sword,  led 
the  brigade  in  the  final  charge. 

To  the  reports  of  regimental  commanders  you  are  referred  for  notices 
of  gallant  conduct  in  other  members  of  the  command. 

The  medical  staff  deserve  the  highest  praise  for  their  prompt  and 
unceasing  attention  to  the  wounded. 

By  order  of 

J.  W.  ROBERTSOK, 

Colonel , Commanding  First  Brigade , Second  Division. 

Capt.  L.  D.  Sandidge, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Second  Division. 

[Addenda.] 

Headquarters  First  Brigade, 

August  8, 1862. 

Captain  : Colonel  Robertson  desires  me  to  say  that  he  wishes  to 
amend  his  brigade  report  by  stating  that  Maj.  John  R.  Throckmorton, 
assistant  quartermaster,  rendered  very  efficient  service  in  taking  off  the 
wounded  from  the  field,  showing  great  fearlessness  of  personal  danger 
in  the  discharge  of  his  duties. 

G.  C.  HUBBARD, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

Capt.  L.  D.  Sandidge, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Second  Division. 


Ko.  35. 

Report  of  Col.  J.  W.  Robertson , Thirty -fifth  Alabama  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Thirty-fifth  Regt.  Alabama  Volunteers, 
Camp  on  Comite  River , La.,  August  8,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  in  the  action  of  the  5th  instant  by  the  Thirty-fifth  Regiment  Ala- 
bama Volunteers  up  to  the  moment  I was  relieved  of  the  command  of 
the  regiment  by  assuming  command  of  the  brigade : 

Before  leaving  the  Comite  River  I deemed  it  advisable  to  consolidate 
certain  companies,  in  which  there  were  but  few  men  and  in  two  in- 
stances no  commissioned  officer,  the  regiment  having  been  decimated 
by  sickness,  and  accordingly  divided  the  regiment,  only  185  strong, 
rank  and  file,  into  four  companies,  placing  them  in  command  of  the 
following  officers,  from  right  to  left,  in  the  order  named : Capt.  S.  S. 
Ives,  Lieut.  Theo.  E.  Ellett,  Capt.  John  S.  Dixon,  and  Lieut.  S.  D. 
Stewart.  The  regiment,  thus  organized,  occupied  the  left  center  of  the 
brigade  and  kept  this  position  during  the  action,  passing  immediately 
to  the  front  of  the  line  first  formed  on  the  common  over  and  through 
many  obstacles  to  a position  near  the  river,  where  the  fight  ended. 

The  regiment  having  never  been  under  fire,  much  anxiety  was  felt 


96 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

by  both  myself  and  the  brigade  commander  as  to  the  probable  effect 
upon  the  men  of  a close  fire  of  musketry.  I am  highly  gratified  to  say 
that  never  once  did  the  regiment,  men  or  officers,  falter  $ but  when 
ordered  to  charge  did  on  three  occasions  bear  themselves  most  gal- 
lantly, and  once  obstinately  held  for  an  hour  a position  exposed  to  a 
fire  from  overwhelming  numbers. 

On  reaching  the  first  encampment  of  the  enemy  in  the  third  charge 
made  by  the  brigade  this  regiment  passed  entirely  through  the  camp, 
driving  the  enemy  before  them,  when  on  looking  to  right  rear  I found 
my  command  was  not  supported,  but  the  right  wing  was  falling  back 
to  cover.  Receiving  no  order,  and  fearing  the  enemy  would  attempt 
to  flank  the  left  wing,  I immediately  ordered  the  regiment  to  retire, 
being  followed  in  the  movement  by  the  Sixth  Kentucky  on  the  left, 
and  formed  line  of  battle  on  the  right  of  the  cemetery,  in  which  the 
Sixth  Kentucky  was  formed.  The  regiments  were  immediately  moved 
forward  and  checked  the  advancing  enemy  by  heavy  firing. 

Being  called  to  command  the  brigade,  I at  this  time  turned  over  the 
regiment  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Goodwin,  who  reports  its  further  ac- 
tion. 

I desire  to  say  that  I am  greatly  indebted  to  Lieut.  Col.  E.  Goodwin, 
my  only  associate  field  officer,  for  the  coolness  and  gallantry  displayed 
by  him  during  the  action.  The  officers  commanding  the  companies 
were  conspicuous  for  coolness  and  courage. 

Dr.  I.  F.  Delony,  a private  of  Company  D,  was  detailed  to  act  as  as- 
sistant surgeon  during  the  action,  and  deserves  particular  mention,  he 
being  up  with  the  regiment  at  all  times,  caring  for  the  wounded  and 
encouraging.the  men.  I respectfully  ask  that  Dr.  Delony  be  discharged, 
that  I may  contract  with  him  as  assistant  surgeon. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

J.  W.  ROBERTSOK, 

Colonel  Thirty -fifth  Eegt.  Ala.  Vols .,  First  Brig .,  Second  Biv. 

Capt.  L.  D.  Sandidge, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Second  Division . 


Ko.  36. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Edward  Goodwin , Thirty-fifth  Alabama  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Thirty-fifth  Alabama  Yol.  Regt., 
Camp  on  Comite  River , La.,  August  7,  1862. 

Lieutenant  : Col.  J.  W.  Robertson,  who  had  so  gallantly  led  on  the 
Thirty-fifth  Alabama  in  two  separate  charges,  having  been  called  to  the 
command  of  the  brigade,  Col.  A.  P.  Thompson  having  been  severely 
wounded  while  cheering  on  his  men,  the  command  of  the  Thirty-fifth 
Alabama  was  handed  over  to  me. 

I held  the  position,  which  we. were  ordered  to  maintain  by  Col.  J.  W. 
Robertson,  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  encampments  for  more  than  an  hour, 
all  the  while  under  the  most  galling  fire  of  the  enemy.  I learned  that 
the  enemy,  both  infantry  and  cavalry,  were  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle 
on  my  left  as  if  preparing  to  charge  our  line  on  the  right.  I therefore 
directed  my  command  to  fire  upon  them,  when  after  three  well-directed 
volleys  the  enemy  fled  precipitately.  A charge  was  immediately  or- 
dered by  Major-General  Breckinridge.  We  promptly  replied  to  the 
command,  driving  the  enemy  from  their  encampments  under  cover  of 
their  gunboats,  when  the  order  was  given  to  fall  back  for  ammunition. 


Chap.  XXVH. l VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


97 


I desire  especially  to  call  attention  to  the  zeal  and  daring  of  the  men, 
both  officers  and  privates,  under  my  command,  the  last  charge  having 
been  made  without  a round  of  cartridges  on  hand. 

Very  respectfully, 

EDWARD  GOODWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Thirty -fifth  Alabama  Vol.  Begt. 

Lieut.  George  0.  Hubbard, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  First  Brigade , Second  Division. 


No.  37. 

Report  of  Capt.  J.  H.  Bowman , Third  Kentucky  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Third  Kentucky  Regiment, 

August  7,  1862. 

Lieutenant  : In  obedience  to  an  order  from  your  office  I return  the 
following  statement  of  the  action  of  the  Third  Kentucky  Regiment  in 
the  battle  of  Baton  Rouge  on  the  5th  : 

The  brigade  was  formed  in  an  open  field  (the  Third  Kentucky  Regi- 
ment on  the  right  flank)  and  ordered  to  march  forward.  The  third 
crossed  a lawn  into  a field,  received  a fire  from  the  enemy’s  skirmishers, 
when  we  frere  ordered  to  charge.  The  skirmishers  were  routed  and 
the  regiment  halted  in  a pea  patch  and  was  ordered  to  lie  down. 
Here  we  received  a heavy  fire,  killing  1 man  and  wounding  5 men. 

We  were  again  ordered  forward  and  to  charge,  which  order  was  exe- 
cuted in  gallant  style.  Passing  over  the  ground  occupied  by  the  enemy 
we  saw  the  bodies  of  a few  dead  of  our  enemies.  Another  charge 
brought  us  into  a road  near  the  enemy’s  camp,  through  which  we 
charged,  and  halted  and  remained  for  some  time,  and  seeing  that  one 
line  to  the  left  was  not  up  on  line  with  us$  I placed  Captain  Edwards 
in  command  temporarily  until  I went  to  the  rear  to  see  where  to  form 
the  line,  with  instructions  to  remain  in  position  until  I could  return. 
After  obtaining  the  necessary  information  I started  on  my  return  and 
met  the  regiment  falling  back  in  good  order.  When  I demanded  to 
know  why  the  regiment  was  doing  so,  I was  informed  it  was  by  order 
of  Brigadier-General  Clark.  I then  resumed  command  and  formed  on 
line  with  the  brigade.  Soon  Colonel  Thompson  ordered  me  to  fall  back 
to  a cut  in  the  road,  which  order  was  promptly  executed.  We  remained 
in  this  position  for  near  one  hour,  firing  near  30  rounds  of  ammu- 
nition at  the  enemy,  at  times  they  being  in  short  range  of  our  rifles. 
The  regiment  then  was  ordered  to  charge  forward  by  Colonel  Cross- 
land, which  order  was  promptly  executed,  and  again  we  passed  through 
their  encampment,  and  were  ordered  to  fall  back,  which  order  was  exe- 
cuted without  any  confusion  or  excitement. 

Without  a single  exception  the  officers  of  the  regiment  bore  them- 
selves gallantly,  and  too  much  cannot  be  said  in  praise  of  the  conduct 
ot  the  men.  Our  infirmary  corps  kept  close  on  our  heels  and  promptly 
removed  and  took  care  of  our  wounded. 

J.  H.  BOWMAN, 

Captain , Commanding  Third  Kentucky  Regiment. 

George  C.  Hubbard, 

. Lieutenant  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

7 R r — vol  xv 


98  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

No.  38. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col . M.  H.  Gofer,  Sixth  Kentucky  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Sixth  Kentucky  Volunteer  Regiment, 
Comite  River , La.,  August  7,  1862. 

Sir  : Pursuant  to  circular  order  just  received  I have  the  honor  tc 
submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by  the  Sixth  Regimen  1 
Kentucky  Volunteers  in  the  battle  of  the  5th  instant  and  the  orders  re 
ceived  from  the  commanding  general : 

This  regiment  occupied  the  extreme  left  of  the  First  brigade,  Second 
Division,  Col.  A.  P.  Thompson  commanding.  At  a little  before  daylighl 
the  troops  were  drawn  up  in  line,  this  regiment  in  the.  open  field  to  tin 
left,  resting  about  200  yards  to  the  right  of  a dense  forest,  in  which 
Colonel  Allen’s  brigade  was  formed. 

At  daylight  the  command  forward  was  given  by  General  Ruggles,  anc 
we  moved  forward  a short  distance  and  halted  by  the  order  of  the  sanu 
officer,  who  was  present  in  person.  We  were  very  soon  ordered  forwarc 
again,  when  we  moved,  encountering  rough  ground,  hedges,  fences 
ditches,  and  a luxuriant  growth  of  weeds  and  grass,  altogether  render 
ing  even  tolerable  alignment  and  steady  marching  impossible.  Passing 
on  over  this  character  of  ground  for  near  1 mile  the  enemy’s  skirmish 
ers  fired  on  us,  doing  no  injury,  but  falling  back  as  we  advanced  unti 
we  arrived  immediately  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  camp.  Here  he  eugagec 
us  warmly  from  a strong  position  in  a heavy  forest,  but  charging  for 
ward  we  drove  him  from  his  position,  and  my  regiment  passed  nearly 
through  the  camp,,  when  we  observed  a battery  on  out  left — say  10( 
yards — and  a little  in  front.  This  battery  was  nearly  silenced  by  ar 
oblique  fire  from  my  left  wing,  and  would  have  been  easily  taken  bu 
for  the  fact  that  the  right  of  the  brigade  was  retiring.  Seeing  no  cause 
for  the  retreat  on  account  of  auy  movement  or  fire  of  the  enemy  mj 
regiment  was  ordered  back,  presuming  the  brigade  was  ordered  to  re 
tire,  which  I since  learn  to  have  been  the  case.  This  retreat  enabled  tin 
enemy  to  regain  his  battery,  which  he  did  promptly,  and  opened  a furi 
ous  fire  with  grape,  canister,  and  shrapnel  on  our  flank.  From  the 
nearness  of  the  guns  he  did  no  serious  damage. 

We  continued  to  move  to  the  rear  some  200  yards,  where  we  reformec 
and  returned  to  a fence  in  front  of  a grave-yard,  where  we  halted  anc 
opened  fire  on  the  enemy,  who  had  reformed  and  reoccupied  his  origina 
position,  from  which  we  had  first  driven  him.  This  position  both  partie: 
held  with  great  stubbornness  and  an  almost  incessant  fire  was  kept  u] 
for  one  hour.  At  this  place  I sustained  nearly  all  the  loss  of  the  day 
My  position  was  very  much  exposed  during  this  time,  having  no  shelte 
but  a thin  picket  fence,  and  being  on  ground  elevated  some  eighteei 
inches  above  any  ground  in  front  between  my  line  and  the  eliemy.  Thi; 
position  was  maintained  until  an  order  to  charge  was  given  and  the  en 
emy  driven  under  his  gunboats,  when  the  regiment  returned  with  tin 
brigade  to  camp,  having  sustained  a loss  of  5 killed  and  23  wounded 
several  mortally. 

I cannot  allow  this  opportunity  to  pass  without  returning  my  thank; 
to  the  officers  and  men  of  the  regiment  for  the  gallant  manner  in  whicl 
they  bore  themselves  during  the  whole  engagement.  From  a want  o 
commissioned  officers  I caused  the  eight  companies  of  the  regiment  tc 
be  consolidated  into  four  companies,  placed  respectively  under  Capts 
Isaac  Smith,  Grandison  Utter  back,  and  Thomas  G.  Page,  and  Firs 
Lieut.  Frank  Harned. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


99 


It  is  proper  for  me  to  say  that  I was  not  in  the  last  charge,  having 
been  carried  off  the  field  too  much  exhausted  and  overcome  to  be  able 
to  go  forward. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  H.  COFER, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Sixth  Kentucky  Regiment . 
George  0.  Hubbard, 

First  Lieutenant  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  39. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  Crossland , Seventh  Kentucky  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Seventh  Kentucky  Regiment, 

August  7,  1862. 

Lieutenant  : In  obedience  to  an  order  from  your  office  I return  the 
following  statement  of  the  action  of  my  regiment  in  the  battle  at  Baton 
Rouge  on  the  5th  : 

The  brigade  was  formed  in  an  open  field  and  ordered  to  march  for- 
ward. My  regiment  crossed  a lawn  into  a field  and  received  a fire  from 
the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  when  we  were  ordered  to  charge.*  The  skir- 
mishers were  routed,  and  the  regiment  halted  in  a pea  patch  and  ordered 
to  lie  down.  Here  we  received  a heavy  fire,  wounding  3 men.  We 
were  again  ordered  forward  and  to  charge,  which  order  was  executed 
in  gallant  style.  Passing  over  the  ground  occupied  by  the  enemy  we 
saw  the  bodies  of  2 dead  and  3 wounded.  .Another  charge  brought  us 
into  a road  near  the  enemy’s  camps,  through  which  we  charged,  and 
were  halted  and  ordered  to  fall  back  by  Captain  Buckner,  of  Gen- 
eral Breckinridge’s  staff,  who  received  the  order  from  General  Clark, 
which  would  have  been  done  in  order  but  for  a regiment  in  advance  of 
our  right,  who  broke  in  wild  confusion  through  my  regiment,  who 
caught  the  panic,  and  retired  disorderly  for  a short  distance.  Aided 
however  by  the  coolness  of  my  company  officers  and  adjutant  I suc- 
ceeded promptly  in  rallying  and  reformiug  them  in  front  of  the  road. 

Colouel  Thompson  ordered  me  to  fall  back  to  the  road,  where  we 
opened  fire  on  the  enemy,  then  advancing  from  their  camps,  and  kept 
it  up  briskly  for  an  hour.  The  enemy  advanced  cautiously  from  their 
camps  under  cover  of  a grove  of  timber  with  the  evident  intention  of 
turning  our  left  flank.  I saw  two  lines  of  infantry  with  cavalry  in  rear. 
They  charged,  and  the  Thirty-fifth  Alabama  Regiment  opened  and  kept 
up  a hot  fire  from  our  left,  which  broke  the  enemy’s  lines,  and  they  re- 
tired in  confusion. 

Our  ammunition  was  nearly  exhausted,  the  wagons  not  having  come 
up.  General  Breckinridge  came  up  on  our  right,  and  I reported  the 
want  of  ammunition  to  him,  when  he  ordered  me  to  charge  the  camps 
with  my  regiment  and  the  Third  Kentucky.  We  went  through  the 
camps,  and  were  halted  by  Captain  Buckner  and  ordered  to  retire, 
which  was  done  in  good  order.  Captain  Buckner,  by  order  of  General 
Breckinridge,  ordered  my  regiment  to  remain  and  support  a section  of 
Sernmes’  battery,  which  was  posted  and  remained  to  protect  those  en- 
gaged in  recovery  of  the  wounded  and*  the  retreat  of  the  stragglers. 

Capt.  C.  Wess.  Jetton,  with  5 men,  was  sent  back  to  fire  the  camps.  A 
cloud  of  smoke  soon  told  that  his  mission  of  destruction  had  been  faith- 
fully executed.  He  reports  the  burning  of  large  quantities  of  commis  - 


100  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

sary  and  quartermaster’s  stores,  together  with  numerous  boxes  of  guns 
and  valuable  camp  equipage. 

With  a single  exception  the  officers  bore  themselves  gallantly,  and 
too  much  cannot  be  said  in  praise  of  the  conduct  of  the  men.  * 

Our  infirmary  corps  kept  close  on  our  heels  and  promptly  removed 
and  took  care  of  the  wounded. 

I beg  to  mention  the  gallant  conduct  of  Joseph  Rollins,  our  color- 

Ivah  -MA-p 

ED.  CROSSLANb, 

Colonel , Commanding  Seventh  Kentucky  Regiment. 

Lieut.  George  C.  Hubbard, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  40. 

Report  of  Col.  H.  W.  Allen.  Fourth  Louisiana  Infantry , commanding 

Second  Brigade. 

East  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  18,  1862. 

Sir  : Ou  the  morning  of  the  5th  instant,  in  pursuance  to  orders  of 
Brigadier-General  Ruggles,  1 formed  the  Second  Brigade,  Second  Di- 
vision, in  line  of  battle,  the  left  of  the  brigade  resting  on  Bernard’s 
fence,  in  the  rear  of  Magruder’s  Institute,  and  the  right  resting  upon 
the  First  Brigade.  On  the  right  was  placed  Colonel  Breaux,  of  the 
Thirtieth  Louisiana ; on  the  left  Lieutenant  Colonel  Hunter,  of  the 
Fourth  Louisiana,  and  in*the  center  was  the  battalion  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Boyd.  At  dawn  of  day  I received  orders  to  advance.  The 
brigade  was  put  in  motion  and  advanced  steadily  through  thick  woods, 
underbrush,  corn  fields,  and  picket  fences.  In  the  midst  of  the  forest 
we  encountered  a battery  supported  by  infantry.  We  halted  and  de- 
livered several  volleys  in  quick  succession:  the  enemy  fled  in  every, 
direction,  taking  off  his  artillery  with  him.  We  started  in  pursuit,  and 
after  considerable  desultory  firing  upon  the  retreating  foe  I discovered 
a battery  on  the  extreme  left  (said  to  be  Nims’),  supported  by  a large, 
amount  of  infantry.  It  was  evident  that  this  was  a flanking  move- 
ment and  required  my  immediate  attention.  I ordered  a movement  to 
be  made  to  the  left  and  advanced  in  the  direction  of  the  battery.  Ats 
the  command  charge  the  whole  brigade  laised  a shout  and  made  as 
gallant  a charge  as  was  ever  witnessed.  Here  I fell,  my  legs  terribly! 
shattered  with  canister-shot.  What  transpired  after  this  on  the  battle- 
field I do  not  know ; the  loss  of  blood  and  extreme  pain  had  rendered 
me  almost  senseless.  To  my  successor  in  command  I must  refer  you 
for  further  particulars  of  the  fight. 

The  officers  and  soldiers  of  this  brigade  fought  with  much  gallantry, 
and  with  few  exceptions  did  their  duty  nobly.  I have  been  informed 
that  upon  my  fall  the  brigade  could  not  be  rallied.  This  has  often 
happened  with  the  best  of  troops  and  the  bravest  veterans,  and  should 
not  attach  any  disgrace  to  the  soldiers.  No  one  charges  that  the  bri- 
gade retreated  from  the  enemy  or  even  retired  from  the  place  of  danger. 
The  enemy  had  been  whipped  and  had  fled  in  every  direction.  Captain 
Semmes’  battery  came  up,  fired  a few  rounds  upon  the  retreating  foe, 
and  all  was  over. 

To  my  adjutant,  B.  W,  Clark,  and  to  my  voluntary  aide,  Lieut.  H.  H. 


Chap.  XX YU.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS  , AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


101 


Walsli,  I am  much  indebted.  They  performed  their  duties  with  great 
gallantry,  coolness,  and  bravery.  Captain  Blount  was  assigned  to  duty 
as  inspector  of  the  brigade.  During  the  journey  from  Camp  Moore  lie 
lost  his  horse  and  had  been  relieved  from  duty  as  inspector  by  the  com 
manding  general.  He,  however,  secured  a horse,  and  in  the  thickest 
of  the  fight  reported  himself  for  duty  to  me.  I gave  him  from  time  to 
time  several  orders  to  execute,  which  he  did  in  a very  prompt  and  gal- 
lant manner.  1 see  he  is  reported  a prisoner  in  New  Orleans.  This  is 
a mystery  to  me.  Many  acts  of  individual  heroism  came  under  my  eye, 
and  I shall  ever  feel  proud  that  I had  the  honor  to  command  the  Sec- 
ond Brigade  in  the  battle  of  Baton  Rouge. 

Among  all  the  officers  and  men  who  distinguished  themselves  in  that 
battle  I shall  mention  only  one  by  name— that  is  Private  Seeders,  of  the 
West  Feliciana  Rifles,  Fourth  Louisiana  Regiment.  He  took  the  colors 
from  me  as  I fell  and  at  the  same  moment  received  a terrible  wound  in 
the  thigh. 

With  respect,  I am,  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  ALLEN, 

Colonel , Commanding  Second  Brigade , Second  Division. 

Captain  Buckner,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  41. 

Report  of  Col.  Gustavus  A.  Breaux , Thirtieth  Louisiana  Infantry , com- 
manding Second  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Camp  near  Comite  River , Xu.,  August  8, 1862. 

Sir  : Col.  H.  W.  Allen,  commander  of  the  Second  Brigade,  [Second] 
Division,  having  fallen  toward  the  close  of  the  action  of  August  5,  it 
becomes  my  duty  as  next  in  command  to  make  the  report,  as  far  as  my 
knowledge  enables  me  to  do  so.  My  attention  was  exclusively  directed 
to  the  action  of  the  Thirtieth  Louisiana  Regiment,  which  I commanded 
until  the  fall  of  the  colonel  commanding. 

At  4.30  a.  m.  our  line  was  formed  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  forces, 
in  a point  of  woods  adjoining  open  and  cultivated  fields ; the  ground 
was  broken.  We  advanced  in  conjunction  with  the  entire  line.  As 
we  were  about  passing  out  of  a little  field  we  met  the  enemy,  who  at 
once  opened  a brisk  fire  on  us,  which  we  returned  with  good  effect, 
since  in  a few  minutes  they  fled  before  us.  We  were  ordered  forward. 
As  the  extreme  right  of  the  brigade  was  advancing  on  a line  parallel 
to  a fence  behind  which  sharpshooters  lay  in  ambush,  harassing  our 
flank,  the  Thirtieth  Louisiana  was  constantly  called  on  to  dislodge 
them,  which  it  did  by  occasional  fires.  We  soon  discovered  that  the 
enemy  were  in  considerable  force  behind  a fence  awaiting  our  approach 
at  a poiut  from  which  they  fired  on  our  line  at  an  angle  of  about  45°. 
We  faced  the  Thirtieth  Regiment  to  them  .and  soon  silenced  them  by 
a well  kept-up  and  directed  fire.  Meanwhile  the  Fourth  Regiment  and 
Boyd’s  battalion  a/lvanced,  driving  also  all  obstacles  before  them. 

It  became  apparent  that  the  exact  location  of  a battery  of  the  enemy 
planted  in  our  front  was  not  known  ; the  fog  was  too  thick  to  enable  us 
to  see  well.  We,  however,  advanced,  having  changed  the  direction  of 
the  line  to  the  left.  The  fire  of  the  enemy  soon  revealed  its  exact  posi- 


102 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

tion,  and  to  the  charge  was  sounded.  The  entire  brigade  advanced  at 
a double-quick  and  in  good  order,  notwithstanding  the  galling  fire  : 
poured  into  our  lines.  The  gallant  Colonel  Allen,  whose  bravery  can- 
not be  too  much  extolled,  flew  at  the  head  of  the  men,  tiag  in  hand, 
on  to  the  battery,  and  was  soon  in  possession  of  its  guns,  surrounded 
by  his  men,  while  the  right  drove  the  infantry  away  by  a destructive 
fire.  Unfortunately  Colonel  Allen  was  wounded,  and  the  shock  was 
terrible  among  the  men  of  the  Fourth  Regiment,  whose  confidence 
seemed  to  repose  mainly  on  him,  and  they  withdrew  in  disorder,  bear- 
ing a wav  their  wounded  chief.  At  a short  distance  I rallied  them  par- 
tially on  the  line  formed  by  the  regiment  on  the  right  of  the  brigade,  j 
but  to  no  good,  since  enough  could  not  be  gathered  to  push  on  our  ad- 
vantage. . _ . . 

Some  time  previous  to  this  charge,  as  I infer  from  not  seeing  him  m i 
it,  Col.  S.  Boyd  had  been  wounded  and  removed  from  the  field.  His 
battalion,  stripped  of  his  influence,  did  not  rally  alter  the  first  charge 
on  this  battery.  Previous  to  this  the  troops  had  all  behaved  with  great 
gallantry. 

It  now  became  evident  that  fatigue  and  thirst  -were  overpowering 
our  men.  They  could  scarcely  answer  to  the  appeals  made  to  them  by 
courageous  men,  to  whose  names  justice  will  be  done  by  those  who 
witnessed  their  conduct  throughout,  and  which  I cannot  give,  as  I only 
saw  them  there  for  the  first  time. 

At  this  time  a second  Federal  battery  entered  the  field  and  was  op- 
portunely met  by  a section  of  Captain  Semmes’  Confederate  States 
battery.  It  affords  me  pleasure  to  bear  testimony  to  the  cool  and  effect- 
ive response  made  by  Captain  Semmes  and  Lieutenant  West,  whom 
the  Thirtieth  and  Fourth  Louisiana  Regiments  fell  back  to  support  m 
this  encounter.  After  a brief  and  quick  fire  of  the  opposing  batteries 
it  was  found  necessary  to  withdraw  it  and  the  infantry  left  with  it. 
From  this  time  there  was  no  more  fighting  on  the  left.  Coming  into 
command  of  the  brigade  at  the  close  of  the  battle  and  after  it  became 
disorganized,  I am*  unable  to  give  any  particulars  beyond  those  which 
refer  to  my  regiment. 

I cannot  close,  however,  without  bearing  witness  to  the  bravery  and 
gallantry  of  Colonel  Allen,  so  conspicuous  to  us  all. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GUS.  A.  BREAUX, 

Colonel , Commanding  Second  Brigade. 

Lieut.  L.  D.  Sandidge, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  S.  E.  Hunter , Fourth  Louisiana  Infantry. 

. Camp  near  Comite,  August  7, 1862. 
Sir  : At  9 p.  m.  of  the  4th  instant,  pursuant  to  orders,  I marched  the 
Fourth  Louisiana  Regiment,  left  in  front,  from  this  place  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Baton  Rouge.  , 

Just  before  daylight  I was  ordered  to  halt  in  an  open  field.  Only  a 
few  minutes  elapsed  before  firing  began  between  our  pickets  and  those 
of  the  enemy.  We  were  then  ordered  to  fall  back  behind  a hedge, 


Chav.  XXVII  ] VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA.  103 

where  we  remained  a very  short  while,  when  we  recrossed  the  hedge 
and  marched  by  the  left  flank  through  a narrow  strip  of  woods  to  a 
field  inclosed  by  a thick  and  impassable  hedge-fence.  Here  we  formed 
our  line  of  battle  and  were  joined  by  the  remainder  of  the  brigade. 
The  word  forward  was  given,  and  all  moved  off  in  gallant  style.  We 
had  not  proceeded  far  when  we  received  a desultory  fire  from  the  enemy, 
which  was  promptly  and  effectually  returned,  causing  the  enemy  to  re- 
tire. The  advance  continued  with  occasional  firing  until  we  reached  an 
open  field  on  our  left.  Here  the  enemy  was  discovered  in  considera- 
ble force  in  front  and  to  the  left.  We  were  marched  by  the  left  flank 
until  our  brigade  had  nearly  cleared  the  woods,  when  we  filed  to  the 
left.  The  Fourth  Louisiana  had  thus  filed,  expecting  to  meet  the  enemy 
at  right  angles  to  our  original  line,  when  a battery  opened  on  us  to  our 
right  and  in  front  of  the  original  line.  The  order  was  given  to  charge 
this  battery,  which  was  done  in  gallant  style,  the  brigade,  being  in  sort 
of  a wedge  shape,  gradually  assuming  a line  as  it  approached  the  bat- 
tery. A heavy  and  galling  fire  was  kept  up  on  us  by  the  enemy,  who 
were  concealed  in  the  rear  of  the  battery.  When  within  a few  paces 
of  the  guns  of  the  enemy  Colonel  Allen,  who  was  in  front,  bearing  the 
colors  of  one  battalion  of  the  brigade,  was  severely  wounded  and  fell 
from  his  horse.  Seeing  him  fall,  the  line  faltered  and  finally  gave  way, 
the  troops  on  the  right  and  center  giving  way  first.  The  brigade  re- 
tired in  confusion  across  the  field  through  which  it  had  so  gallantly 
advanced.  Here,  after  some  little  delay,  my  regiment  was  reformed 
and  remained  so  for  some  time.  No  order  to  advance  was  given.  A 
section  of  Semmes7  battery  came  up  and  prepared  for  action  on  our 
right  and  the  right  of  the  brigade.  We  were  ordered  to  form  in  its 
rear  to  support  it.  After  great  exertion  a line  was  partially  formed, 
but  at  this  point  the  enemy’s  artillery  opened  on  us  at  short  range. 
The  right  again  gave  way,  followed  rapidly  by  the  whole  line. „ The 
troops, , exhausted  by  fatigue  and  crying  for  water,  were  thrown  in  utter 
confusion,  and  all  attempts  to  rally  them  were  fruitless.  From  this  time 
no  more  fighting  was  done  by  our  brigade. 

I would  not  close  this  report  without  mentioning  among  the  names 
of  those  among  my  officers  who  were  conspicuous  for  gallantry  on  the 
field  Lieutenant  Corkern,  who  was  in  command  of  Company  B,  Lieu- 
tenant Jeter,  of  Company  F,  Sergt.  Maj.  B.  S.  Daniels,  and  Adjutant 
Clark.  I hear  of  others  who  distinguished  themselves,  but  only  these 
came  under  my  special  observation. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

S.  E.  HUNTER, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Fourth  Louisiana. 

Col.  G.  A.  Breaux. 


No.  43. 

Report  of  Col.  Gustavus  A.  Breaux , Thirtieth  Louisiana  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Thirtieth  Louisiana  (Sumter)  Regiment, 

In  Camp , near  Comite  River , La., , 1802. 

Sir  : For  the  action  of  my  regiment  in  general  during  the  battle  of 
August  5,  at  Baton  Rouge,  I beg  to  refer  you  to  the  report  circum- 
stances have  compelled  me  to  make  in  the  stead  of  Colonel  Allen. 


104 


ALA., 


MISS.,  LA., 


TEX.,  N. 


MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


For  troops  who  had  never  been  under  fire  before  the  Thirtieth  Lou- 
isiana acted  with  great  bravery  and  gallantry.  Conspicuous  among  the 
officers  who  distinguished  themselves  1 take  pleasure  in  mentioning 
Captain  Trepaguier,  who  lost  his  life  in  all  probability,  and  Lieutenant 
Dapremont,  of  Picket  Cadets,  who  was  also  wounded.  I have  the  sat- 
isfaction of  stating  that  men  and  officers  were  zealous  in  their  efforts 
to  beat  off  a superior  force.  The  regiment  throughout  rallied  and  pre- 
sented a good  line  whenever  called  on.  After  the  partial  disorganiza- 
tion of  the  brigade,  which  the  loss  of  its  commander  temporarily  pro- 
duced, and  when  it  became  evident  that  the  left  must  fall  back,  this 
regiment  did  so  in  an  orderly  manner  and  under  orders. 

Vefy  respectfully,  GUS.  A.  BREAUX, 

Colonel , Commanding  Thirtieth  Louisiana  Regiment. 

Lieut.  L.  D.  Sandidge, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


No.  44. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  T.  Shields , Thirtieth  Louisiana  Infantry. 

In  the  Field,  August  7,  1862. 

Sir  : For  the  information  of  General  Ruggles,  commanding  Second 
Division,  I beg  leave  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  operations  of 
the  detachment  under  my  command  in  the  battle  of  Baton  Rouge: 

In  obedience  to  orders  I proceeded  with  a section  of  Semmes  Con- 
fedrate  States  Artillery,  under  command  of  T.  K.  Fauntleroy ; two  com- 
panies of  infantry,  Company  E,  Sumter  (Thirtieth  Louisiana)  Regiment, 
Capt.  Roger  T.  Boyle;  BeaverCreek  Rifles,  Captain  Amacker,  and  one 
company  mounted  Partisan  Rangers,  Capt.  A.  C.  Bickham  the  whole 
numbering  about  150  rank  and  file — at  about  4.30  p.  m.  of  the  4th  in- 
stant, to  take  position  on  the  Clinton  plank  road,  there  to  engage  the 
enemy,  supposed  to  be  posted  with  a battery  of  artillery  at  the  junction 
of  that  and  the  Bayou  Sara  road.  . . 

After  a fatiguing  night’s  march  we  reaohed  the  desired  point  just  at 
dawn  of  day  of  the  5th  instant,  prepared  to  execute  orders  at  the  given 
signal— the  firing  of  small-arms  by  the  main  body  on  my  left.  Exactly 
at  4.30  a.  m.,  the  sound  of  musketry  being  distinctly  audible,  I ordered 
the  advance  at  double-quick  of  the  entire  command,  having  previously 
dismounted  the  Rangers  with  a view  to  greater  efficiency.  The  enemy  s 
picket  fled  precipitately  on  our  approach,  leaving  accouterments  and 
equipments  hanging  to  the  posts  and  walls  of  the  house  where  they  wei  o 
stationed  and  on  the  trees  immediately  around  it,  and  sought  shelter  in 
the  wood  to  the  right  of  the  Bayou  Sara  road,  gaining  which  they  fired 
one  feeble  volley,  but.  immediately  retreated  in  confusion  in  the  direction 
of  the  Arsenal.  The  infantry  was  now  posted  in  a corn  field  on  the  right 
of  a street  leading  to  a Federal  camp,  with  instructions  to  advance 
slowly  in  support  of  the  artillery,  which  was  placed  at  the  same  time  in 
raking  position  at  the  head  of  the  same  street.  The  enemy  here  ap- 
X>eared  in  force,  two  regiments  of  infantry  disputing  our  farther  advance. 
The  artillery  opening  obliquely  on  the  camp  enabled  us,  by  its  well-di- 
rected fire,  to  advance  within  250  feet  of  the  camp  of  the  Fourteenth 
Maine  Regiment  (judged  to  be  so  by  papers,  &c.,  found  subsequently 


Chai-.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS.,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA.  105 

in  the  tents).  Again  opening  a rapid  fire  of  artillery  in  the  direction  of 
this  camp  we  maintained  our  position  until  the  infantry  support  before 
the  overwhelming  numbers  of  the  enemy  were  compelled  to  fall  back, 
and  some  four  horses  of  the  section  becoming  unmanageable  and  un- 
serviceable from  wounds  received,  I conseuted  to  the  withdrawal  of 
the  section  to  the  junction  of  the  roads  above-mentioned,  there  to  await 
re  enforcements  from  the  main  body,  then  seen  to  be  advancing  in  our 
direction.  In  this  new  position  we  were  unfortunately  taken  for  the 
enemy  and  fired  upon,  but  luckily  without  casualty  of  any  kind.  Dis- 
engaging the  disabled  horses  and  supplying  their  places  with  others 
the  section  was  again  placed  in  position,  where  it  was  kept  until  the, 
termination  of  the  engagement.  The  infantry  force  of  my  command 
was  attached  by  order  to  the  Twenty-second  Mississippi  Regiment  on 
the  arrival  of  that  regiment  on  the  field,  leaving  me  with  the  artillery, 
where  I remained  until  retired  by  one  of  the  staff  of  Major-General 
Breckinridge  upon  the  withdrawal  of  the  army. 

I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  conduct  of  the  men  of  the  command, 
artillery  and  infantry,  and  beg  to  commend  to  favorable  notice  the  offi- 
cers of  Company  E,  Sumter  "Regiment  (Thirtieth  Louisiana),  Captain 
Boyle,  and  Lieuts.  H.  C.  Wright,  D.  C.  Byerly,  and  W.  B.  Chippendale, 
for  gallant  behavior.  To  Lieut.  T*  K.  Fauntleroy,  commanding  section 
of  artillery,  I am  indebted  for  valuable  services,  his  conduct  throughout 
being  marked  with  coolness  and  decision  and  worthy  the  highest  praise. 
His  artillery,  as  efficient  as  it  was,  would  have  been  more  so  but  for  the 
inferiority  of  the  friction  primers,  nine  out  of  ten  of  which  proving  worth- 
less, rendering  the  working  of  the  pieces  at  times  difficult  and  unsat- 
isfactory. 

Of  the  casualties  I have  to  mention  the  following:  In  the  Beaver 
Creek*  Rifles,  Lieutenant  Amacker,  wounded  in  the  shoulder  severely ; 
Sergeant  Wilson,  hand,  slightly  ; Private  J.  L.  Perryman,  back,  danger- 
ously. In  Fauntleroy’s  section  artillery.  Sergeant  Bellam,  severely 
wounded,  and  4 horses  killed. 

In  conclusion,  I have  to  state  that  my  object  was  to  obey  to  the  letter 
the  instructions  received,  and  every  effort  was  made  on  my  part  to  that 
end,  and  but  for  the  inadequacy  of  my  force  I believe  more  important 
results  could  have  been  obtained.  I hope  what  we  have  been  able  t© 
accomplish  may  meet  the  approval  of  the  general  commanding. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

THUS.  SHIELDS, 

Lieut.  Col.  Sumter  [Thirtieth  La.)  Regt .,  Comdg.  Detachment. 

Lieut.  L.  D.  Sandidge,  C.  S.  A., 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


No.  45. 

Report  of  Capt.  Thomas  Bynum , Boyd’s  Battalion , Stewart’s  Legion. 

Hdqrs.  Battalion  Infantry  Stewart’s  Legion, 
Comite  Bridge , La.,  August  8,  1862. 
Sir:  I herewith  submit  report  of  participation  of  this  battalion,  under 
command  of  Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  Boyd,  in  the  action  of  the  5th.  instant: 

Its  force  consisted  of  the  following:  One  field,  3 staff,  9 company 
officers,  and  190  enlisted  men.  They  composed  the  center  of  Colonel 


106  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S MISS  , LA.,  TEX.,  MEX.  [Chap.  XXY1L 

Allen’s  brigade,  the  Thirtieth  Louisiana  Regiment  (Colonel  Breaux),  on 
the  right,  and  the  Fourth  Louisiana  Regiment  (Lieutenant-Colonel  Hun- 
ter) on  the  left.  The  line  of  battle  was  formed  in  the  woods  back  and 
leftward  of  the  residence  of  Capt.  E.  W.  Robinson,  and  about  three- 
fourths  of  a mile  to  the  rear  of  the  central  portion  of  Baton  Rouge.  As 
soon  as  the  line  was  formed  it  was  put  in  forward  motion,  feeling  its  way 
slowly  through  tall  woods  in  the  morning’s  haze  for  the  enemy’s  first 
line  of  force.  Marching  straight  to  the  front  through  briers,  hedges, 
and  over  picket  fences,  the  brigade  was  halted  in  the  face  of  a line  of 
the  foe  drawn  up  to  receive  us,  and  after  giving  them  two  well-directed 
volleys  charged  upon  them,  when  they  fled.  The  brigade,  having 
paused  a few  moments,  resumed  its  line  as  well  as  the  nature  of  the 
undergrowth  would  permit,  and  marched  some  200  or  300  yards  forward 
in  a left-oblique  direction.  Receiving  reports  of  a battery  of  the  enemy 
supported  by  a regiment  right  in  our  front,  about  150  yards  distant,  our 
commander,  after  calling  for  three  cheers  for  the  Confederacy,  ordered 
us  to  charge.  Alarmed  at  our  shouts  and  dash  the  enemy  broke,  taking 
off  their  battery,  but  leaving  heaps  of  slain  and  wounded.  It  was  here 
that  Captain  Chinn  fell  from  a wound  in  the  leg  while  gallantly  respond- 
ing at  the  head  of  his  company  to  Colonel  Allen’s  orders. 

Resuming  our  course,  we  soon  found  ourselves  upon  the  edge  of  an 
old  field,  on  the  opposite  side  of  which  is  the  Benton  Ferry  road  and 
the  inclosures  of  the  race-track.  Square  in  our  front  was  posted  along 
the  road-side  a number  of  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  qr  sharpshooters, 
and  to  their  left  a battery  was  planted  at  the  mouth  of  a street  in  front 
of  the  outskirts  of  the  corporation  of  Baton  Rouge.  A regiment  (the 
Sixth  Michigan)  supported  the  battery,  and  its  men  were  placed  behind 
the  fences,  outhouses,  and  houses  in  the  neighborhood  of  Hockney’s. 
Colonel  Allen,  taking  the  colors  of  this  command  in  this  hand,  rapidly 
drew  up  his  command  in  line,  who  at  his  call  and  example  rushed, 
under  a galling  fire  of  grape,  canister,  and  Minie,  across  the  field. 
There  was  not  a shrub  even  as  a screen  on  it,  and  over  the  300  yards 
of  that  open  space  the  foe  sent  many  a missile  of  death  and  shaft  of 
anguish  within  100  yards  of  the  cannon. 

Lieutenant  Causey,  of  Buffington’s  company  and  commanding  it,  fell, 
shot  through  the  brain.  No  victim  in  this  great  struggle  against  fanat- 
icism and  the  principles  of  rapine  aud  spoliation  leaves  to  his  family  and 
friends  a brighter  memory  for  chivalrous  courage  and  unsullied  patriot- 
ism. A few  yards  farther  on  Lieutenant-Colonel  Boyd  fell,  shot  through 
the  arm,  and  was  borne  off  the  field.  In  a moment  or  so  after  the  enemy 
fled,  leaving  two  cannon  and  a lieutenant  and  8 or  10  privates  prisoners 
in  our  hands.  In  passing  beyond  the  fence  inclosing  Turner’s  house  and 
getting  partially  into  the  street  the  gallant  leader  fell  helpless  from  his 
horse  into  the  arms  of  his  trusty  soldiers  and  was  by  them  carried  from 
the  field.  His  fall  was  peculiarly  unfortunate.  It  completely  paralyzed 
his  old  regiment  (the  Fourth),  at  whose  head  he  was,  even  in  that  moment 
of  victory.  Notwithstanding  his  repeated  shouts  to  go  forward,  it.became 
confused  and  huddled  up,  lost  in  a maze  of  stolidity  and  dismay. 

At  this  critical  moment  the  undersigned  first  became  apprised  by 
Colonel  Breaux,  now  commanding  the  brigade,  that  it  was  his  duty 
to  assume  command  of  this  battalion.  With  serious  misgivings  in  his 
capacity  in  this  emergency  and  sorrowful  at  the  necessity  he  aimed  to 
do  his  best  in  seconding  the  gallant,  fearless,  and  conspicuous  example 
of  the  commanding  officer  to  save  his  troops  from  a panic  and  to  rally 
them  into  line.  His  efforts  were  surpassed  by  the  daring  courage  of 
Lieutenant  Barrow,  commanding  Captain  Chinn’s  company ; by  the 


Chap.  XXVII.]  VICKSBURG,  MISS-,  AND  BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


107 


energy  of  Lieutenant  Burnett,  of  Captain  Bynum’s  company,  and  by 
the  cool  and  noble  example  of  Lieutenant  Brown,  of  same  company. 
A partial  success  only  rewarded  their  exertions — we  were  saved  a 
panic;  but  the  annoying  fire  from  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  left  them 
no  other  alternative  but  to  fall  back  across  the  field  to  the  shelter  of 
the  woods.  Here  another  effort  was  made  to  rally  the  brigade  into 
line,  now  massed  confusedly.  The  commanding  officer  employed  every 
incentive  and  expedient  that  courage  could  suggest,  but  with  haggard 
restflts.  The  men  made  no  response  to  his  appeals.  They  were  not 
cowed  or  panic-stricken.  They  were  simply  exhausted — hopelessly  ex- 
hausted— and  seemed  to  be  staggeringunder  the  half  of  that  last  ounce 
which  breaks  the  camel’s  back  of  endurance. 

Having  been  under  arms  for  more  than  sixteen  hours;  having  neither 
supper,  breakfast,  nor  sleep;  having  marched  over  12  miles,  and  hav- 
ing gone  through  four  hours’  hard  fighting,  it  is  not  a matter  of  sur- 
prise or  of  blame  that  they  paid  but  little  heed  to  the  rallying  cries  of 
their  leaders.  Their  conduct  was,  however,  only  in  accordance  with  the 
example  of  troops  who  had  been  under  fire  and  were  reputed  veterans. 

Many  vicissitudes  of  this  battle  must  remain  unnoticed.  The  under- 
signed was  not  called  to  command  till  a late  hour,  and  many  events 
doubtless  noted  by  the  experienced  eye  of  Colonel  Boyd  must  be  un- 
chronicled because  of  his  absence.  While  Colonel  Boyd  was  in  com- 
mand his  promptitude  and  courage  ably  sustained  the  policy  of  Colonel 
Allen.  His  adjutant,  Lieutenant  Breeden,  was  conspicuous  for  daring 
devotion  to  duty  throughout  the  trials  of  the  day.  The  men  generally 
behaved  with  coolness  and  courage. 

Upon  returning  to  headquarters,  near  Ward’s  Creek  Bridge,  the  un- 
dersigned was  relieved  of  his  command  by  Lieutenant  Barrow.* 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

TOM.  BYNUM, 

Captain , Comdg  Battalion  Infantry , Stewards  Legion. 

Captain  Morrison, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Second  Brigade. 


No.  46. 

Report  of  Capt.  0.  J.  Semmes , commanding  Battery. 

In  Camp  near  Baton  Rouge,  La., 

August  8,  1862. 

Sir  : I was  ordered  to  take  part  in  the  action  of  the  5th  instant,  which 
I did.  My  men  behaved  well.  The  officers — Lieuts.  J.  T.  M.  Barnes 
and  J.  A.  A.  West — acted  with  great  coolness  and  bravery,  at  times  firing 
their  pieces  personally.  Lieut.  T.  K.  Fauntleroy  was  detached  with  a 
section,  and  I did  not  see  him  during  the  action. 

The  casualties  were  5 men  killed,  5 severely  wounded,  5 slightly, 
9 horses  killed,  2 badly  wounded,  2 missing,  1 caisson  exploded  by  an 
enemy’s  shell,  the  rear  carriage  of  another  rendered  worthless  and  left 
on  the  field,  and  4 sets  of  harness  lost. 

I fired  200  rounds  of  smooth-bore  6-pounder  ammunition  and  120 
rounds  of  6-pounder  rifled. 


Nominal  fist  of  casualties  omitted  is  embodied  in  Report  No.  25,  p.  82. 


108 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH 


Dr.  Lewis,  assistant  surgeon,  0.  S.  Army,  rendered  efficient  service 
to  my  wounded  on  the  field. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully, 

O.  J.  SEMMES, 

Captain  Confederate  States  Light  Battery . 


P.  S. — At  4.30  p.  m.  of  the  5th  instant  I took  position  between 
Colonels  Allen’s  and  Thompson’s  brigades,  filling  a vacancy  of  some  80 
yards  j moved  forward  with  the  infantry  line  half  a mile  and  opened  fire 
on  an  enemy’s  battery,  driving  them  back ; moved  to  the  right  of  the 
Second  Division,  General  Buggies  commanding,  when  1 opened  on  a 
battery  with  effect  at  about  250  yards ; then  occupied  my  first  position, 
opening  on  a column  of  infantry,  doing  much  execution.  Was  ordered 
to  the  support  of  Colonel  Allen’s  brigade ; took  up  position  on  its 
right  and  silenced  a battery.  This  was  my  last  firing;  after  which  re- 
joined main  forces. 


JUNE  14-15,  1862.— Expedition  from  Pensacola  to  Milton,  Fla. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  Lewis  G.  Arnold,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Western  District, 
Department  of  the  South. 

No.  2— Lieut.  Col.  Michael  Cassidy,  Sixth  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  3.— Capt.  Charles  E.  Heuberer,  Sixth  New  York  Infantry. 

Bo.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Lewis  G.  Arnold , U.  S.  Army , commanding  Western 
District , Department  of  the  South. 

Hdqrs.  Western  District,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Pensacola , Fla .,  June  16,  1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  a report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Michael 
Cassidy,  Sixth  Begiment  Bew  York  Volunteers,  relative  to  an  expedi- 
tion to  Milton,  Ela.,  under  his  command,  directed  by  Special  Orders,  Bo. 
23,  of  June  14,  from  these  headquarters. 

It  had  been  reported  to  me  by  some  secret  agents  engaged  in  my 
service  that  a cavalry  force  of  100  men  were  in  the  town  of  Milton,  some 
30  miles  from  here,  arresting  some  good  Union  men  and  impressing 
others  into  the  rebel  service.  I ordered  this  command,  under  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Cassidy,  to  Milton,  for  the  purpose  of  capturing  this  rebel 
force  and  to  release  all  good  Union  men  impressed  on  account  of  their 
opinions  or  loyalty  to  the  United  States.  Unfortunately  for  Lieutenant-. 
Colonel  Cassidy,  who  executed  his  orders  to  my  satisfaction,  and  the 
troops  under  his  command,  he  found  but  a small  portion  of  the  reported  * 
and  expected  rebel  cavalry  in  Milton,  they  having  been  divided  into 
several  predatory  bands  for  the  purpose  of  arresting  deserters  from  the 
rebel  service  and  loyal  Union  citizens,  and  driving  off  cattle  to  feed 
the  rebel  force  at  Bluff  Springs  and  Pollard,  38  and  48  miles  from 
here,  and,  according  to  the  best  information  I can  obtain  without  having 
any  cavalry  under  my  command,  numbering  from  3,000  to  5,000  men,  a 
portion  of  them  badly  armed. 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Cassidy  and  the  officers  and  soldiers  under  his 


Chap.  XXYII.J 


EXPEDITION  TO  MILTON,  FLA. 


109 


command  are  deserving  of  approbation  for  their  good  conduct  displayed. 
He  doubtless  would  have  much  greater  and  moye  favorable  results  to 
report  if  he  had  been  opposed  by  the  anticipated  numbers  and  had  met 
with  the  resistance ‘expected  when  he  received  his  orders. 

I desire  to  express  my  thanks  and  acknowledgments  to  Lieutenant- 
Commander  Madigan,  U.  S.  N.,  commanding  sloop-of-war  Vincennes, 
lying  oif  Pensacola,  co-operating  with  me  in  the  defense  of  the  city, 
for  his  ready  and  valuable  assistance  in  furnishing  for  the  expedition  3 
launches  and  3 guns,  1 officer  and  40  sailors,  and  1 officer  and  17  marines. 

I will  take  this  occasion  to  repeat  what  I have  expressed  in  former 
communications,  that  a regiment  of  cavalry  is  very  necessary  here  to 
give  protection  to  loyal  citizens,  for  scouts,  and  for  the  purpose  of 
making  military  reconnaissances,  and  to  rid  the  surrounding  country  of 
the  rebel  cavalry  that  are  constantly  hovering  about. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  G.  ABNOLD, 

Brigadier- General,  TJ.  S.  Volunteers , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  L® renzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  TJ.  S.  Army , Washington , I).  C. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Michael  Cassidy , Sixth  New  Yorh  Infantry. 

Camp  Jackson, 
Pensacola , Fla.,  June  16,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  compliance  with  Spe- 
cial Orders,  No.  23,  of  the  14th  instant,  from  these  headquarters,  and 
also  special  instructions  which  I received  from  you  verbally,  I proceeded 
with  four  companies  of  the  Sixth  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers,  com- 
prising a force  of  220  officers  and  men,  which  had  been  detailed  by 
Colonel  Wilson,  down  to  the  wharf,  and  embarked  on  board  the  steamer 
General  Meigs. 

We  left  the  wharf  at  7.30  p.  m.  on  the  14th  instant,  and  arrived  at 
Bagdad  on  the  15th  instant  at  1 a.  m.  or  little  after.  In  consequence 
of  the  steamer  having  run  aground  I directed  the  troops  to  go  in  the 
scows  which  we  brought  with  us,  and  the  same  to  be  towed  ashore  by 
the  boats  of  the  Vincennes,  all  of  which  was  executed  in  a quiet  and 
orderly  manner.  We  started  on  our  march  from  Bagdad  in  the  follow- 
ing order:  Company  C,  Captain  Hazeltine  commanding ; Company  E, 
Lieutenant  Eoddy  commanding ; Company  B,  Lieutenant  Denslow  com- 
manding, and  Company  H.  Captain  Heuberer  commanding.  I detailed 
Lieutenant  Hanham  and  12  men  to  proceed  200  or  300  yards  in  advance 
as  skirmishers  to  guard  against  surprise,  and  they  performed  their  duty 
well. 

We  arrived  at  Milton  about  2 a.  m.  My  plan  was,  Companies  C and 
E and  myself  to  take  a street  which  would  lead  us  directly  in  front  of 
the  Eagle  Hotel,  the  house  where  the  rebels  were $ Company  B to  take  a 
street  which  would  bring  them  to  the  right  of  the  hotel,  and  Company  H, 
a street  which  would  bring  them  to  the  left,  and  all  arrived  at  the  proper 
places  in  proper  time  with  the  exception  of  Comjiany  H.  How  they  made 
the  mistake  I cannot  tell,  nor  did  I know  that  a mistake  had  been  made 
until  after  the  rebels  liad  fled,  taking  the  very  road  where  Company  H 


110 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

should  have  been.  Just  before  we  reached  the  hotel  I was  satisfied  that 
they  had  become  alarmed.  I then  ordered  the  two  companies  with  me 
to  take  the  double-quick,  and  on  arriving  in  front  of  the  hotel  I com- 
manded the  rebels  to  surrender.  They  immediately  fired  upon  us  and 
we  fired  two  or  three  rounds  in  return,  when  they  fled,  some  going  through 
the  house  and  some  running  up  the  street  where  I supposed  Company 
n was.  I directed  the*  firing  to  cease  and  immediately  after  took  1 
prisoner.  I then  directed  squads  to  go  in  the  hotel  and  stables  to  ascer- 
tain if  any  rebels  had  hid  themselves,  but  only  two  were  found  by  Lieu- 
tenant Hanham,  who  delivered  them  to  me;  then  squads  brought  out 
the  horses,  saddles,  &c.  I was  then  told  that  some  Union  prisoners  were 
in  the  jail,  and  1 detailed  Lieutenant  Denslow,  with  his  company,  to  go 
and  liberate  them.  They  found  the  building  very  strong,  and  were  un- 
able to  gain  admittance  until  Lieutenant  Green  and  a detachment  of 
sailors  from  the  Vincennes  went  to  their  assistance  with  axes  and  sledge- 
hammers, who  after  working  at  the  doors  for  nearly  an  hour  succeeded 
in  getting  in.  They  found,  however,  only  two  negroes,  whom  we  brought 
with  us.  Three  citizens  were  brought  to  me  and  I deemed  it  my  duty 
to  take  them  with  us.  I offered  to  take  their  families,  but  they  declined. 

To  Mr.  Wolfe,  the  guide,  I attribute  a good  share  of  the  success  of 

our  expedition.  „ , ^ A _»  • 

To  Major  Babcock  and  Captain  Dwight,  of  the  Seventy-fifth  Regi- 
ment New  York  Volunteers,  I return  my  thanks  for  the  advice  and  as- 
sistance they  rendered.  __  _ 

Surgeon  Pease,  of  the  Sixth  Regiment  New  Yrork  Volunteers,  also  ren- 
dered great  assistance  and  was  very  active. 

Only  one  man  on  our  side  was  wounded — Patrick  Doyle,  of  Company 
C;  his  wound  is  slight.  ' . A ' 

Lieutenant  Kaufman,  of  the  Sixth  Regiment,  acted  as  adjutant  ior 
the  battalion  and  deserves  thanks. 

To  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Vincennes  I return  my  thanks,  and 
will  say  that  they  did  all  they  could  to  render  the  expedition  successful. 
Their  not  partaking  in  the  attack  was  owing  to  our  troops  being  obliged 
to  hurry  matters  alter  finding  that  we  were  discovered. 

In  relation  to  the  force  of  the  rebels  I have  no  means  of  knowing  cor- 
rectly, but  I think  it  fell  short  of  what  we  expected  to  find. 

I turned,  in  pursuance  with  your  orders,  in  to  Capt.  [A.  N.]  Ship- 
ley,  quartermaster,  9 horses,  14  saddles,  7 bridles,  and  2 saddles  incom- 
plete ; also  to  Major  Babcock,  provost-marshal,  3 soldiers  of  the  rebel 
cavalry,  3 citizens  of  Milton,  and  2 negroes. 

I should  state  that  we  left  Milton  about  sunrise  and  arrived  at  Pensa- 
cola at  11  a.  m.  on  the  15th  instant. 

I have  no  knowledge  of . the  amount  of  arms,  &c.,  taken  or  found  by 
our  troops.  If  they  have  any  they  have  kept  them  in  their  possession. 

Of  the  companies  that  formed  my  command  I will  say  that  they  were 
exceedingly  quiet  and  orderly,  and  I think  that  we  all  did  our  duty,  and 
hope  that  our  actions  will  meet  your  approbation. 

I am.  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ MICHAEL  CASSIDY, 

Lieut.  Col.  Sixth  Regt.  N.  Y.  Vols.,  Comdg.  Expedition. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

Comdg.  West.  List .,  Department  of  the  South , Pensacola , Jt  la. 


Chap.  XXVH.]  SKIRMISH  AT  PASS  MANCHAC,  LA.  Ill 

m.  3. 

Report  of  Gapt.  Charles  E.  H euberer,  Sixth  New  York  Infantry. 

Gamp  Jackson, 
Pensacola,  Fla .,  June  18,  1862. 

Sir  : I see  by  your  official  report  that  I might  be  censured  for  not 
carrying  out  your  instructions.  The  cause  of  my  not  being  in  the  spot 
directed  for  me  was  on  account  of  the  guide  becoming  very  much 
alarmed  and  excited,  so  that  he  could  not  inform  me  definitely  where  I 
was  to  remain.  I then  heard  firing  in  your  direction,  and  thinking 
you  had  been  attacked  by  a large  force  (as  the  guide  had  previously 
informed  me  that  he  thought  there  was  nearly  500  cavalry  there)  I 
hastened  up  to  your  assistance.  In  the  mean  time  I was  fired  upon 
from  a fence,  which  was  immediately  returned  by  me.  When  I came 
up  to  you  I was  ordered  to  left  wheel  into  position,  which  I did,  and 
there  remained  for  further  orders. 

Hoping  this  explanation  may  prove  perfectly  satisfactory,  I am,  sir, 
very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHAELES  E.  HEHBEEEE, 
Captain f Sixth  New  York  Yols.,  Comdg.  Company  H. 

Lieut.  Col.  M.  Cassidy,  Sixth  N.  Y.  Vols .,  Camp  Jackson , Fla. 


JUNTE  17,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Pass  Manchac,  La. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler , TJ.  S.  Army , commanding  the 
Department  of  the  Gulf. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf," 

New  Orleans , La.,  June  19,  1862. 

Sir  : Finding  that  the  rebels  were  making  some  demonstrations  to 
hold  Manchac  Pass,  I sent  Lieutenant-Colonel  Kimball,  with  a portion 
of  the  Twelfth  Maine  Volunteers  and  a section  of  Manning’s  battery,  in 
aid  of  the  New  London  gunboat,  to  take  and  destroy  the  enemy’s  work 
there. 

The  affair  was  very  gallantly  done,  the  enemy  firing  a few  shots  from 
their  upper  battery  of  two  guns,  32-pounders ; ran  from  a charge  upon 
their  lower  battery  of  four  guns,  32-pounders,  If  miles  below,  without 
firing  a shot,  leaving  their  guns  loaded.  tThe  battery  was  taken  by  a 
charge.  The  enemy  escaped  in  boats  they  had  prepared  for  that  pur- 
pose on  the  other  side  of  the  draw-bridge,  which  they  drew  up,  burn- 
ing bridge  behind  them.  We  took  all  their  camp  equipage,  garrison 
stores,  and  a stand  of  colors,  destroyed  the  bridge  and  works,  demolish- 
ing gun§  and  carriages. 

The  party  then  proceeded  to  Mandeville  and  Madison ville,  dispersed 
a body  of  cavalry  there,  and  took  prisoner  Colonel  Putnam,  with  $5,000 
recruiting  funds  upon  his  person.  Not  having  any  cavalry,  rt  was  im- 
possible to  pursue  the  runaways. 

In  consideration  of  the  gallant  conduct  of  the  men  I have  allowed 
the  regiment  to  retain  the  stand  of  colors  taken. 

We  had  no  casualties. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  verv  truly,  yours, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEE, 
Major- General , Commanding. 

Hon,  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


112 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


JUNE  22,  1862.— Expedition  from  Ship  Island  to  Pass  Christian,  Miss. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Real  Bow , TJ.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters, 

Ship  Island , June  24,  1862. 

General  : Hearing  that  threats  of  hanging  or  otherwise  injuring 
Union  men,  or  those  supposed  to  be  such,  were  frequent  at  Pass  Chris- 
tian, I sent  an  expedition  there  on  the  22d,  in  the  steamer  Creole,  with 
instructions  to  seize  the  recorder,  Mr.  Hearn,  Mr.  Seal,  and  the  Bev.  Mr. 
Sill,  if  they  could  be  found,  and  then  enter  Bay  Saint  Louis,  and  capture 
every  rebel  vessel  that  might  be  found  there.  Those  persons  whom  I 
was  most  desirous  of  securing  were  absent,  but  the  son-in-law  of  the 
recorder  and  another  were  arrested  and  brought  away.  They  both 
have  been  active  in  the  rebellion,  one  of  them  an  officer  in  the  rebel 
army.  I have  sent  them  to  Fort  Pike  for  safe-keeping  as  hostages. 
Ho  vessels  were  found  except  one,  that  had  a pass  from  headquarters  at 
Hew  Orleans.  Several  persons,  whites,  were  brought  away  from  the 
bay,  who  wished  to  escape  persecution.  Under  the  lead  of  an  Indian 
guide  a partv  of  20  was  sent  10  miles  through  the  woods  to  the  house 
of  a captain  of  rebel  rangers,  in  the  expectation  of  finding  him  at  home. 
In  this  the  partv  was  disappointed,  but  a considerable  quantity  of  corn, 
flour,  and  hospital  stores  for  the  rebel  army  was  found,  which  was  de- 
stroyed, as  the  party  had  no  means  of  bringing  it  away.  The  same 
guide  pointed  out  a herd  of  cattle,  part  of  which  belonged  to  a captain 
absent  in  the  rebel  army.  The  guide  selected  all  those  with  his  mark 
upon  them,  20  in  number,  which  were  taken  on  board  the  steamer  and 
brought  away.  While  the  steamer  was  in  Jordan  Biver,  toward  even- 
ing she  was  fired  upon  by  a party  of  rebels  in  the  woods.  The  balls 
passed  through  the  saloon  in  many  places,  even  touching  the  clothes 
of  some  of  the  party,  but  no  one  was  hurt.  The  firing  was  promptly 
returned,  with  what  effect  is  not  known,  except  that  the  only  mounted 
man  of  the  party  was  seen  to  fall.  • 

I very  much  wish  that  a small  light-draught  steamer  may  be  attached 
to  this  post,  as  we  would  then  be  enabled  to  make  frequent  excursions 
up  and  down  the  rebel  coast,  which  now  we  cannot  do. 

V ery  respectfully  % . 

. HEAL  DOW, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  New  Orleans. 


JUNE  29,  1862.-— Capture  of  steamer  Ann  under  the  guns  of  Fort  Mor- 
gan, Ala. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  W.  L.  Ro  well , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Brigade , and 
resulting  correspondence. 


Brigade  Headquarters, 
Fort  Morgan , Ala .,  July  1,  1862. 

Captain:  1 have  respectfully  to  submit  the  following  report  in  detail 
upon  the  loss  of  the  British  steamer  Ann,  with  a portion  of  her  cargo, 
which  had  arrived  under  the  guns  of  this  fortification,  in  attempting  to 
run  the  blockade  of  this  harbor; 


CHAP.  XXVII.] 


CAPTURE  OF  STEAMER  ANN. 


113 


About  11.30*  p.  in.  on  the  29th  ultimo  I received  the  report  that  a 
vessel  was  approaching  from  the  eastward,  showing  a certain  signal.  I 
immediately  repaired  to  the  lookout  station,  and  upon  being  assured 
myself  of  the  signal,  directed  a given  reply.  Shortly  after  a boat 
approached  the  beach,  and  I duly  received  the  report  that  the  British 
steamer  Ann,  with  a valuable  cargo,  was  lying  between  the  banks  and 
the  beach,  about  three-fourths  of  a mile  from  the  fort,  and  desired  pro- 
tection and  assistance  in  getting  into  the  harbor.  Sixteen  gun  detach- 
ments, which  are  regularly  detailed  every  night  for  service  in  such  an 
emergency,  were  already  at  their  guns  and  were  directed  to  lay  at  their 
posts  for  the  night.  A reliable  pilot  was  sent  oft'  to  anchor  the  vessel  in 
a secure  position  and  to  remain  on  board  of  her.  An  armed  guard  was 
stationed  on  the  beach  abreast  of  the  vessel,  and  the  steamer  Orescent, 
attached  to  this  post,  was  ordered  to  be  alongside  of  the  Ann  at  early 
daylight  to  commence  discharging  her  cargo.  To  work  at  night  would 
only  have  attracted  the  attention  of  the  enemy  and  endangered  the 
vessel  by  the  necessary  lights.  A working  squad  was  detailed  from 
the  garrison  to  assist  the  crews  of  the  steamers. 

The  Orescent  promptly  executed  the  order  given  her,  and  the  work 
of  discharging  went  rapidly  and  regularly  on  during  the  greater  part  of 
the  day,  the  heavy  vessels  of  the  blockading  squadron  lying  at,  anchor 
6 or  7 miles  distant  and  the  gunboat  not  in  sight. 

Upon  the  opening  of  the  telegraph  offices  in  the  morning  the  situa- 
tion of  the  steamer,  the  nature  of  her  cargo,  the  name  of  the  consignee, 
were,  as  you  are  aware,  promptly  reported  to  the  general  commanding, 
and  shortly  after,  it  having  become  apparent  that  the  Crescent  would 
not  be  able  to  assist  the  Ann  over  the  bar  before  night,  a telegram  was 
dispatched  to  the  city  desiring  a boat  of  more  power  to  be  sent  down  to 
assist  in  the  work  and  to  tow  that  vessel  over  the  obstructions. 

At  4 p.  m.  the  boat  from  the  city  was  rapidly  approaching.  The 
Crescent  had  just  gotten  in  heavily  laden  for  the  second  time,  having 
brought  in  the  working  detachment  from  the  garrison,  to  be  relieved  by 
another  now  in  readiness  to  go  out  at  once  upon  the  boat  from  the  city. 
The  Ann,  having  had  a portion  of  her  heaviest  articles  of  the  cargo  left 
in  her  necessary  to  maintain  her  in  the  position  requisite  for  getting  her 
over  the  bar,  was  steaming  up  to  that  obstruction  with  the  view  of  being 
in  readiness  to  be  acted  upon  at  once,  and  the  blockading  gunboat  was 
now  in  sight,  coming  in  from  seaward. 

At  5 p.  m.  the  Ann  was  lying  upon  the  bar,  with  a boat  in  readiness 
to  take  and  secure  the  tow-line.  The  Dick  Keys,  which  had  reported 
from  the  city,  taken  a detachment  of  the  garrison  on  board,  and  received 
orders  to  proceed  at  once  to  tow  the  Ann,  was  about  500  yards  from  that 
vessel.  The  gunboat  was  steaming  slowly  in,  as  if  to  examine  the  posi- 
tion of  affairs,  but  was  3 miles  distant  and  could  not  approach  within 

miles  from  that  direction  from  the  nature  of  the  banks,  and  three 
detachments  had  been  posted  at  some  of  our  heavy  rifled  guns  to  keep 
her  out  of  range. 

I now  observed,  to  my  astonishment,  that  the  captain  of  the  Ann, 
with  her  crew,  was  hurriedly  abandoning  his  vessel,  and  shortly  after 
the  captain  of  the  Dick  .Keys  turned  his  boat  around  and  as  hurriedly 
move  back  toward  the  wharf.  At  this  time  not  a shot  had  been  fired, 
nor  could  the  gunboat  have  thrown  her  shot  or  shell  more  than  two- 
thirds  of  the  distance.  Major  Barnwell  was  directed  to  meet  the 
Dick  Kqys  at  the  wharf  and  order  the  captain  to  return  at  once  to 
execute  the  duty  assigned  him.  This  order  he  objected  to  obeying 

8 r r — yol  xv 


114 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

pleading  the  danger  to  liis  boat  and  insisting  upon  seeing  me;  and 
upon  receiving  the  order  from  myself,  he  first  plead  the  danger  to  his 
boat,  which  was  only  chartered  by  the  Government,  and  upon  my  as- 
suming all  responsibility  upon  that  point,  he  changed  his  plea  to  not 
being  a pilot  for  that  channel,  in  which  I had  seen  him  perform  the 
same  service  but  a few  weeks  previously.  Much  to  my  regret  the  only 
pilot  at  hand  was  in  one  of  the  boats  now  pulling  off  from  the  Ann, 
and  more  to  my  regret  there  was  no  captain  at  hand  to  replace  this 

apology  for  a man.  _ . , 

In  the  mean  time — the  Ann  having  been  abandoned  m a hurry  and 
the  anchor  lot  go  in  such  haste  as  to  jam  the  chain— she  worked  back 
off  the  bar  and  drifted  with  the  tide,  not  out  to  sea,  but  through  the 
channel  parallel  to  the  beach.  I was  thus  offered  the  choice  of  turning 
the  guns  of  the  fort  upon  her  and  blowing  her  up  or  sinking  her  and 
the  valuable  freight  yet  on  board  of  her  or  of  making  another  effort  to 
save  her.  She  was  only  three-fourths  of  a mile  off,  her  machinery  was 
in  running  order,  the  water  was  hot  in  her  boilers,  fire  was  in  her  fur- 
naces. A few  resolute  men  had  only  to  start  her  cable  and  let  her 
anchor  catch  on  the  bottom,  or  supply  her  furnaces  with  fuel,  start  her 
engine,  and  steer  her  back  to  her  former  position  into  security,  and  the 
enemy  were  yet  3 miles  off.  A number  of  the  garrison  volunteered  to 
o’o.  There  was  but  little  time  to  select,  but  two  boats  were  quickly 
dispatched  in  pursuit,  carrying  the  captain,  engineer,  and  one  or  two 
of  the  crew  of  the  Ann,  who  had  apparently  become  ashamed  of  their  | 
previous  conduct  and  asked  to  be  allowed  to  return.  But  time  had 
been  lost,  and  the  steamer  had  gradually  gotten  nearer  the  end  of  the 
bank,  around  which  the  blockading  vessels,  from  which  her  condition  was 
now  seen,  could  approach  to  within  range  of  their  guns.  The  steamer 
frigate  got  under  way  to  support  the  gunboat.  A few  shot  and  shell 
fell  about  the  Ann,  and  our  boats  hesitated  and  laid  between  our  bat- 
teries and  the  drifting  steamer,  so  as  to  prevent  us  from  now  resorting 
to  blowing  her  up  or  doing  anything  more  with  our  heavy  guns  than  to 
fire  a few  shots  to  keep  the  frigate  out  of  range. 

Lieutenant  Bond,  of  the  First  Artillery  Battalion,  now  volunteered 
to  take  the  boats  to  her,  and  was  directed  to  run  her  back  if  possible, 
or  act  as  circumstances  should  require,  and  Captain  Whiting  s company 
was  ordered  to  follow  and  protect  the  cargo  if  Lieutenant  Bond  should 
find  it  necessary  to  put  her  on  the  beach  or  to  anchor.  Lieutenants 
Bond  and  Hammond,  of  the  First  Artillery  Battalion,  and  Lieut.  L. 
H Goodman,  of  the  Light  Artillery  Battalion,  with  the  two  boats  crews, 
got  on  board  and  there  met  Captain  Blakeslee,  of  the  Crescent,  who, 
seeing  the  change  affairs  had  taken,  transported  one  of  his  boats  across 
from  Navy  Cove  and  boarded  her.  The  fires,  however,  had  now  become 
nearly  extinct,  the  enemy  was  firing  rapidly  at  only  three-fourths  of  a 
mile  distant,  and  it  was  determined  to  sink  her  and  thus  keep  her  out 
of  tlieir  hands.  The  supply-pipe  of  the  engine  was  accordingly  cut 
and  she  was  abandoned  a second  time,  under  the  supposition  that  she 
would  settle  on  the  bottom  in  a few  moments,  as  the  water  was  gushing  m 

bv  the  ton.  . 

"Night  came  on.  The  enemy  got  on  board.  The  Ann  proved  to  have 
several  water-tight  compartments,  only  one  of  which  had  filied,  and  we 
felt  the  chagrin  of  seeing  her  with  the  enemy’s  squadron  on  the  follow- 
ing morning.  . _ 

I have  gone  thus  into  the  details  of  this  case,  captain,  as  I am  aware 
that  it  is  one  which,  without  a full  explanation,  might  be  remarked 
upon  and  criticised  to  the  injury  of  the  zeal  and  enterprise  of  myself  and 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CAPTURE  OF  STEAMER  ANN. 


115 


those  that  I have  the  honor  to  command.  But  upon  the  statement  of 
facts  which  1 have  given  I feel  convinced  that  the  zeal  and  enterprise  of 
the  garrison  itself  must  be  acknowledged,  and  the  success  of  each  step, 
with  the  exception  where  failure  was  caused  by  positive  disobedience 
of  orders  and  dastardly  neglect  of  duty  on  the  part  of  a subordinate 
agent,  up  to  the  choice  of  hastening  the  destruction  or  attempting  to 
recover  the  abandoned  steamer,  will  prove  that  each  was  judiciously 
taken. 

I am  perfectly  aware  that  I might  have  made  more  u noise  in  the 
world”  by  turning  all  the  guns  of  the  fort  upon  the  vessel  and  blowing 
her  up,  but  I should  have  brought  certain  destruction  upon  property 
very  valuable  to  our  Government,  of  comparative  little  value  to  the 
enemy  if  it  did  fall  into  his  hands,  and  in  favor  of  saving  which  there 
were  many  chances. 

If  I erred  it  was  by  sacrificing  self  to  the  interests  which  have  been 
intrusted  to  my  care,  and  the  course  taken  is  justified  by  the  excellent 
military  maxim,  “When  in  doubt  as  to  attacking  an  enemy,  lean  to 
the  side  of  rashness ; when  in  doubt  as  to  the  destruction  of  the  prop- 
erty of  an  ally,  lean  to  the  side  of  caution.” 

This  statement  of  facts,  it  is  hoped,  sir,  carries  conviction  that  the 
loss  of  the  Ann  is  to  be  attributed  to  one  of  those  sudden  panics  which 
history  shows  all  collections  of  men  to  be  subject  to,  and  also  that  those 
affected  on  this  occasion  were  not  of  the  regular  garrison,  but  tempo- 
rarily acting  in  concert  with  it. 

In  conclusion,  I respectfully  call  the  attention  of  the  general  com- 
manding to  that  part  of  this  report  relating  to  the  conduct  of  Captain 
Deering,  of  the  Dick  Keys,  and  respectfully  suggest  that  he  be  removed 
and  his  place  supplied  by  a more  reliable  man,  as  to  positive  disobe- 
dience of  orders'on  his  part  the  loss  of  the  steamer  Ann  is  attributable 
more  than  to  any  other  circumstance,  and  his  conduct  on  this  occasion 
shows  that  he  cannot  be  relied  upon  in  any  similar  cases  that  may  occur 
hereafter. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your,  obedient  servant, 

W.  L.  POWELL, 

Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 

Capt.  S.  Croom, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


Naval  Commandant’s  Office, 

Mobile , Ala.,  July  16,  1862. 

Hon.  Georgke  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  1 Yar,  Richmond , Va. : 

Sir:  I herewith  beg  leave  to  inclose  for  your  examination  sundry 
papers  relating  to  the  loss  of  the  British  steamer  Ann  and  cargo  under 
the  guns  of  Fort  Morgan. 

First.  The  report  of  Colonel  Powell,  C.  S.  Army,  addressed  to  Brig. 
Gen.  J.  H.  Forney,  giving  an  account  of  the  arrival  of  that  vessel  and 
her  capture  while  under  the  guns  of  the  fort  by  the  enemy.  (See  p.  1 12.) 
Second.  A copy  of  my  letter  to  General  Forney,  containing  charges 
against  Colonel  Powell.  Third.  Copy  of  a letter  to  me  from  General 
Forney, stating  that  he  had  referred  the  whole  matter  to  General  Bragg; 
and,  fourth,  General  Bragg’s  decision  upon  the  subject. 

My  object  in  addressing  you  is  that  the  hasty,  inconsequential,  and, 


116 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA., 


as  I think,  unjust  decision  of  General  Bragg  may  not  be  permitted  to 
stand  as  a precedent  in  future  time  for  the  guidance  of  the  Army,  act- 
ing in  concert  with  the  Navy.  • , . . 

1 will  not  presume  to  suggest  what  should  be  your  action  m the 
premises,  but  I ask— what  1 cannot  believe  it  received  at  the  hands  ot 
General  Bragg— a careful  and  dispassionate. examination  of  my  report 

°f  And  what  are  the  simple  facts  of  the  case  1 I,  an  officer  of  the  Navy, 
of  equal  rank  with  General  Bragg  and  co-operating  with  the  Army, 
have  respectfully  asked  the  arrest  and  trial  of  a colonel  under  his  co  m- 
mand upon  certain  grave  charges,  and  lie,  as  I think,  curtly  and  dis- 
courteously replies  that  I have  no  right  to  ask  an  investigation,  or  words 

to  that  effect.  . _ 

I respectfully  submit  the  matter  to  your  consideration. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^  EAND0LpH^ 

Flag-Officer , Alabama. 

[Indorsement.] 

Acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the  communication,  and  say  that  the  Sec- 
retary earnestly  desires  to  maintain  the  cordiality  between  the  wo 
services  so  necessary  to  the  public  welfare,  and  feels  great  respect  for 
the  views  of  so  experienced  and  gallant  an  officer  as  Commodore  Ran- 
dolph ; but  being  of  opinion  that  a court  of  inquiry  would  acquit  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Powell,  he  does  not  think  it  expedient  to  order  such  a 

court.  n w T> 


[In closure  No.  1.] 

Naval  Commandant’s  Office, 

Mobile,  Ala. y July  5,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  read  the  elaborate  report  addressed  to  you  by  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Powell,  detailing  the  loss  of  the  British  steamer  Ann  on 
June  29  while  under  the  guns  of  Fort  Morgan,  and  the  conclusion  to 
my  mind  is  irresistible,  upon  that  officer's  own  showing,  that  tbe  loss  of 
said  vessel  and  cargo  never  would  liave  occurred  bad  the  fla^-oinccr  o 
this  naval  station  been  apprised,  as  be  ought  to  have  been  immediate  y 
bv  telegraph,  that  the  Ann  was  aground.  And  permit  me  to  ask  wb\ 
was  the  Navy  kept  iu  ignorance  of  the  whole  transaction  . Let  Lie*.1, 
tenant-Colonel  Powell  answer,  if  he  can,  this  simple  question.  Is  it 
not  the  duty  of  the  officer  commanding  at  Fort  Morgan  to  apprise  the 
commander  of  the  naval  forces  at  Mobile  of  the  ^ vesse  s. 

off  the  entrance  of  the  harbor;  more  especially  if  they  have  valuable 
cargoes  on  board  and  are  liable  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  uiomy  , 
Whoever  before  heard  that  upon  forts  and  garrisons  devolve  the  duty 
of  succoring  stranded  vessels,  when  by  a word  a fle^ 
might  easily  have  been  brought  to  the  rescue  ? But  no,  Lieutenant 
Oofonel  Powell,  it  seems,  felt  so  confident  of  Ins  own  skill  and  m his  own 
ability  to  save  the  Ann  and  her  valuable  cargo  as  to  ignore  the  Navy  alto 
aether.  It  seems  not  to  have  entered  into  Ins  calculations  that  seamen 
afloat  might  do  the  work  more  effectually  than  soldiers  could  l behind 
brick  walls  and  in  casemates.  Perhaps  it  may  oo  asked, Bii L ^ ' a 

it  that  the  vessels  of  the  Navy  were  not  on  the  spot,  ready  without 
telegraph  from  the  Army  to  render  the  necessary  assistance  to  the  All  . 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CAPTURE  OF  STEAMER  ANN. 


117 


This  can  be  easily  and  satisfactorily  explained.  Admitting,  however,  for 
a moment  that  no  satisfactory  explanation  can  be  given  for  the  tem- 
porary absence  of  our  vessels  from  the  lower  bay,  this  does  not  in  the 
least  degree  relieve  Lieutenant-Colonel  Powell  from  the  charge  of  cul- 
pable neglect  of  duty.  But  it  can  be  satisfactorily  explained  why  the 
vessels  of  the  Navy  were  not  in  the  lower  bay  at  the  time  of  the  ground- 
ing of  the  British  steamer.  They  were  undergoing  important,  nay,  in- 
dispensable, alterations  and  repairs  at  the  city.  The  boilers  of  the 
steam -ram  Baltic  were  reported  by  the  engineers  as  unsafe,  and  were 
being  patched  and  strengthened  for  important  service.  She  of  course 
could  not  be  sent  below.  The  steamers  Morgan  and  Gaines  were  in  the 
hands  of  numerous  mechanics,  who  were  engaged  in  putting  on  and 
bolting  iron  plates,  in  order  to  give  some  protection  to  the  machinery 
and  boilers  of  those  vessels ; and,  lastly,  the  Florida  had  only  left  her 
station  off  Fort  Morgan  the  morning  of  the  day  that  the  Ann  was 
wrecked.  She  came  to  the  city  to  land  two  officers  who  had  been  de- 
tached by  order  of  the  Navy  Department  and  to  receive  others  in  their 
places.  But  had  Lieutenant-Colonel  Powell  sent  a dispatch  to  me  on 
Sunday  morning — which  he  might  easily  have  done,  and  which  by  fail- 
ing to  do  I insist  he  is  amenable  to  the  charge  of  neglect  of  duty — all 
would  have  been  well,  as  I should  immediately  have  stopped  all  work 
on  board  our  steamers,  and  would  have  been  at  Fort  Morgan  by  12  m. 
on  Sunday,  June  29,  and  have  had  the  Ann  off  for  the  city  of  Mobile 
that  night. 

I beg  leave  to  say,  in  addition  to  this  grave  charge  against  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Powell,  that  in  his  long  report  to  you  of  the  transactions 
below  he  failed  even  to  allude  to  his  suppression  of  a private  telegraph 
which  was  made  to  the  consignee,  Mr.  Bittner,  by  a gentleman  at  Fort 
Morgan.  Had  that-  private  telegraph  been  allowed  to  be  communi-* 
cated  to  the  consignee  of  the  Ann  the  Navy  would  have  been  informed 
of  the  grounding  of  that  vessel,  and  she,  together  with  her  valuable 
cargo,  would  have  been  saved  to  the  country.  The  suppression  of  the 
above  telegraphic  dispatch  to  Mr.  Bittner  is  quite  significant,  and  I 
think  you  will  agree,  under  the  circumstances,  was  altogether  unwar- 
rantable and  indefensible. 

Again,  Lieutenant  Colonel  Powell,  in  his  labored  report  to  you,  says 
that  the  guns  of  Fort  Morgan  could  easily  have  reached  the  Ann  when 
she  was  abandoned  to  the  enemy.  In  the  name,  then,  of  common  sense 
why  was  she  not  sunk  by  Fort  Morgan  and  thus  kept  from  the  hands 
of  the  rapacious  Yankees  ? Do  I characterize  this  act,  or  rather  omis- 
sion to  act,  in  too  strong  language  when  I say  that  the  commanding 
officer  at  Fort  Morgan  was  not  only  guilty  of  neglect  of  duty  but  also 
of  want  of  self-possession  ? 

Sir,  this  is  no  time  for  the  exhibition  of  petty  jealousy  between  the 
two  arms  of  the  public  service.  We  are  engaged  in  a glorious  strug- 
gle for  independence,  and  let  it  not  be  said  that  the  Navy  is  jealous  of 
the  Army  or  the  Army  of  the  Navy. 

In  conclusion,  I respectfully  ask  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  Powell  shall 
be  arraigned  before  a military  tribunal  upon  the  following  charges : 

1st.  Palpable  neglect  of  duty. 

2d.  Absence  of  self-possession  at  an  important  crisis. 

I am,  very  respectfullv,  &c., 

Y.  M.  BANDOLPH, 
Flag-Officer , Alabama . 

Brig.  Gen.  John  H.  Forney, 

Comdg.  Land  Forces , Alabama  and  Florida , &c. 


118 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chav.  XXVII 


[Inclosure  Ho.  2.] 

Headquarters  District  of  the  Gulf, 

July  9,  1862. 

Commodore  V.  M.  Randolph, 

Flag-Officer,  Alabama: 

Sir:  After  a careful  consideration  of  my  duty  touching  the  charges 
preferred  by  you  against  Col.  W.  L.  Powell  on  the  5th  instant,  I have 
referred  the  whole  matter  to  General  B.  Bragg,  commanding  Depart- 
ment No.  2,  in  a communication  of  which  I have  the  honor  herewith  to 

^I^gree  entirely  with  you,  sir,  that  “this  is  no  time  for  the  exhibi- 
tion of  petty  jealousy  between  two  arms  of  the  public  service,  and,  so 
far  as  I am  concerned,  I assure  you  none  exists  to  be  exhibited.  1 ope 
a full  examination  may  show  that  no  one  can  in  such  a crisis  allow  so 
miserable  a feeling  to  injure  our  common  cause. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  ob®CQ^s^v^1o,ENEY) 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding  District  of  the  Gulf. 


[Sub-inclosure.] 

Headquarters  District  of  the  Gulf, 

Mobile , Ala.,  July  9,  1862. 

Maj.  George  G.  Garner, 

■ Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  J\o.  Z : 

Sir  : For  the  reasons  set  forth  below  I very  respectfully  submit  and 
♦refer  to  your  consideration  a copy  of  the  statement  of  Col.  v\ . h.  Powell 
respecting  the  loss  of  the  British  steamer  Ann,  with  a part  ol  her 
cargo,  in  attempting  to  run  the  blockade  of  this  harbor  and  after  she 
had  arrived  under  the  guns  of  Port  Morgan.  This  paper  is  marked 

E?also  submit  copies  of  the  telegrams  touching  the  same  subject  re- 
ferred to  in  Colonel  Powell’s  statement.  They  are  marked,  respect- 
ively. B,  C,  and  D.f  j?  i 

With  these  papers  I also  refer  to  you  a copy  of  charges  preferred 
against  Colonel  Powell  by  the  flag-officer  of  this  naval  station.  Colonel 
Powell  is  there  charged  with — 

1st.  Palpable  neglect  of  duty.  . . 

2d.  Absence  of  self-possession  at  an  important  crisis. 

Colonel  Powell  was  furnished  with  a copy  of  these  charges  on  the  Rh 
instant,  and  requested  to  make  any  reply  he  might  desire,  as  well  as  to 
telegraph  whether  or  not  he  wished  to  do  so.  As  yet  he  has  not  so 

16 1 make  this  reference  of  the  whole  matter  to  you  because,  although 
feeling  myself  perfectly  free  from  all  cause  for  blame,  still  I am  not 
willing  to  screen  my  conduct  from  examination  by  entertaining  a charge 
against  Colonel  Powell.  , n , i 

The  first  charge,  you  will  perceive,  is  based  upon  the  fact  that  Colonel 
Powell  did  not  inform  the  flag-officer  by  telegraph  of  the  arrival  and 
condition  of  the  Ann.  Colonel  Powell  did,  on  the  29th  ultimo,  tele- 
graph me  twice  in  the  language  of  the  copies  above  referred  to,  ana  i 
those  dispatches  contained  information  which  it  was  necessary  to  co  - 
municate  to  Flag-Officer  Randolph,  then  I would  be  the  person  who 


* See  p.  112. 


tNot  found. 


Chap.  XXVIT.] 


CAPTURE  OF  STEAMER  ANN. 


119 


committed  the  fault  aiul  Colonel  Powell  would  not  be  guilty  under  this 
charge,  unless  his  position  on  the  spot  should  have  occasioned  more 
anxiety  as  to  the  situation  of  the  steamer  than  his  dispatches  indicate. 
No  one  can  feel  more  than  I do  the  importance  of  the  harmonious 
co-operation  of  all  arms  of  the  service,  but  from  the  nature  of  the  two 
telegrams,  marked  B and  C,*  I considered  the  steamer— lying  under  the 
guns  of  the  fort  and  with  the  Crescent  by  her — as  beyond  danger  of 
capture  by  the  enemy  and  as  needing  no  other  assistance  than  the  aid 
of  an  ordinary  steamer  to  lighten  and  tow.  I therefore  saw  no  necessity 
of  having  the  tenor  of  those  dispatches  communicated  to  the  flag-officer 
of  this  station.  I hope  and  believe  Colonel  Powell  felt  and  thought  as 
I did.  I will  also  add  that  this  seems  to  me  to  be  one  of  those  unfor- 
tunate circumstances  which  is  a subject  of  regret  rather  than  censure 
upon  any  arm  of  the  service. 

I think  the  crew  of  the  steamer  were  the  first  and  main  cause  of  the 
disaster.  It  was  not  to  be  foreseen  nor  presumed  that  they  would  so 
unnecessarily  and  hastily  abandon  their  vessel,  and  their  continued 
presence  and  self-possession  would  undoubtedly  have  saved  her.  Even 
after  the  abandonment  I am  satisfied  the  vessel  might  have  been  saved 
had  the  captain  of  the  Dick  Keys  not  have  turned  back  in  so  cowardly 
a manner,  and  I think  his  conduct  in  the  highest  degree  censurable. 

Such  an  abandonment  by  the  crew  and  such  conduct  on  the  part  of 
the  captain  of  the  Dick  Keys  not  being  presumable,  many  omissions 
are  in  my  opinion  excusable  which  would  not  be  so  in  a case  of  antici- 
pated danger.  But  as,  from  a feeling  of  delicacy,  I cannot  entertain 
the  first  charge  against  Colonel  Powell,  I have  deemed  it  best  to  refer 
the  whole  matter  to  you,  and  a copy  of  this  paper  has  been  furnished 
to  Flag-Officer  Randolph. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  H.  FORNEY, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

\ . 

[In closure  No.  3.] 


Headquarters  Department  No.  2, 

Tupelo , Miss.,  July  13,  1862. 


[John  H.  Forney, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding :] 


General:  The  general  commanding  directs  me  to  say  that  he  fully 
concurs  in  your  views  in  regard  to  the  conduct  of  Colonel  Powell  in  the 
loss  of  the  Ann.  His  report  is  full,  clear,  explicit,  and  leaves  no  ground 
for  censure  or  even  doubt.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  conduct  of 
the  captains  of  the  Dick  Keys  and  Ann  should  have  resulted  disas- 
trously, but  for  them  Colonel  P.  could  not  be  responsible. 

As  Colonel  Powell  makes  no  imputation  on  Commander  Randolph 
or  the  Navy,  it  is  not  seen  what  the  latter  has  to  do  with  the  colonePs 
execution  of  military  duty. 

The  general  declines  to  entertain  the  charges,  and  thinks  the  com- 
mander will  on  reflection  see  he  has  not  done  the  colonel  justice. 

Respectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  G.  GARNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Not  found. 


120 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


JULY  5-8,  1862. — Expedition  from  Ponchatouia,  La. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Alfred  Bradley , Caruthers ’ Sharpshooters. 

Ponchatoula,  La.,  July  8,  1862 

Sir:  Agreeably  to  your  orders,  on  receipt  of  tbe  intelligence  of  tbe 
murder  of  Gorpl.  J.  1ST.  Smith  and  Private  James  Harvey,  of  your  com- 
mand, on  July  4,  instant,  near  the  Springfield  Bridge,  1 proceeded  to 
the  place  of  the  murder  with  18  men  to  try  and  arrest  the  murderers 
and  assist  in  the  disposing  of  the  murdered. 

On  my  arrival  in  Springfield  1 found  that  the  bodies  had  been  re- 
moved by  the  friends  and  relations  of  the  deceased,  wno  were  making 
all  necessary  arrangements  for  their  burial,  &c. 

I sent  10  men  to  the  houses  of  the  supposed  murderers  and  the  pris- 
oners who  had  escaped  with  them,  with  orders  to  waylay  their  houses, 
and,  if  possible,  arrest  them. 

Learning  that  Capt.  A.  C.  Koberts  was  in  Springfield  with  his  negro 
dogs,  I went  and  got  him  to  return  with  me  to  the  place  where  the  men 
were  ambushed,  in  the  hope  that  by  the  time  of  our  arrival  the  cavalry 
you  had  sent  for  would  be  on  the  ground.  Here  we  waited  for  near 
two  hours,  when,  having  no  horses  to  follow  the  dogs,  and  night  ap- 
proaching, I was  forced  to  abandon  further  efforts  for  the  day,  and  re- 
turned to  Ponchatouia  for  supplies,  &c.,  that  I might  resume  the  pur- 
suit next  day.  On  my  way  to  the  depot  I met  the  party  of  cavalry  and 
directed  them  how  to  proceed. 

Saturday,  July  5,  the  party  of  cavalry  arrived  with  2 of  the  men  we 
were  in  pursuit  of,  and,  together  with  12  men  of  your  company  and  a 
detachment  of  men  from  Camp  Moore,  under  command  of  Lieutenant 
Carpenter,  I started,  under  orders  to  scour  the  country  around  Spring- 
field  in  search  of  the  man  Kinehen,  who  had  been  arrested  on  the  pre- 
vious day  by  Smith  and  Harvey,  and  the  man  Elijah  Ganey,  who  was 
supposed  to  have  been  engaged  in  the  murder  of  our  men,  and  to  arrest 
them,  as  well  as  all  persons  supposed  or  known  to  be  enemies  to  the 
Confederate  States. 

On  my  arrival  at  Wadesborough  I procured  a boat,  in  which  I dis- 
patched 8 men,  under  command  of  Lieutenant , to  proceed  to  the 

mouth  of  the  Amite  Kiver  and  intercept  any  boats  that  might  attempt 
to  pass  down  that  stream  or  the  Tickfaw.  I then  proceeded  to  Spring- 
field,  where  I met  the  party  of  cavalry,  under  command  of  Lieutenant 
Evans,  and  found  the  10  men  I had  left  on  duty  the  previous  day.  From 
here  I dispatched  Sergt.  William  Duncan,  with  4 men  on  horseback,  to 
go  to  Borne,  on  the  Tickfaw,  and  from  there  to  James  Davidson’s  mill, 
on  the  Amite,  and  to  make  inquiries  and  search  for  the  criminals,  with 
orders  to  join  me  in  the  morning  at  a point  near  the  Bayou  Barbary. 
At  the  same  time  I directed  the  party  under  Lieutenant  Evans  to  scoui 
the  country  between  Springfield  and  Tickfaw  and  surround  and  search 
certain  houses  on  the  route  during  the  night,  and  to  meet  me  at  a point 
agreed  upon  next  day,  while  I,  with  infantry,  proceeded  to  Hall’s  Ferry, 
on  the  Tickfaw,  where  1 arrived  at  8 o’clock,  after  a very  fatiguing  and 
circuitous  march  of  near  20  miles. 

Sunday,  6th,  resumed  our  march  after  a sleepless  night  and  pro 
ceeded  to  the  Bayou  Barbary,  where  I halted  to  await  the  arrival  ol 
the  cavalry,  finding  the  road  almost  impracticable  for  infantry  on  ac- 
count of  the  backwater  from  the  Amite,  which  filled  the  road  through 
the  Barbary  Swamp  to  a depth  of  near  3 feet.  Having  formed  a junc- 
tion with  the  men  sent  under  Sergeant  Duncan  to  the  Amite  1 resolved 


Crap.  XXVII.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  PONCHATOULA,  LA.  121 

to  proceed  without  waitiug  longer  tor  the  cavalry,  and  moved  forward 
with  the  men  of  your  company  in  advance  and  waded  through  the 
swamp  above  referred  to,  and  halted  at  the  residence  of  William  H. 
Wilder,  esq.,  to  get  water  and  information  necessary  to  our  further 
progress.  Here  I waited  for  some  time,  wondering  what  detained  the 
rear  guard,  consisting  of  Lieutenant  Carpenter’s  command,  when  the 
cavalry  came  plunging  through  and  informed  me  that  they  were  not 
advancing.  Having  procured  much  information  from  Mr.  Wilder,  I 
resolved,  as  the  infantry  were  much  exhausted,  to  leave  them  and  pro- 
ceed with  the  cavalry.  I therefore  instructed  Sergt.  William  Duncan 
to  take  command  and  return  to  a safe  camping  ground,  and  procure  a 
small  beef,  sufficient  to  do  the  men  and  to  afford  a sufficiency  for  our 
return  to  camp. 

On  my  return  from  the  parish  of  Ascension  I took  Sergeant  Kmcken 
and  2 men  from  your  company,  and  having  procured  four  horses, 
we  mounted  and  started  for  the  French  settlement  on  the  Amite  Eiver, 
where  we  arrived  about  1 p.  in.  I called  upon  Alexander  Sevique,  who 
agreed  to  act  as  my  guide,  and  from  whom  I procured  a mutton  for  the 
men  and  5J  pounds  of  corn  for  the  horses.  Having  sufficiently  refreshed 
both  man  and  horse,  I started  at  sundown  with  a force  of  28  men,  in- 
cluding myself  and  the  guides,  for  the  parish  of  Ascension,  to  arrest  a 
notorious  desperado  named  Adolph  Dies,  who  had  proclaimed  himself 
a Lincolnite  and  threatened  to  burn  the  property  of  a number  of  the 
citizens  of  this  parish  and  was  understood  to  have  a party  of  some  15 
men  under  his  command.  On  my  way  to  the  residence  of  this  man  I 
learned  that  he  had  12  armed  men  in  his  house  at  sundown,  and  several 
admonished  me  to  be  watchful  of  an  ambush,  as  a party  of  Captain  Wil- 
son’s cavalry  had  been  on  the  Amite  that  evening  and  they  were  prepared 
for  resistance,  &c. 

On  my  arrival  at  Port  Vincent  I detailed  a guard  for  the  horses,  and 
with  Lieutenants  Evans  and  B.  B.  Starns,  of  Captain  Bredow’s  cavalry, 
and  20  men  I crossed  the  river  and  proceeded  on  foot  to  the  house  of  Dies, 
and  after  surrounding  it  summoned  him  in  the  name  of  the  Confederate 
States  to  surrender  himself  and  the  men  under  his  charge  as  prisoners, 
at  the  same  time  assuring  him  that  if  he  did  so  no  violence  would  be 
used,  but  that  if  he  offered  resistance  I would  arrest  him  dead  or  alive. 
He  refused  to  submit  to  the  authority  of  the  Confederate  States  and 
defied  me.  I then  summoned  all  who  might  be  in  the  house  to  come  forth 
and  surrender,  assuring  them  at  the  same  time  that  if  they  done  so  no 
harm  should  be  done  them,  but  that  if  they  refused  I should  be  compelled 
to  burn  the  house  to  get  them  out,  when  a voice  came  forth  within  to 
“Burn  and  be  damned.”  I then  ordered  a portion  of  the  men  to  fire  the 
house.  While  they  were  preparing  to  do  so  several  attempts  were  made 
to  leave  the  house  by  the  inmates  and  an  attempt  to  shoot  through  one 
of  the  windows,  but  it  was  slammed  to  by  one  of  the  men,  and  the  as- 
surance given  that  if  he  stuck  his  head  out  again  it  would  be  blown 
off.  At  this  crisis,  when  the  torch  was  being  got  ready  to  fire  the  house, 
I again  demanded  a surrender  in  the  name  of  the  Confederate  States,  but 
again  came  the  refusal  to  do  so,  and  the  party  making  it  came  out  on 
the  front  porch  to  fire  on  our  men,  when  I immediately  fired  upon  him, 
inflicting  a mortal  wound.  The  rest  now  offered  to  surrender — came  out 
and  done  so.  Lieutenant  Evans  with  a party  now  entered  the  house 
and  searched  for  arms,  &c.,  and  after  securing  four  guns,  all  of  which 
were  loaded  and  cocked  and  some  ammunition,  we  took  the  prisoners 
— three  in  number — and  brought  them  to  the  ferry,  where  I found  one 
of  them  to  be  a youth  of  sixteen  years,  who  said  that  he  was  a son  of 


122 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MTSS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Dies,  and  begged  for  liberty  to  go  to  the  assistance  of  his  father.  I there-i 
fore  ordered  him  to  be  released  on  his  promise  never  to  engage  in  hos  ! 
tility  to  the  South.  I took  the  other  two  men  on  horses  which  I bor- 
rowed for  the  purpose  and  brought  them  to  Ponchatoula.  Their  names| 

are  Thomas  Sherman  and Williams,  both  of  whom  are  known  to  be 

Lincolnites,  and  the  former  is  said  to  be  a very  dangerous  man. 

On  my  return  march  to  Ponchatoula  I caused  search  to  be  made  at) 
the  house  of  one  Bedding  and  also  the  houses  of  Kinchen  and  G-aney, 
but  discovered  no  trace  of  the  murderers.  Redding  had  gone  to  Hew 
Orleans.  I took  two  double-barreled  guns  from  the  house  of  Kinchen 
and  a keg  containing  about  two  pounds  of  powder,  and  from  Ganey’s  a 
rifle  gun,  all  of  which  I brought  to  Ponchatoula. 

On  my  arrival  at  Ponchatoula  this  morning  I learned  that  the  party 
sent  out  in  the  boat  had  returned  the  day  previous  without  making  any 
arrests  or  discovering  anything  of  the  murderers  or-escaped  prisoners. 

On  my  arrival  at  Ponchatoula  I was  much  exhausted  from  want  of 
sleep  and  my  feet  were  blistered  so  much  as  to  render  it  impossible  for 
me  to  walk  after  I had  got  cool,  so  I put  the  prisoners,  &c.,  undercharge 
of  Lieutenant  Bankston  and  retired  to  my  home,  where,  tired  and  sleepy, 
I write  this  report. 

In  closing  this  report  I must  say  that  what  little  success  attended  the  ; 
expedition  was  attributable  to  Lieutenants  Evans  and  Starns  and  the 
cavalry  under  their  command,  all  of  whom  behaved  well.  The  men 
from  your  company  also  acted  well,  not  a murmur  escaping  from  any: 
during  the  most  fatiguing  portions  of  our  march,  and  when  we  came  to 
water  they  took  it  like  ducks ; but  the  men  from  Camp  Moore,  under 
charge  of  Lieutenant  Carpenter,  complained  much  from  fatigue,  and 
several  returned  to  Ponchatoula  the  first  and  second  day  after  our  de- 
parture. Lieutenant  Carpenter  himself  did  all  he  could  to  encourage 
the  men  both  by  word  and  example,  but  the  men  under  his  command) 
were  so  much  fatigued  on  their  arrival  at  Barbary  Swamp  that  he  found 
it  impossible  to  get  them  to  cross  it.  He  therefore  encamped  on  the 
east  bank  of  Bayou  Barbary  until  my  return  from  Ascension  Parish, 
after  which  they  did  good  service  in  searching  houses  and  doing  guard ; 
duty  on  the  return  march. 

To  sum  up  the  fruits  of  our  expedition  since  leaving  Ponchatoula 
amounts  to  the  capturing  of  three  of  those  interested  in  the  murder  of 
Smith  and  Harvey  and  three  guns  and  some  powder  from  the  same  par- 
ties ; the  killing  of  the  Lincolnite  desperado,  Adolph  Dies,  and  the  cap-  * 
turing  of  two  of  his  partisans  and  four  guns,  three  being  double-barreled 
and  one  rifle. 

Regretting  that  we  could  do  no  more,  I remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALFRED  BRADLEY, 
Lieutenant , Caruthers1  /Sharpshooters. 

Capt.  W.  D.  L.  McRae. 


JULY  24,  1862. — Skirmish  on  the  Amite  River,  La. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Wingfield,  Ninth  Louisiana  Battalion  Parti- 
san Rangers .* 

July  25,  1862 — 4.30  p.  m. 

My  entire  command  has  been  routed.  The  enemy  in  great  force,  esti- 
mated at  from  1,200  to  2,500,  with  six  pieces  of  artillery,  flanked  them 

* Sometimes  called  First  Regiment  Louisiana  Partisan  Rangers. 


hap.  xxvn.] 


SKIRMISH  ON  AMITE  RIVER,  LA. 


123 


m all  sides.  They  took  position  ready  to  resist  an  attack,  when  Cap 
ain  Wilson  ordered  them  to  retreat.  Captain  Kemp’s  whole  command 
s supposed  to  have  been  taken.  The  rest  are  scattered.  As  soon  as 
>ossible  I shall  report  to  the  general.  I am  now  pushing  on  with  a 
ew  men  as  vedettes.  I have  ordered  Captain  McMichael  to  pitch  his 
eut  on  Twelve  Mile  Bayou,  4 miles  west  of  Greenburg,  and  have  sent 
>ut  to  rally  all  the  men  I can.  I hope  to  get  all  the  particulars  by  12 
n.  to-night.  We  have  lost  all  our  stores  and  camp  equipage.  I can 
jive  no  particulars  of  who  is  killed,  wounded,  or  missing  . 

In  haste, 

J.  H.  WINGFIELD. 

Maj.  J.  De  Baun. 


Camp  Turner,  July  26, 1862. 

General  : The  enemy  attacked  Capt.  W.  B.  Kemp’s  company  about 
laylight  Thursday,  24th,  at  Benton’s  Ferry,  appearing  first  in  citizen’s 
•lothes  and  crying  out  they  were  friends.  Captain  Kemp  ordered  his 
nen  to  retain  their  fire;  but,  to  the  astonishment  of  all,  the  Yankees 
>pened  on  them,  when  Captain  Kemp  returned  fire,  wounding  2 of  the 
aiemy,  when  he  fell  back,  losing  20  or  25  horses,  together  with  all  camp 
;quipage  and  one  four-mule  wagon,  mules,  and  harness  complete.  The 
memy,  which  is  spoken  of  above,  350  strong,  continued  to  advance  up 
he  east  side  of  Amite  Biver  in  the  direction  of  this  camp.  Two  other 
jolumns  of  the  enemy  in  the  mean  time  having  crossed  at  a ford  known 
is  Curtis’,  about  4 miles  above  Camp  Turner,  600  strong,  consisting  of 
savalry,  artillery,  and  infantry,  Captain  Wilson,  who  was  in  command 
if  our  forces,  threw  them  in  line  of  battle  and  afterward  in  ambus- 
jade,  about  200  strong.  The  enemy  on  their  approach  from  Benton’s 
Ferry  again  hailed  our  pickets  as  friends,  but  in  this  case  our  pickets 
ired,  killing  a lieutenant-colonel  and  1 private  (this  is  reported).  The 
enemy  at  this  time  commenced  shelling  our  troops  from  three  different 
joints,  they  attacking  us  in  three  columns,  each  column  having  one  piece 
)f  artillery,  a detachment  of  cavalry,  and  three  companies  of  infantry. 
Oaptain  Wilson,  finding  himself  flanked  and  the  great  disparity  of 
aumbers,  ordered  a retreat.  Subsequently  the  troops,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  some  N stragglers,  rallied,  and  now  occupy  their  old  camp.  We 
have  not  lost  a man  nor  have  we  had  one  wounded. 

The  depredations  committed  by  the  enemy  are  of  the  most  shameful 
character  on  private  property  and  on  the  persons  of  our  fellow-citizens 
and  helpless  women  and  children. 

I do  not  make  this  communication  as  official,  not  yet  having  become 
familiar  with  all  the  facts  of  this  affair,  but  knowing  your  anxiety  to 
hear  from  me,  I report  as  near  the  facts  as  under  the  circumstances  I 

can. 

The  men  are  in  good  spirits,  and  I hope  soon  to  have  my  camp  organ- 
ized and,  if  I can  be  allowed  time  to  drill,  have  them  well  disciplined. 
General,  you  are  aware  we  have  never  had  one  hour’s  time  for  drilling. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  H.  WINGFIELD, 

Lieut.  Col .,  Comdg.  Ninth  Louisiana  Batt.  Partisan  Bangers. 
Brigadier- General  Kuggles. 


1 24  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chav.  XXVII. 

JULY  25-AUGUST  2,  1862.— Expedition  to  Lake  Pontchar train,  Pass  Man- 
chac,  and  up  the  Tchefuncta  and  Pearl  Bivers,  La.,  with  skirmishes. 

Report  of  Maj.  Frank  H.  Peclc , Twelfth  Connecticut  Infantry , command - , 

ing  expedition. 

Camp  Paeapet,  Caeplollton,  La., 

August  4,  1862. 

Sip:  The  expedition  directed  by  orders  of  July  25,  1862,  from  head-  Li 
quarters  of  this  department  returned  on  the  2d  of  August.  I have  to  | 
submit  the  following  report  of  our  operations: 

On  the  evening  of  July  25,  with  five  companies  of  the  Twelfth  Eegi-  4 
ment  Connecticut  Volunteers  and  a section  of  Capt.  P.  E.  Holcomb’s  i 
Second  Vermont  Battery,  I embarked  on  board  the  boat  Grey  Cloud,  I 
commanded  by  Lieutenant  Buchanan,  U.  S.  Navy.  We  left  the  wharf  , 
about  midnight  and  arrived  at  Pass  Manchac  soon  after  daylight  on  the  I 
morning  of  the  26th.  As  we  approached  the  bridge  Captain  Holcomb  j 
sent  forward  a shell  from  his  Sawyer  gun,  which  had  the  effect  to  draw  |j 
from  one  of  the  houses  a rebel  scout,  who  immediately  ran  up  the  rail-  \( 
road  in  the  direction  of  Camp  Moore.  He  was  fired  after,  and,  as  soon  ij 
as  a squad  of  men  could  be  landed,  was  pursued  across  the  island  to 
the  North  Pass,  where  he  plunged  into  the  stream  and  escaped.  We  ex-  | 
amined  the  buildings,  and  found  the  musket  and  equipments  of  the  sol-  | 
dier,  bunks,  parts  of  uniforms,  and  other  evidence  of  recent  military  1 
occupation.  As  the  place  was  evidently  used  as  a rendezvous  for  spies  1 
and  scouts  I directed  it  all  to  be  burned.  The  part  of  the  bridge  north  : 
of  the  draw  had  been  previously  destroyed.  We  burned  the  remainder.  1 
I am  aware  of  nothing  remaining  at  Pass  Manchac  more  combustible  i1 
than  railroad  iron  and  water-soaked  piles. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  day  we  went  up  the  North  Pass,  where  we  \ 
found  that  a beginning  had  been  made  toward  repairing  the  bridge.  j; 
We  burned  this  also.  . jj 

On  the  27th  we  sailed  up  the  Tchefuncta  Eiver.  When  opposite  . 
Madison ville  we  were  bred  upon  by  the  guerrilla  picket  stationed  there,  j 
We  responded  with  a shot  from  one  of  the  32-pounders  of  the  boat, .sent 
through  the  street  from  which  the  firing  came.  Fortunately  none  of 
our  party  were  struck,  though  a bullet  passed  disagreeably  near  to  a 
group  of  officers  standing  upon  the  forward  deck. 

At  a point  about  3 miles  below  Covington  our  farther  progress  was  J 
obstructed  by  three  sunken  gunboats,  from  which  the  guns  have  been 
recently  removed.  At  this  point  we  heard  the  shots  of  the  guerrilla 
pickets,  and  the  long  roll  was  sounded  in  two  different  directions  not 
far  from  us.  We  landed  here  and  marched  to  Covington.  On  our  way 
we  learned  that  several  bands,  of  from  6 to  50  each,  had  passed  near 
us  after  our  landing,  with  the  intention  of  concentrating  at  some  point 
to  meet  us.  The  advance  sent  forward  into  the  city  saw  5,  mounted 
and  armed,  and  fired  upon  them  as  they  retreated,  with  what  effect 
they  could  not  tell,  except  that  one  or  more  of  their  horses  were 
wounded. 

We  carried  the  national  flag  through  the  principal  street  of  the  city. 
White  flags  were  hung  from  many  of  the  houses,  and  citizens  waited 
upon  us  to  request  that  license  might  not  be  given  for  the  commission 
ofi  any  outrage,  such  as  their  previous  experience  led  them  to  expect. 
Of  course  no  liberties  were  taken  by  our  troops.  Owing  to  the  inti  use  , 
heat  we  shortly  returned  to  our  boat.  On  our  way  back  we  were  in- 
formed by  friendly  persons  that  guerrillas  were  gathering  on  the  banks 


Chap.  XXVH.]  EXPEDITION  TO  LAKE  PONTCHARTRAIN. 


125 


of  the  river  below  to  oppose  our  passage  to  the  lake.  I regret  to 
report  that  during  this  march  2 men  fell  from  sun-stroke  and  died 

before  night.  . ^ . _ 

As  the  boat  was  about  leaving  we  were  surprised  with  a volley  ot 
musketry  from  the  thick  bushes  which  cover  the  river  banks.  Our 
men  immediately  sprang  to  their  arms  and  returned  the  fire  with  steadi- 
ness and  spirit.  Captain  Holcomb  almost  instantly  sent  a charge  of 
canister  after  them,  and  Lieutenant  Buchanan  brought  his  32-pounders 
to  bear  with,  terrible  effect.  Of  course  their  fire  was  soon  silenced. 
The  scars  upon  the  boat  is  evidence  of  its  severity. 

Our  casualties  were  marvelously  few,  considering  our  exposed  posi- 
tion. Only  3 men  were  wounded,  and  none  of  them  seriously — 1 soldier 
and  2 sailors.  We  cleared  a passage  for  ourselves  out  of  the  river,  at 
each  turn  firing  shell  and  canister  into  the  thick  bushes  upon  the  shore 
and  sending  an  occasional  shell  back  into  the  woods  from  Captain  Hol- 
comb’s 20-pounder  Parrott.  We  were  not  fired  on  again,  but  could 
frequently  see  armed  men  retreating  into  the  woods. 

Monday,  the  28th,  was  spent  in  taking  in  coal,  &c. 

Tuesday,  the  29th,  we  crossed  the  lake,  and  by  one  of  the  bayous 
went  some  distance  into  the  country.  Reports  of  guerrillas  we  found 
everywhere,  but  none  showed  themselves. 

Failing  to  induce  them  to  meet  us  anywhere  on  the  lake  shore,  and 
hearing  of  some  farther  east,  on  the  30th  we  went  up  Pearl  River,  as 
far  as  Pearlington.  We  found  the  people  in  great  destitution  and 
beset  by  plunderers  on  every  side.  A company  was  sent  back  into  the 
country,  but  found  no  enemy. 

Hearing  that  a small  party  were  prowling  about  Pass  Christian,  Miss., 
on  the  31st  we  sailed  up  the  Bay  of  Saint  Louis,  and  landed  about  day- 
light opposite  the  town,  hoping  to  capture  a picket  stationed  there  by 
approaching  them  from  the  rear.  They  had,  however,  perceived  the 
approach  of  our  boat.  We  found  the  place  deserted  by  nearly  all  its 
population,  who,  as  from  other  towns  we  visited,  are  Hying  daily  by 
boat  loads  to  escape  impressment  into  the  Confederate  service.  They 
are  destitute  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  being  dependent  entirely  upon 
the  small  amounts  smuggled  from  Mobile. 

We  afterward  visited  Shieldsborough,  where  we  found  the  same  state 
of  things  existing.  Here  outrages  too  gross  for  description  have  been 
recently  perpetrated  by  guerrillas,  who  find  apologists  among  the  most 
prominent  citizens  of  the  place. 

On  August  1 we  visited  Louisburg.  All  the  docks  and  landings  at 
this  place,  and  at  Mandeville,  2 miles  distant,  were  burned  by  a party 
of  guerrillas  some  two  weeks  since.  It  will  cost  many  thousands  of 
dollars  to  rebuild  them.  A company  was  landed  in  small  boats  and 
marched  back  into  the  woods,  where  till  recently  has  been  one  of  their 
camps.  They  found  it  deserted,  as  about  this  region  too  there  was 
nothing  left  to  plunder. 

We  then  revisited  the  Tchefuncta  as  far  as  Madisonville,  The  picket 
which  has  been  stationed  there  has  been  removed.  The  town  was  de- 
serted, and  nearly  every  public  and  private  building  closed. 

Despairing  of  finding  an  enemy  who  would  stand  fire  within  the  cir- 
cuit designated  for  our  expedition  we  thence  returned  to  camp.  We 
heard  various  reports  at  different  places  of  the  loss  on  the  part  of  the 
guerrillas  from  our  engagement  on  Sunday.  That  which  seemed  to 
come  most  direct  and  to  be  most  reliable  was  the  admission  oi  7 killed, 
4 by  our  musketry  anil  canister  shots  and  3 from  the  explosion  of  a 
shell  in  the  woods  at  a distance.  I give  it  ho  great  credit. 


126 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

Certain  prominent  facts  attracted  our  attention  at  each  place  we  visited. 
Perhaps  the  most  noticeable  was  the  utter  destitution  of  the  people.  In 
many  places  flour  had  not  been  seen  for  months,  the  poorer  classes  sub- 
sisting almost  entirely  upon  the  meanest  quality  of  corn  meal.  Another 
was  the  odiousness  of  the  conscript  law  and  the  means  employed  to  en- 
force it,  as  if,  after  being  reduced  to  a state  of  destitution  through  the 
agency  of  organized  bands  of  outlaws,  men  at  last  might  be  induced  to 
enter  the  rebel  service  to  escape  the  alternative  of  starvation.  We  met 
large  numbers  flying  to  the  protection  of  the  Federal  Army,  and  at  each 
place  visited  by  us,  without  exception,  we  were  besought  by  men  and 
women  for  passage  to  New  Orleans.  At  several  places  we  were  asked 
to  leave  troops  for  their  protection  against  their  professed  friends. 

Though  the  tangible  results  of  our  expedition  may  seem  small  I have 
no  doubts  of  its  good  effect.  For  more  than  a week  we  have  hunted 
guerrillas  at  every  point  where  we  could  hear  of  them.  Nearly  every -j 
day  we  have  invited  them  to  a fair  engagement  distant  from  our  sup- 
port. On  each  occasion  we  obtained  only  dissolving  views  of  them. 1 
Authorized  and  commissioned  as  they  are,  they  are  actuated  by  no 
motive  but  plunder.  They  fight  only  from  ambuscade,  and  war  indis- 
criminately upon  friend  and  foe.  The  conduct  of  officers  and  men  dur- 
ing the  whole  expedition  has  been  most  creditable. 

I am  especially  indebted  to  Captain  Holcomb,  whose  large  experience  | 
in  service  of  this  character  has  been  of  great  assistance  to  me.  Lieu- 
tenant Buchanan  was  untiring  in  his  efforts  to  promote  the  comfort  of 
the  men  while  on  board  his  boat.  Any  comment  upon  his  bearing  in 
action  would  be  superfluous. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK  H.  PECK, 

Major  Twelfth  Regiment  Conn.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Expedition. 

Capt.  R.  S.  Davis, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-  General , Dept,  of  the  Gulf. 


AUGUST  7-10,  1862. — Reconnaissances  from  Pensacola  to  Bagdad  and 

Milton,  Fla. 

Reports  of  Capt.  Alexander  A.  Shipley , U.  S.  Army , commanding  expe- 
dition. 

Pensacola,  Fla.,  August  11,  1862. 

Sir  : 1 have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  orders  received 
from  these  headquarters  in  West  Florida,  I left  this  place  with  the  fol- 
lowing command,  viz:  Asst.  Surg.  De  Witt  C.  Peters,  IT.  S.  Army, 
and  First  Lieut.  J.  Schuyler  Crosby,  First  Artillery,  aide-de-camp  to 
the  general  commanding,  and  Companies  A and  B,  Sixth  Regiment 
New  York  Volunteers.  The  officers  of  these  companies  present  were 
Captain  Burgess,  First  Lieutenant  Latham,*  and  Second  Lieutenant 
Mathews,  of  Company  A.  (This  company  represented  71  enlisted  men.) 
Company  B was  commanded  by  Captain  Denslow.  His  junior  officer 
was  First  Lieutenant  Vangieson.  (Sixty-nine  enlisted  men  of  this 
company  reported  for  duty.) 

At  8 o’clock  on  the  evening  of  the  7th  instant  we  left  the  dock  and 
proceeded  up  the  bay  to  within  about  2 miles  of  the  town  of  Bagdad, 
which  is  distant  from  this  place  some  28  miles.  Here  we  remained  until 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


RECONNAISSANCES,  ETC. 


127 


3.30  o’clock  on  the  following  morning,  when  we  weighed  anchor  and 
steamed  to  a point  known  as  Hunt’s  Mill,  where  I communicated  with 
a Union  man  on  shore,  and  from  him  ascertained  the  disposition  of  the 
enemy  whom  I was  anxious  to  meet.  This  friend  also  told  me  where  I 
would  be  likely  to  capture  a large  quantity  of  valuable  naval  stores, 
and,  among  other  articles,  the  sails  and  rigging  of  a rebel  gunboat. 

After  this  short  delay  we  started  for  the  town  of  Milton,  where  I 
reconnoitered  for  the  enemy,  and  at  the  same  time  explored  for  the 
hidden  stores,  which  I determined  to  take  on  my  return  trip.  I next 
carefully  sailed  up  the  Blackwater  River  to  the  head  of  navigation 
and  to  a place  called  Union  Hill,  where  I received  on  board  the  steamer 
four  known  Union  families,  and  employed  my  men  in  removing  to  our 
boat  all  their  valuable  furniture  and  other  effects.  These  people  were 
delighted  to  escape  the  tyranny  of  their  oppressors,  and  now,  for  the 
first  time  in  months,  felt  safe.  It  was  with  considerable  difficulty  that 
the  steamer  could  be  turned  in  the  river ; but  the  pilot  proved  faithful 
to  his  charge  and  soon  brought  us  back  to  Milton,  where  we  landed, 
and  there  removed  several  thousand  dollars’  worth  of  naval  stores 
(stolen  from  this  navy-yard)  to  our  steamer.  It  was  here  that  I found 
some  furniture,  which  I am  well  assured  belonged  to  a notorious  rebel. 
This  furniture  has  since  been  turned  over  to  the  provost-marshal  of 
Pensacola,  as  well  as  all  other  captured  property.  In  the  town  of  Mil- 
ton  I found  a lot  of  planed  and  grooved  lumber,  which  is  needed  by  our 
forces,  and  this  also  was  transferred  to  the  boat. 

Having  given  the  enemy  ample  opportunity  to  attack  my  forces 
and  accomplished  my  object  I returned  to  Bagdad,  where  I landed, 
and  received  on  board  a large  quantity  of  furniture,  &c.,  belonging  to 
some  Union  men,  who  wTith  your  permission  accompanied  me.  The 
instructions  I had  received  having  been  accomplished,  I started  for 
and  arrived  at  this  town  on  the  morning  of  the  9th.  We  saw  none  of 
the  rebel  troops,  though  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  while  in 
Milton  60  or  70  cavalry  were  in  the  vicinity. 

The  banks  of  the  Blackwater  River  are  peculiarly  fitted  for  the  ac- 
tion of  sharpshooters  and  light  artillery,  and  it  appears  to  me  strange 
that  the  enemy  does  not  take  advantage  of  this  circumstance. 

The  valuable  saw-mills  once  so  numerous  in  this  section  of  the  coun- 
try have  been  burned,  as  have  millions  of  feet  of  yellow  pine  and  oak 
lumber. 

I would  here  state  that  2 officers  and  8 men,  belonging  to  Porter’s 
mortar  fleet,  accompanied  me,  in  order  to  procure  some  needed  ship- 
timber,  and  their  mission  was  successful. 

The  detachment  of  10  regular  soldiers,  under  Lieutenant  Crosby,  had 
charge  of  our  only  piece  of  artillery,  and  were  ready  at  any  moment  to 
open  on  the  enemy. 

In  conclusion  allow  me  to  say  that  both  officers  and  men  were  anx- 
ious and  ready  for  any  duty,  and  they  fully  came  up  to  my  expecta- 
tions. All  I have  to  regret  is  that  they  did  not  have  the  opportunity 
to  meet  the  rebels,  when  I feel  satisfied  that  they  would  have  proved 
themselves  worthy  of  the  confidence  placed  in  them. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  NT.  SHIPLEY, 

Captain,  U.  S.  Army , Commanding  Expedition . 

Capt.  Charles  C.  Dwight, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Pensacola,  Fla. 


128 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII.  > 


Pensacola,  Fla.,  August  13, 1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  orders  received 
from  these  headquarters  in  West  Florida,  I left  this  place  with  the  fol-  l 
lowing  command,  viz : Assistant  Surgeon  Myers,  Ninety-first  New  York 
Volunteers 5 First  Lieut.  H.  P.  Norris,  First  Artillery,  and  1 sergeant 
and  10  men  of  Company  L,  First  Artillery,  and  Companies  H and  K, 
Ninety-first  New  York  Volunteers.  The  officers  of  these  companies 
present  were  Capt.  John  B.  Collin,  First  Lieutenant  Chattertou,  and 
First  Lieut.  W.  L.  Herwerth.  (This  company  represented  95  enlisted 
men.)  Company  K was  commanded  by  Capt.  H.  S.  Hulbert,  First  j 
Lieut.  H.  L.  Evans,  and  Second  Lieut.  S.  Brownell.  (One  hundred 
men  of  this  company  reported  for  duty.) 

At  5.30  p.  m.  on  the  9th  instant  we  left  the  middle  wharf  and  pro- 
ceeded up  the  bay  to  Bagdad,  a town  situated  on  the  right  bank  of 
Blackwater  River,  and  distant  from  this  place  some  28  miles.  At  this 
place  I tied  up  the  steamer,  posted  the  necessary  guards,  and  took  20 
men  and  reconnoitered  and  explored  the  suburbs  of  the  town,  where  I 
was  informed  I would  find  a large  quantity  of  naval  stores  that  had 
been  hidden  by  some  rebels  engaged  to  build  a gunboat.  I searched 
the  town  thoroughly  and  found  but  few  stores.  These  I put  on  board 
and  directed  the  men  to  rest  until  daylight,  soon  after  which  I steamed 
up  to  Milton,  distant  from  there  about  2 miles.  At  this  place  I ob- 
tained the  light  house  clock,  which  had  been  stolen  at  the  outbreak  of 
the  rebellion  from  the  light-house  at  this  place;  also  a few  stores,  with 
some  ship  lumber  and  a quantity  of  wrought  iron,  all  of  which  I put  on  . 
board  of  the  steamer.  I also  had  considerable  furniture  put  on  board  | 
that  belonged  and  has  since  been  turned  over  to  Union  families,  brought 
to  this  place  by  the  last  expedition  under  my  command;  after  which  I 
directed  the  captain  of  the  steamer  to  blow  the  steamer’s  whistle,  which 
was  the  signal  for  all  to  return  to  the  boat.  All  returned  in  the  course 
of  one  hour  or  thereabouts  except  1 man,  Private  Charles  Ozier,  of 
Company  H,  Ninety-first  New  York  Volunteers.  Having  waited  as 
long  as  I thought  proper,  I steamed  up  and  returned  to  Bagdad.  At 
this  point  I put  on  board  a quantity  of  furniture,  3 cows  and  calves,  2 
large  anchors,  and  1 large  cable-chain,  the  property  of  known  Union 
men.  After  having  spent 'two  hours  at  this  place,  hoping  that  the  man 
left  at  Milton  would  rejoin  this  command  and  finding  that  he  did  not,  1 
I started  for  Hunt’s  Mill,  where  1 stopped  and  had  carried  on  board 
some  20  cords  of  pine  wood,  much  needed  here.  Having  completed  my  s 
instructions  I steamed  up  and  returned  to  this  place,  where  I anived  i 
at  about  6.30  o’clock  on  the  evening  of  the  10th  instant. 


The  stores  seized  are  as  follows: 

Five  boxes  1^-iuch  brads,  100  pounds ; 


1 light-house  clock:  1,000 
pounds  of  rod  iron;  1 grindstone;  3,000  feet  deck  planks;  1 platform- 
scale;  2 hay-scaleg ; 6 small  circular  saws;  2 sets  taps  and  dies;  8 
wooden  clamp-screws;  1 pump-auger;  5 papers  wrought  nails;  2 gal- 
lons spirits  of  turpentine;  10  wooden  clamp-screws;  4 pieces  India- 
rubber  belting;  2 bundles  sand-paper;  1 package  auger-bits,  and  20 
cords  of  pine  wood  ;'  all  of  which  have  been  turned  over  by  me  to  the 
provost-marshal.  None  of  the  rebel  forces  were  seen  during  the  trip. 


I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ 5 A.  N.  SHIPLEY, 

Captain , U.  &.  Army , Commanding  Expedition, 


Capt.  Charles  C.  Dwight, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Pensacola , Fla. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  EVACUATION  OF  BATON  ROUGE,  LA.  129 

AUGUST  10,  1862.— Affair  at  Bayou  Sara,  La. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  C.  N.  Rowley , Louisiana  Militia , commanding  Sixth 
Brigade  Louisiana  Militia. 

Hdqrs.  Sixth  Brigade  Louisiana  Militia, 

Point  Coupee , La .,  August  11,  1862. 

General  : Yesterday  the  enemy’s  iron-clad  gunboat  Essex  came  to 
Bayou  Sara  early  and  anchored  near  the  shore,  where  she  now  lies  (4 
p.  m.).  About  5 p.  m.  yesterday  also  came  a transport,  which  is  still  at 
Bayou  Sara.  On  arriving  the  gunboat  threw  some  shells  into  the  lower 
part  of  Bayou  Sara,  and  when  she  saw  the  transport  coming  up  she 
shelled  the  road  and  fields  on  this  side  the  river.  The  transport  then 
came  to  the  ferry,  landing  on  this  Side,  and  took  on  board  a quantity  of 
sugar  lying  there  to  be  carried  across  to  Bayou  Sara.  They  compelled 
the  negroes  of  Bemis  and  Ool.  Stephen  Van  Wickle  to  roll  the  sugar 
on  board,  while  100  armed  men  stood  guard  over  them.  They  notified 
Mr.  Gill  to  have  his  hands  ready  to  put  another  lot  on  board  which 
was  lying  three-quarters  of  a mile  above,  but  they  left  this  side  before 
it  was  accomplished,  the  whole  or  larger  part  being  on  this  bank  this 
morning.  There  was  a large  quantity  of  sugar  at  the  railroad  depot 
in  Bayou  Sara,  which  we  hear  they  seized,  but  cannot  say  whether 
they  have  it  on  board. 

Having  no  adequate  force  yet  collected,  and  those  we  have  out  being 
15  miles  below  here,  and  the  company  of  Bangers  of  Captain  Thompson 
being  either  at  the  Atchafalava,  45  miles  above,  or  gone  to  Opelousas, 
we  could  do  nothing  to  prevent  these  marauders  from  executing  their 
plans.  However,  Colonel  [F.  H.]  Farrar  had  guards  out  all  night  on  every 
road  to  cut  off  any  stragglers  and  prevent  the  negroes  and  others  from 
having  access  to  the  enemy.  I also  wrote  to  Captain  Thompson,  and 
sent  a special  bearer,  requesting  him  to  return  to  this  neighborhood, 
where  our  militia  might  co-operate  with  him  and  prevent  any  small 
parties  from  prowling  about  and  restrain  their  plunderings. 

We  cannot  form  an  opinion  whether  they  have  merely  come  upon  a 
thieving  errand  or  will  be  stationed  permanently  at  Bayou  Sara.  They 
got  400  or  500  hogsheads  of  sugar,  I think,  here  and  at  Bayou  Sara, 
which  belongs  almost  entirely  to  speculators.  They  also  arrested  and 
took  on  board  two  or  three  persons  who  have  been  engaged  in  crossing 
sugar.  I believe  they  hold  them  prisoners  still. 

C.  N.  BOWLEY, 

Brigadier- General,  Comdg.  Sixth  Brigade  Louisiana  [Militia]. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  L.  Lewis,  Commanding  Louisiana  Militia. 


AUGUST  20-21,  1862. — Skirmish  at  and  evacuation  of  Baton  Rouge,  La. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Maj.  J.  De  Baun,  Ninth  Louisiana  Battalion  Partisan  Rangers. 

No.  3. — J.  A.  De  Russy,  Provisional  Mayor. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles , C.  S.  Army. 

Port  Hudson,  August  23,  1862. 

Our  scouts  drove  in  the  enemy’s  pickets  at  Baton  Bouge  on  the  20th 
9 r r — VOL  xv 


130 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX  [Chap.  XXVII 

and  captured  some  20  beeves  and  40  horses.  The  gunboats  shelled 
furiously. 

The  town  was  evacuated  by  the  enemy  on  the  21st.  The  Essex  and 
No.  7 remain  before  it.  I expect  to  be  in  possession  this  morning. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier * General. 

Major-General  Van  Dorn,  Jackson , Miss. 


No.  2. 


Reports  of  Maj.  J.  Be  Baun , Ninth  Louisiana  Battalion  Partisan  Rangers. 


Camp  Pratt,  August  21,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  to  report  that  on  yesterday  morning  I drove  in  the  Fed- 
eral pickets  and  caused  a general  stampede  of  the  forces  in  Baton 
Rouge,  who,  with  the  exception  of  those  in  the  barracks,  fled  to  the 
gunboats.  They  fired  upon  me  with  one  company  and  afterward  their 
gunboats  shelled  me  for  two  hours.  It  is  reported  that  they  killed  1 
woman  and  5 children  and  1 negro  woman.  This  I do  not  know  of  my 
own  knowledge.  I captured  23  head  of  cattle  from  their  slaughter-pen; 
1 drove  all  the  horses  they  had  down  to  Bird’s  field  and  33  down  as  far 
as  Seth  David’s — a part  of  which  I now  have. 

The  Federals  have  released  all  the  convicts  from  the  penitentiary. 
All  the  negroes  that  were  in  the  penitentiary  have  been  uniformed  and 
armed.  This  information  regarding  the  penitentiary  1 have  received 
from  a convict  who  is  now  in  my  camp. 

Respectfully, 


J.  De  BAUN, 


Major , Commanding  Partisan  Rangers. 
Brigadier- General  Ruggles. 


Camp  near  Baton  Rouge, 

August  22,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  to  inform  you  that  the  enemy  have  evacuated  Baton 
Rouge,  and  the  gunboats  Essex  and  No.  7 are  lying  in  front  of  the  town. 
They  declare  that  if  we  enter  the  town  they  will  shell  it.  I have  sent  in 
messenger  for  the  women  and  children  to  come  out. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  De  BAUN, 

Major , Commanding  Partisan  Rangers . 
Brigadier- General  Ruggles. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  J.  A.  De  Russy , Provisional  Mayor. 

Baton  Rouge,  August  22,  1862. 

Sir  : On  the  morning  of  the  22d  instant,  the  day  after  the  evacuation 
of  the  United  States  troops,  the  citizens  of  the  city  of  Baton  Rouge 


Chap.  XXV2X] 


AFFAIR  AT  BAYOU  SARA,  LA. 


131 


convened  in  public  meeting  at  the  residence  of  William  S.  Pike,  esq., 
and  organized  by  calling  Mr.  J.  A.  De  Pussy  to  the  chair  and  appoint- 
ing Mr.  Joseph  Larguier  as  secretary. 

On  motion,  duly  seconded  and  unanimously  adopted,  a committee  of 
three  citizens  was  appointed  by  the  chairman  to  wait  upon  the  com- 
mander of  the  United  States  gunboat  lying  in  front  of  Baton  Rouge, 
with  instructions  to  inquire  his  intentions  in  relation  to  the  shelling  or 
otherwise  destroying  or  damaging  the  city  or  molesting  its  citizens. 

The  committee  was  composed  of  Messrs.  William  S.  Pike,  H.  Hart, 
and  William  D.  Phillips,  who  immediately  proceeded  on  their  mission, 
and  returning,  reported  that  Captain  Caldwell,  commanding  the  U.  S. 
gunboat  No.  7,  after  respectfully  listening  to  the  subject  matter  with 
which  they  were  charged,  answered  that  the  citizens  of  Baton  Rouge 
and  their  families  could  rest  secure  within  their  homes ; that  not  a shot 
should  be  fired  on  the  town;  but,  on  the  contrary,  to  invite  the  fam- 
ilies who  had  left  to  return  to  their  homes  and  resume  their  usual 
avocations.  Further,  that  no  boat  should  be  sent  from  their  vessel  or 
vessels  without  the  authority  of  the  city  authorities  first  being  had  for 
that  purpose. 

These  assurances  were  given  with  a condition  that  the  Confederate 
Army,  then  understood  to  be  in  the  neighborhood,  should  not  enter 
and  hold  military  possession  of  the  city  in  the  view  of  fortifying  the 
same,  or  any  demonstrations  of  a hostile  nature  against  his  forces. 

At  the  same  meeting  committees  were  appointed  to  call  upon  the 
commanders  of  the  two  detachments  of  your  army  marching  on  this 
city  and  explain  the  result  of  the  visit  to  Captain  Caldwell,  and  asking 
if  within  the  line  of  their  duty  to  halt  their  respective  commands  beyond 
the  corporate  limits  of  the  city. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day  another  meeting  was  held,  at  which 
the  following  gentlemen  were  elected  provisionally  as  mayor  and  board 
of  selectmen,  viz : J.  A.  De  Russy,  mayor ; William  S.  Pike,  Joseph  Lar- 
guier, G.  Gusman,  R.  H.  Burke,  S.  M.  Hart,  and  N.  K.  Knox  as  select- 
men. 

The  council  met  at  4 o- clock  p.  m.  and  appointed  Captain  Hayden  as 
chief  of  police,  with  authority  (jointly  with  the  mayor)  to  appoint  as 
many  subordinates  as  in  their  judgment  might  be  required  for  the  effi- 
cient police  of  the  city. 

It  was  also  resolved  that  the  said  authority  be  required  forthwith  to 
proceed  to  the  clearing  of  all  rubbish  and  impediments  within  the  cor- 
porate limits,  and  the  better  to  carry  this  order  into  effect  he  be  author- 
ized to  call  upon  owners  of  all  slaves  within  the  city  and  in  the  neigh- 
borhood to  assist  in  said  work. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

J.  A.  De  RUSSY, 

Provisional  Mayor  City  of  Baton  Rouge. 

J.  LARGUIER, 

Secretary . 

. General  Ruggles,  Comdg . Confed.  Forces  in  Baton  Rouge. 


AUGUST  23,  1862. — Affair  at  Bayou  Sara,  La. 

Report  of  H.  G.  Whiteman. 

Bayou  Sara,  August  24,  1862 — 10  a.  m. 
Sir  : The  gunboat  Essex  and  a transport  arrived  here  last  night;  fired 


132 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

two  shell  into  the  town,  but  did  no  damage.  Still  here;  no  troops.  Gun- 
boat Essex  now  rapidly  shelling  this  place,  10  a.  m. 

H.  0.  WHITEMAN. 

General  Ruggles,  Port  Hudson , La. 


AUGUST  29,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Saint  Charles  Court-House,  La. 

Report  of  Col.  Stephen  Thomas , Eighth  Vermont  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Eighth  Regiment  Vermont  Volunteers, 

Algiers , La .,  September  3,  1862. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  your  order  I left  camp  by  railroad  on 
Thursday  morning,  August  28,  with  two  companies  of  my  command, 
Company  A,  Captain  Grout,  and  Company  C,  Captain  Foster,  num- 
bering about  50  men  each,  and  a company  of  cavalry  (70  men),  under 
command  of  Lieutenant  Perkins,  Company  B,  Second  Regiment  'Mas- 
sachusetts Cavalry,  and  proceeded  to  Boutte  Station,  a distance  of  24 
miles,  on  the  New  Orleans,  Opelousas  and  Great  Western  Railroad. 
From  this  point  we  marched  to  Saint  Charles  Court-House,  where  we 
arrived  about  6 o’clock  p.  m.  and  encamped  for  the  night.  At  4 o’clock 
the  next  morning  we  were  again  under  way.  Reports  soon  began  to 
reach  us  that  there  was  a rebel  force  of  from  300  to  500  men  at  Bonnet 
Carre  Point,  and  when  about  8 miles  from  the  Court-House  the  advance 
guard  of  the  cavalry  came  riding  rapidly  back,  saying  they  had  found 
the  enemy.  The  balance  of  the  cavalry,  without  waiting  for  orders, 
advanced  at  full  speed,  with  the  exception  of  Lieutenant  Perkins  and 
a few  men  of  his  company,  who  were  in  rear  of  the  column.  I imme- 
diately put  the  battery  (it  being  two  pieces  of  artillery  attached  to  my 
regiment,  in  charge  of  Lieutenant  Morse,  Company  I)  and  infantry  at 
double-quick  and  was  soon  on  the  ground,  where  a skirmish  had 
commenced.  Two  prisoners  were  taken  by  the  cavalry.  One  man  was 
wounded  by  a canister-shot,  dealt  by  Lieutenant  Morse.  I discovered  j 
the  enemy  in  small  force,  out  of  rifle  range,  in  the  cane  field,  and  or- 
dered a few  shell  to  be  thrown  among  them,  which  caused  them  to 
scatter  and  take  to  the  swamps. 

We  then  proceeded  on  about  2 miles  farther,  but  finding  nothing  of 
the  enemy  we  commenced  a return,  my  object  being  to  secure  a large  ! 
drove  of  cattle  we  had  passed  during  the  morning.  On  our  march  back 
we  collected  horses,  cattle,  sheep,  and  mules  in  large  numbers,  which 
will  be  properly  reported  through  the  quartermaster’s  department,  and 
we  returned  to  camp  about  11  o’clock  a.  m.  on  Saturday,  the  30th  j 
ultimo,  having  marched  from  time  of  starting  the  previous  morning 
about  50  miles.  The  dust  and  heat  during  the  day-time  was  excessive, 
but  the  men  endured  the  fatigue  without  a murmur,  and  all  returned 
in  much  better  condition  than  could  have  been  expected.  Three  pris- 
oners were  taken  on  the  return,  who,  together  with  the  3 taken  where 
the  skirmish  was  had,  have  been  sent  to  the  custom-house. 

Captain  Mitchell,  of  the  Thirteenth  Regiment  Connecticut  Volun- 
teers, accompanied  the  expedition,  and  rendered  valuable  service  in 
aiding  the  moving  forward  and  as  an  interpreter. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

STEPHEN  THOMAS, 

Colonel  Eighth  Regiment  Vermont  Volunteers. 

H.  W.  Birge,  Acting  Brigadier- General. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


BAYOU  DES  ALLEMANDS,  LA. 


133 


SEPTEMBER  4-5,  1862.— Affairs  at  Boutte  Station  and  Bayon  des  Alle- 

mands,  La. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of 
the  Gulf. 

No.  2.— Col.  Stephen  Thomas,  Eighth  Vermont  Infantry. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler , U.  S.  Army , commanding  the 
Department  of  the  Gulf. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  September  11,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Saturday,  the  7th 
[Thursday,  the  4th],  a regiment  of  Texas  Partisan  Rangers,  under  the 
command  of  Major  [E.]  Waller,  ambushed  my  advanced  pickets  (a  de- 
tachment of  the  Eighth  Vermont  Volunteers)  at  Bayou  des  Allemands, 
32  miles  from  Algiers,  on  the  railroad,  when  they  were  coming  down  to 
Algiers  for  provisions,  and  wounded  a number  of  them.  The  guerrillas 
then  proceeded  to  the  bayou,  and  by  means  of  abuse  of  a flag  of  truce 
to  which  they  induced  an  answer  and  then  seized  the  bearers  and  put- 
ting them  in  front  of  their  column  of  attack  caused  a surrender  of  the 
remainder  befope  our  supporting  force  could  reach  them.  These  sup- 
ports were  detained  by  the  unfortunate  accident  of  running  upon  an 
ox  upon  the  track,  which  broke  up  the  train,  and  wounded  several  of 
the  troops.  Still  I cannot  approve  of  the  conduct  of  the  picket  in  not 
holding  out  and  making  a contest,  as  they  would  have  been  immedi- 
ately supported.  Emboldened  by  this  success  this  cavalry  force  made 
its  appearance  on  the  west  bank  of  the  river  some  30  miles  above  the 
city.  I immediately  ordered  Colonel  McMillan  to  take  a portion  of  the 
Twenty-first  Indiana  Regiment  and  Ninth  Connecticut  and  land  below 
them  and  Colonel  Paine  to  take  the  Fourteenth  Maine  and  the  Fourth 
Wisconsin  and  land  above  them,  and  asked  Commodore  Morris  to  send 
up  the  Mississippi  to  cover  the  landing  in  case  the  enemy  should  be 
supported  by  artillery,  which  request  was  promptly  complied  with. 

The  movement  was  admirably  executed,  and  resulted  in  hemming  in, 
between  the  river  and  the  swamp,  the  entire  body  of  guerrillas.*  Upon 
being  called  upon  to  surrender  they  fled  from  their  horses  into  the 
swamp  and  were  pursued  by  our  men,  who  succeeded  in  capturing 
some  40  prisoners,  including  several  officers,  and  250  horses,  with  their 
equipments,  which  could  not  be  taken  into  the  swamp. 

The  enemy  lost  8 killed  and  wounded.  This  guerrilla  force,  which 
has  been  the  terror  of  all  that  portion  of  the  country,  has  been  thor- 
oughly dispersed,  dismounted,  and  disorganized. 

I will  endeavor,  as  soon  as  I receive  re-enforcements,  to  organize  an 
expedition  which  shall  relieve  the  western  part  of  Louisiana  from  the 
presence  of  any  force  of  the  enemy. 

I am  convinced  that  all  attempts  upon  New  Orleans  are  abandoned 
for  the  present,  and  that  the  enemy  await  the  finishing  of  the  iron-clad 


See  September  7-8,  1862.— Expedition  from  Carrollton,  &c. 


134 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 


boats  which  they  are  making  near  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo  River. 
These  they  expect  to  finish  by  the  middle  of  October. 

I am,  very  trulv,  your  obedient  servant,. 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEE, 
Major- General , Commanding. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commanding  the  Armies  of  the  United  States. 


Ko.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  Stephen  Thomas , Eighth  Vermont  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Eighth  Regiment  Vermont  Volunteers, 

Algiers,  La .,  September  6,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  4th  instant  Cap- 
tain Hall,  commanding  the  outposts  at  Bayou  des  Allemands,  dis- 
patched Captain  Clark,  Company  K,  with  a detail  of  infantry,  and  one 
12-pounder  howitzer,  manned  by  12  men,  on  a train  of  cars,  to  meet 
and  protect  the  upper  train,  which  was  supposed  to  be  without  escort. 
When  his  train  had  arrived  nearly  opposite  Boutte  Station  it  was  fired 
into  by  a large  force  of  guerrilla  cavalry  and  infantry  lying  in  ambush. 
Many  of  his  men  were  instantly  killed,  wounded,  and  disabled,  includ- 
ing every  one  of  the  artillerists,  they,  with  many  of  the  infantry,  being 
on  open  platform  cars.  The  enemy  had  placed  the  switch  so  that  the 
train  ran  onto  a side  track,  where  it  came  in  collision  with  an  empty 
passenger  car,  the  force  of  which  was  such  as  to  knock  many  of  the 
men  down  and  off  the  cars.  One  of  these  last,  during  the  momentary 
delay,  ran  ahead  and  turned  the  switch  at  the  other  end  of  the  side 
track,  thus  thwarting  the  design  of  the  enemy  to  run  the  train  into  the 
ditch.  Captain  Clark  soon  met  the  upper  train,  but  not  deeming  it 
prudent  to  return  through  a force  which  was  estimated  at  not  less  than 
1,000,  he  kept  on  with  both  trains  to- Algiers.  The  rebels,  after  robbing 
our  dead,  wounded,  and  prisoners,  and  committing  numberless  atrocious 
acts  on  them  (slashing  wounded,  helpless  men  over  the  head  with  sabers, 
&c.),  moved  on  toward  the  bayou,  nearing  which  place  they  hoisted  a 
flag  of  truce  over  the  bushes.  Captain  Hall  sent  out  a party  to  see 
what  was  wanted.  This  party  being  absent  an  unreasonable  length  of 
time  he  sent  out  another,  which  was  seized,  and  both  were  placed  in 
front  and  obliged  to  march  toward  the  bayou.  Captain  Hall,  seeing 
the  immensely  superior  force  that  was  brought  against  him  and  that 
his  first  fire  would  prove  fatal  to  his  own  men,  surrendered  his  force, 
as  I learned  by  an  intelligent  contraband  that  escaped. 

On  the  5th,  in  obedience  to  your  orders,  I proceeded  at  an  early  hour, 
with  all  the  available  force  of  that  portion  of  the  regiment  stationed 
here  and  with  a section  of  Mms’  battery,  toward  the  Bayou  des  Alle- 
mands, by  railroad.  When  within  about  13  miles  of  Boutte  Station 
we  most  unfortunately  came  in  collision  with  a cow,  by  which  several 
cars  were  thrown  from  the  track  and  several  men  badly  injured.  So 
many  cars  were  smashed  up  that  it  was  impossible  to  place  the  men  on 
what  were  left  without  subjecting  them  to  great  exposure  and  without 
room  to  use  their  arms.  Before  the  wreck  could  be  cleared  from  the  track 
and  the  track  repaired  so  that  the  train  could  move  on  it  was  so  late 
that  I deemed  it  impossible  to  co-operate  with  Colonel  McMillan,  as  pre- 
viously arranged,  especially  as  I learned  that  the  track  was  torn  up  at 


Chap.  XXVn.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  CARROLLTON,  LA.  135 

different  points  between  us  and  Boutte  Station.  I dispatched  Major 
Dillingham  to  Carrollton  immediately  after  the  accident,  with  orders 
to  communicate  with  General  Butler  relative  to  our  situation  and  with 
regard  to  our  probable  inability  to  co-operate  with  Colonel  McMillan. 
Had  I disembarked  and  attempted  to  march  to  Boutte  I should  have 
been  obliged  to  have  gone  out  to  the  river  and  made  a distance  of  17 
miles  and  could  not  have  reached  there  until  evening.  I believed  I 
could  reach  that  point  earlier  by  returning  and  going  by  boat  up  the 
river.  * 

The  total  casualties  of  the  two  days  are  as  follows : Killed,  9 ; wounded, 
27  j missing,  155.  One  12-pounder  howitzer  and  two  Ellsworth  guns, 
after  being  rendered  useless  by  throwing  portions  of  them  into  the  river, 
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

STEPHEN  THOMAS, 
Colonel  Eighth  Regiment  Vermont  Volunteers . 

Capt.  R.  S.  Davis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Gulf 


SEPTEMBER  7-8,  1862. — Expedition  from  Carrollton  to  vicinity  of  Saint 
Charles  Court-House,  La.,  and  skirmish. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  James  W.  McMillan,  Twenty-first  Indiana  Infantry. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Frederick  Frye,  Ninth  Connecticut  Infantry. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  James  W.  McMillan , Twenty-first  Indiana  Infantry . 

Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Camp  Carrollton , La.,  September  9,  1862. 

Sir:  In  obedience  to  an  order  received  from  Major-General  Butler, 
commanding  the  department,  dated  September  7,  i took  the  Twenty- 
first  Indiana  Regiment  and  battery  and  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  Regi- 
ment, of  Col.  H.  E.  Paine’s  brigade,  and  proceeded  up  the  Mississippi 
River  about  15  miles,  where  I learned  there  was  a considerable  force  of 
rebels  on  the  west  bank  about  20  miles  above  the  city.  As  the  enemy’s 
position  led  me  to  believe  they  could  be  captured,  I at  once  returned 
to  the  city  and  gave  the  commanding  general  what  information  I could 
get. 

Having  discussed  and  agreed  upon  a plan  of  operations,  I was  again, 
on  the  8th  instant,  ordered  up  the  river  with  the  same  command ; also 
one  section  of  Thompson’s  battery,  Colonel  Paine  in  command  of  the 
Fourteenth  Maine  and  Ninth  Connecticut  Regiments  and  two  sections 
of  Thompson’s  battery.  When  near  the  place  the  rebels  were  last  re- 
ported I went  ashore  and  learned  they  had  gone  up  the  river.  Colonel 
Paine  having  landed  his  regiment  2 or  3 miles  above,  I at  once  resolved 
to  go  yet  higher  up  the  river  and  cut  off  the  rebels.  When  about  5 
miles  above  Saint  Charles  Court-House  I again  touched  shore,  and  find- 
ing I was  above  the  rebels  I at  once  commenced  landing  my  force.  I 
ordered  Captain  Roy,  with  five  companies  of  the  Twenty  first  Indiana 


136 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

Volunteers,  to  move  back  to  the  timber  or  edge  of  the  swamp  to  cut  off 
the  rebels  if  Colonel  Paine  should  drive  them  up  the  river,  and  followed 
with  the  other  force  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  land.  When  about  1£ 
miles  back  from  the  river  I found  a good  road,  running  parallel  with 
the  river,  made  for  the  sole  use  of  the  rebel  forces  in  their  guerrilla 
raids  along  the  river,  the  cane  hiding  them  completely  from  the  river. 

I posted  a small  force  on  each  side  of  the  rebel  road,  masked  by  tall 
weeds  on  the  bank  of  one  of  the  many  ditches  running  from  the  river  to 
the  swamp,  and  sent  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  Begiment  and  three  guns  of 
the  Indiana  battery  to  the  support  of  Captain  Roy,  who  had  discovered 
the  rebels  in  the  edge  of  the  swamp,  but  cut  off  from  going  up  the  river. 
Soon  after  posting  the  force  on  the  rebel  by-road  a lavge  body  of  them 
approached  to  within  three-fourths  of  a mile  of  the  force  on  the  road, 
then  temporarily  under  command  of  Captain  McLaflin,  when  one  of  my 
men,  who  had  been  ordered  back  by  Captain  Boy,  was  discovered  by 
them,  and  3 of  the  ragged  villains  started  at  full  speed  to  capture  or 
kill  him.  When  within  30  paces  of  Captain  McLaflin  my  man  dropped 
to  the  ground,  and  in  an  instant  Captain  McLaflin’s  command  had 
killed  and  wounded  the  3 rash  rebels,  killing  1 horse  and  capturing  the 
other  2.  As  soon  as  the  main  body  saw  their  rash  comrades  fall  they 
stopped,  and  turned  and  fled  through  the  cane  toward  the  swamp,  where 
they  were  again  foiled  by  Captain  Boy’s  command. 

Having  gotten  all  the  artillery  landed,  I posted  the  two  12-pounder 
howitzers  of  Thompson’s  battery  on  the  rebel  road,  supported  by  a por- 
tion of  the  Twenty -first  Indiana  and  Fourth  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  the 
main  force  being  near  the  swamp  where  the  rebels  were  ambushed.  I 
ordered  the  Indiana  battery  into  position  and  shelled  the  weeds  for  a 
few  moments,  when  the  rebels  broke  out  of  their  weedy  ambush  and  ran 
to  the  swamp,  covered  by  heavy  timber.  When  I found  they  were 
gone  into  the  swamp  I advanced  my  guns  (having  ordered  up  Lieuten- 
ant Hartley,  with  one  of  his  howitzers)  as  far  as  the  ground  would 
permit  and  shelled  the  border  of  the  woods  for  a short  time;  but  soon 
becoming  satisfied  the  rebels  had  taken  to  the  swamp,  I ordered  five 
companies  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana,  under  Captain  Boy,  and  five 
companies  of  the  Fourth  Wisconsin,  all  under  command  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Bean,  of  the  Fourth  Wisconsin,  to  follow  them  into  the  swamp. 
They  followed  the  horse-tracks  until  they  found  the  horses,  to  the  num- 
ber of  300  or  350,  belly-deep  in  mud  and  water,  tied  to  the  trees,  and 
deserted  by  their  riders.  They  came  up  with,  shot,  and  captured  sev- 
eral of  the  rebels,  but  they  were  scattered  so  much  that  pursuit  soon 
appeared  useless,  and,  after  getting  200  of  their  horses,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Bean  prudently  left  the  pursuit  of  the  rebels  and  returned  to 
solid  ground  once  more,  with  his  men  tired  and  muddy,  many  of  the 
men  and  officers  having  been  to  their  waists  in  mud  and  water.  I then  x 
returned  to  the  boats,  satisfied  the  only  chance  left  the  rebels  for  es- 
cape was  up  the  river,  and  that,  by  sending  a force  above,  I could  cap- 
ture them.  In  the  mean  time  Colonel  Paine,  finding  the  enemy  were 
above  him,  had  moved  up  to  where  I had  landed.  At  my  suggestion 
he  took  the  Fourteenth  Maine  Begiment  and  went  up  the  river  about 
10  or  11  miles,  to  a point  where  it  was  said  the  rebels  had  left  one  com- 
pany and  all  their  stores  and  camp  equipage.  When  I got  the  cap- 
tured horses  on  board  of  the  transports  I found  that  I could  not  possi- 
bly take  any  more  if  I captured  them.  1 therefore  resolved  to  return  to 
Carrollton,  leave  the  horses,  and  return  again  by  sunrise  of  to-day. 
Having  ordered  the  Ninth  Connecticut  Begiment  to  join  Colonel  Paine, 

I came  down,  arriving  about  7 p.  m.  Left  the  captured  horses,  and, 


Chap.  XXVII.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  CARROLLTON,  LA.  137 

with  250  men  from  each  (the  Twenty-first  Indiana  and  Fourth  Wis- 
consin Begiments),  returned  to  explore  the  swamp  again  for  horses. 
I brought  down  about  50  to-day  and  killed  a large  number  that  were 
totally  unable  to  get  out  of  the  swamp.  The  rebels  proved  to  be  Colonel 
[E.]  Waller’s  Texas  Cavalry.  We  captured  over  50  prisoners,  including 
several  commissioned  officers.  We  found  but  2 dead  and  3 wounded, 
but  the  prisoners  say  our  shell  and  canister  killed  and  wounded  several 
in  the  swamp.  We  captured  about  300  horses  and  saddles,  2 rebel  flags, 
1 French  flag,  shot-guns,  pistols,  and,  indeed,  nearly  everything  they 
had  with  them,  even  to  their  spurs. 

The  officers  and  men  of  my  command  did  all  that  soldiers  could — did 
their  duty  well.  The  operations  of  Colonel  Paine’s  command  will,  I 
infer,  be  the  subject  of  a separate  report  by  himself. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  W.  McMILLAlf, 
Colonel  Twenty-first  Indiana  Volunteers. 

Maj.  George  C.  Strong, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Frederick  Frye , Ninth  Connecticut  Infantry. 

Camp  Parapet,  La.,  September  12, 1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  of  inclosing  to  you  my  report  of  an  ex- 
pedition against  the  enemy  in  the  neighborhood  of  Saint  Charles  Court- 
House,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river. 

The  expedition,  accompanied  by  the  armed  steamer  Mississippi,  was 
under  command  of  Actg.  Brig.  Gen.  H.  E.  Paine,  and  was  composed 
of  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  and  Sixth  Michigan  Begiments  and  a section 
of  the  First  Maine  Battery  in  one  division,  and  the  Ninth  Connecticut  and 
Fourteenth  Maine  Begiments,  with  another  section  of  the  same  battery, 
in  another  division. 

Word  had  been  received  that  the  enemy  were  establishing  a camp  and 
had  already  concentrated  a force  of  2,000  infantry,  a full  battery  of  light 
artillery,  and  about  500  cavalry.  In  accordance  with  orders,  the  Ninth 
Connecticut,  about  550  strong,  embarked  at  Carrollton  on  the  transport 
Morning  Light,  with  a section  of  battery,  at  11  o’clock  on  the  night  of 
September  7,  and  landed  at  daylight  at  a point  above  Carrollton  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  river,  with  the  Fourteenth  Maine,  the  other  divis- 
ion landing  5 or  6 miles  above,  all  to  converge  to  a common  center, 
proper  signals  having  been  arranged.  After  moving  forward  about  a 
mile  signal  was  made  from  the  mast-head  of  the  Mississippi,  u Enemy 
approaching.”  The  artillery  shelled  the  woods,  but  failing  to  dislodge 
the  enemy,  the  Ninth  Connecticut  were  thrown  forward  as  skirmishers. 
After  moving  forward  Several  miles  through  woods,  swamps,  bayous, 
and  canebrakes,  everywhere  finding  traces  of  allying  enemy,  abandoned 
haversacks,  blankets,  bundles,  papers,  &c.,  it  was  found  that  the  enemy, 
mostly  cavalry,  attempting  to  break  through  in  this  direction,  had  been 
driven  back,  and,  abandoning  their  horses,  saddles,  and  equipments,  had 
fled  into  an  almost  imj^enetrable  swamp,  but  being  surrounded  on  all 
sides  our  troops  killed  and  wounded  8,  taking  about  40  prisoners  and 
bringing  in  upwards  of  200  horses  ready  equipped.  This  was  accom- 


138 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  X.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTL 

plished  without  loss  on  our  side.  A lot  of  sutler’s  and  other  stores  were 
also  recaptured,  which  had  been  taken  by  the  enemy  from  the  steamer 
Whiteman,  sunk  by  collision  after  the  battle  of  Baton  Rouge^ 

The  regiments  were  re  embarked  at  about  6 o’clock  p.  m.,  the  Wis- 
consin and  Michigan  regiments,  with  their  section  of  battery  and  the 
captured  booty,  returning  to  Carrollton,  while  the  Connecticut  and  Maine 
regiments  and  the  other  section  of  battery  proceeded  up  the  river  to 
cut  off  the  enemy’s  retreat.  Pickets  were  thrown  out  that  night,  and 
Captain  Hennessy,  Company  E,  of  the  Ninth  Connecticut,  having  been  i 
sent  out  with  his  company,  captured  a colored  rebel  scout,  well  mounted, 
who  had  been  sent  out  to  watch  our  movements.  It  being  ascertained 
that  the  enemy  had  proceeded  in  another  direction,  we  re-embarked  and 
returned  to  our  encampment,  arriving  at  6 p.  m.,  September  9. 

The  men  deserve  great  credit  for  their  energy  and  determination,  for 
though  not  recovered  from  the  effects  of  the  Vicksburg  and  Baton  Rouge 
expeditions,  not  a man  lagged. 

# * # . # * * * 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FREDERICK  FRYE, 

Major , Comdg.  Ninth  Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers. 

J.  D.  Williams, 

Adjutant- General,  State  of  Connecticut. 


SEPTEMBER  13-15,  1862.— Expedition  to  Pass  Manchac  and  Ponchatoula 

La.,  and  skirmish. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1.— Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of  j 
the  Gulf. 

No.  2— Maj.  George  C.  Strong,  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Department  of  the  Gulf. 
No.  3.— Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Buggies,  C.  S.  Army,  and  instructions. 

I; 

No.  1. 

» 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler , JJ.  S.  Army , commanding  the 
Department  of  the  Gulf. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  September  24,  1862. 

General:  Having  been  informed  that  a small  force  of  the  enemy 
was  repairing  Manchac  Pass,  and  that  the  troops  haff  been  withdrawn 
from  Ponchatoula,  48  miles  north  of  this  city,  the  headquarters  of  Gen- 
eral  Jeff.  Thompson,  I directed  Major  Strong,  my  chief  of  staff,  to  take 
five  companies  of  men  to  complete  the  destruction  of  the  bridge  and  the 
repairs,  if  any,  and,  by  a division  of  his  force,  to  endeavor  to  secure  the 
person  of  General  Thompson  and  to  destroy  his  supplies.  j 

Owing  to  the  heavy  draught  of  our  boats,  as  set  forth  in  Major  Strong’s  j 
report  (herewith  inclosed),  it  was  found  impossible  to  carry  the  place, 
as  originally  proposed  $ but  Major  Strong,  not  lo  bo  baffled,  determined  . 
upon  an  attack,  and  in  open  day,  at  the  head  of  112  men,  made  a march 
of  10  miles  upon  the  headquarters  of  a general  who  was  collecting  forces 
to  attack  New  Orleans,  drove  away  a light  battery  of  artillery,  supported 


CHAP.  XXVII.] 


EXPEDITION  TO  PONCHATOULA,  LA. 


139 


by  300  infantry,  took  and  occupied  the  town,  destroyed  the  telegraph 
and  post-offices,  captured  the  dispatches,  possessed  himself  of  the  gen- 
eral’s presentation  sword,  spurs,  and  bridle  as  trophies  (our  officers  do 
not  plunder  generals’  quarters  of  shirts  and  stockings),  burned  his  sup- 
ply train  of  twenty  cars,  and  returned  at  his  leisure,  inflicting  treble 
loss  upon  the  enemy  in  killed  and  wounded. 

I beg  to  commend  this  to  the  commanding  general  as  one  of  the  most 
daring  and  successful  exploits  of  the  war — equal  in  dash,  spirit,  and 
cool  courage  to  anything  attempted  on  either  side.  Major  Strong  and 
his  officers  and  men  deserve  great  credit.  It  may  have  been  a little 
daring,  perhaps  rash,  but  that  has  not  been  an  epidemic  fault  with  our 
officers. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEB, 
Major-General , Commanding* 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  Armies  of  the  United  States . 


No.  2. 

i Report  of  Maj.  George  C.  Strong , Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department 

of  the  Gulf. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  September  24,  1862. 

General:  Pursuant  to  your  orders  of  the  13th  instant  I embarked 
on  the  afternoon  of  that  day  on  board  steamer  Ceres,  at  Lakeport, 
with  three  companies  of  the  Twelfth  Begiment  Maine  Volunteers,  com- 
manded respectively  by  Captains  Thornton,  Farrington,  and  Winter, 
ind  one  company  (Captain  Pickering’s)  of  the  Twenty-sixth  Massachu- 
setts Begiment.  I had  previously  sent  100  men  of  the  Thirteenth  Con- 
necticut Begiment  on  board  the  gunboat  New  London,  whose  com- 
mander, Captain  Bead,  had  kindly  consented  to  co-operate  with  me. 
The  object  in  view  was  to  surprise  the  village  of  Ponchatoula,  the  head- 
quarters of  the  rebel  General  Jeff.  Thompson,  48  miles  north  of  this 
3ity,  on  the  line  of  the  Jackson  Bailroad.  To  that  end  the  New  London 
was  to  land  her  men  at  Maneliac  Bridge,  where  at  daybreak  next 
morning  they  were  to  drive  the  enemy  that  might  be  found  there 
northward  to  Ponchatoula,  while  the  remainder  of  the  force,  having 
found  our  way  15  miles  up  to  Tangipahoa  Biver  in  the  night,  should 
have  landed,  marched  6 miles  westward,  and  captured  Ponchatoula  in 
season  to  secure  those  of  the  enemy  who  had  been  driven  up  from  Pass 
Manchac. 

The  attempt  at  surprise  failed,  for  not  only  was  the  New  London 
inable  to  get  over  the  bar  into  Manchac  Pass  in  the  darkness,  but  the 
Oeres,  too  large  for  the  easy  navigation  of  the  narrow  and  winding 
Tangipahoa,  failed  in  each  of  the  succeeding  nights  to  reach  her  desti- 
nation on  that  river  in  season  to  admit  of  our  gaining  Ponchatoula 
before  daylight.  I resolved  therefore  to  go  with  that  steamer  to  Man- 
diac  Bridge,  and  did  so  on  the  morning  of  the  15th.  From  that  point 
Captain  Winter  was  sent  with  liis  company  southward,  to  make  the 
lestruction  of  the  railroad  on  Manchac  Island  more  complete,,  which 
luty  he  thoroughly  performed.  Captain  Pickering’s  company  was  left 
o guard  the  steamer,  and  the  companies  of  Captains  Thornton  and 


140 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


Farrington  began  a forced  march  of  10  miles  upon  Fonchatoula.  A 
locomotive  1 mile  below  the  village  gave  notice  of  our  approach,  which 
could  not  be  concealed,  and  ran  northward,  giving  the  alarm  at  the 
village,  and  thence  to  Camp  Moore,  for  re-enforcements.  We  met  on 
entering  Ponchatonla  a discharge  of  canister  at  70  yards  from  a light 
battery,  in  charging  which  Captain  Thornton  fell  severely  wounded. 
His  company,  then  under  Lieutenant  Sight,  re-enforced  Captain  Far- 
rington’s first  platoon,  that  had  gained  a position  on  the  enemy’s  right, 
to  which  Lieutenant  Coan,  with  the  second  platoon  of  that  company 
took  a position,  under  partial  cover,  on  the  left  of  the  enemy’s  line 
From  these  positions  our  men  poured  in  so  deliberate  and  destructive 
a fire  that  the  enemy  was  driven  from  the  field,  the  artillery  galloping) 
away,  followed  by  the  infantry,  on  a road  through  the  forest,  m a north  4 
westerly  direction.  We  then  set  fire  to  a train  of  upwards  of  20  cars, 
laden  with  cotton,  sugar,  molasses,  &c.,  took  the  papers  from  the  post 
and  telegraph  offices  (destroying  the  apparatus  of  the  latter),  and  Gen- 
eral Jeff.  Thompson’s  sword,  spurs,  bridle,  &c.,  from  his  quarters  in 
the  hotel.  The  sword  was  presented  to  him  by  so-called  “Memphis 

^Awritten  document  was  obtained,  which  showed  the  rebel  force  at 
that  point  to  consist  of  300  troops  of  the  Tenth  Arkansas  Regiment, 
one  company  of  Home  Guards,  and  one  company  of  artillery,  with  six 
pieces.  I had,  however,  received  reliable  information  that  the  enemy’s 
force  was  a week  previous  only  200  infantry  and  no  artillery.  The 
re -enforcement  had  taken  place  at  a subsequent  date.  Our  force  en 
gaged  amounted  to  but  112  men.  We  left,  of  killed,  wounded,  anc 
missing  (exclusive  of  those  who  have  since  come  in,  among  these  Iasi 
the  gallant  Thornton),  10  men  at  Ponchatonla.  Surgeon  Avery,  Nintl 
Connecticut  Volunteers,  with  his  attendant,  voluntarily  remained  witl 
the  wounded,  but  the  former  has  since  returned.  We  brought  m 11 
men  more  or  less  severely  wounded.  One  fatal  case  of  sunstroke  oc 
curred  on  board  the  steamer.  Our  return  from  Poucliatoula  was  neces 
sarilv  along  the  railroad,  through  a swamp,  and  on  which  there  is  n( 
cover  for  troops,  and  it  was  therefore  impossible  to  bring  off  those  of  oui 
men  who  were  most  severely  wounded,  as  they  would  be  exposed  for  ; 
long  distance  to  the  fire  of  the  artillery,  which,  with  horses  attached 
would  be  brought  back  upon  the  line  of  the  road  as  soon  as  we  shoulc 
have  left  the  village.  It  did  so  return  at  the  signal  of  the  inhabitants 
but,  though  actively  served,1  did  us  no  harm.  Surgeon  Avery  report! 
20  of  the  enemy  killed.  , , „ , , , , . 

Captains  Thornton  and  Farrington  and  the  officers  and  men  of  tnei 
respective  commands,  though  nearly  exhausted  by  the  march  (2  mile 
of  which  was  over  an  open  trestle  work,)  in  the  heat  of  the  day,  behave! 
nobly  in  the  fight.  Captains  Pickering  and  Winter,  after  a very  rapi< 
march,  for  which  they  are  entitled  to  much  credit,  came  up  after  w 
had  left  the  village,  covered  our  rear,  and  assisted  iu  bringing  in  th 
wounded.  Lieutenants  Martin,  Allen,  and  Finnegass,  and  Commande 
Buchanan,  U.  S.  Navy,  who  accompanied  the  expedition,  rendered  iffi 
portant  services,  and  their  .gallantry  during  the  action  deserves  specia 

mention.  _ ,,  , . 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedien 

servant’  GEO.  O,  STRONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf. 


141 


Chap.  XXVIL]  EXPEDITION  TO  DONALDSONVILLE,  LA. 

No.  3. 

: Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Buggies , G.  S.  Army , and  instructions. 

[September  14  or  15,  1862.] 

Three  regiments  of  the  enemy  attacked  and  burned  Ponchatoula  to- 
day. Can  vou  send  me  two  regiments? 

DANIEL  RUGGLES. 

General  Van  Dorn,  Holly  Springs. 


« [Jackson,  Miss.,  September  15,  1862.] 

Operator  at  Tickfaw  dispatches  that  enemy  have  burned  Long  Bridge, 
over  Ponchatoula  River,  2 miles  this  side  station  at  Ponchatoula.  Our 
forces  nearly  all  captured.  Enemy  lost  16  killed.  Our  battery  taken. 
Enemy,  3,000  to  4,000,  not  yet  at  Tickfaw. 

Can  you  send  me  some  troops? 

[DANIEL  RUGGLES,] 
Brigadier -General,  G.  S.  Army. 

General  Van  Dorn,  Holly  Springs. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  September  15, 1862. 

If  the  enemy  are  still  at  Ponchatoula  communicate  immediately  to 
General  Beall  by  courier,  stating  full  particulars,  and  request  the  gen- 
eral to  send  such  troops  as  he  can  spare  by  railroad  to  Clinton  for 
further  orders. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 
Brigadier -General , G.  S.  Army. 

Captain  Carter,  Gamp  Moore , La. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  September  16, 1862. 
Our  troops  at  Ponchatoula  rallied  by  Colonel  Witt  and  repulsed  the 
merny,  reported  900  strong,  retaking  our  battery,  capturing  the  enemy’s 
vounded.  Attack  expected  this  morning. 

[DANIEL  RUGGLES,] 
Brigadier- General,  G.  S.  Army. 

General  Van  Dorn. 

(Same  to  Generals  Beall  and  M.  L.  Smith.) 


IEPTEMBER  21-25,  1862. — Expedition  from  Carrollton  to  Donaldsonville, 

La.,  and  skirmish. 

Report  of  Gol.  James  W.  McMillan,  Tie enty -first  Indiana  Infantry. 

Camp  Carrollton,  September  25,  1862. 
Sir  : In  the  execution  of  your  order  to  go  to  Donaldsonville  with 
iy  regiment  I was  compelled  to  go  to  Baton  Rouge  to  find  a gunboat, 


142 


w 


. FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S. 


S.  MISS.. 


the  Sciota,  Itasca,  and  Katahdin  having  gone  up  to  that  place  on 
Saturday  morning  early.  I gave  the  commanding  officer  the  order  from 
Commodore  Morris,  and  was  accompanied  to  near  Donaldsonville  by 
all  of  them,  the  Sciota  going  to  anchor  a few  miles  above,  for  the  pro  - 
tection of  the  steamboat  Iberville,  loading  with  sugar  on  the  west  bank 
of  the  river.  The  Katahdin  and  Itasca  anchored  opposite  Donaldson- 
ville. It  being  dark  when  we  arrived  I deemed  it  prudent  to  wait 
until  morning  before  landing.  Early  Monday  morning  I landed  my 
command,  and,  finding  the  rebel  pickets  in  the  village,  I followed  them 
closely  nearlv  4 miles  down  the  bayou  to  where  they  were  encamped 
in  sugar-houses.  On  our  approach  they  scattered  among  the  cane  and 
ran  to  the  woods.  Finding  I could  effect  nothing,  I returned  to  the 
town  with  a few  blankets,  left  in  the  precipitancy  of  the  flight  of  the 
rebels.  I learned  their  provisions  were  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
bayou,  where  they  have  a small  fortification  and  five  or  six  guns,  and 
use  the  sugar  warehouses  of  Aro  & Cox  as  barracks.  On  yester-  | 
day  (Wednesday)  I determined  to  see  what  was  the  strength  of  their 
works  and  forces,  having  had  so  many  conflicting  statements  in  regard 
to  their  numbers,  varying  from  1,000  to  2,500.  I was  met  by  them 
with  one  6-pounder  gun  within  1-J  miles  of  the  river,  but  I only  allowed 
them  one  shot  by  pushing  on  so  rapidly  as  to  compel  a hasty  retreat 
to  save  their  gun.  They  opened  on  us  once  more,  when  I brought  two  \ 
of  my  guns  into  battery  and  soon  drove  them  to  their  fortifications,  ] 
pushing  them  rapidly.  When  within  700  yards  of  their  fortifications 
they  opened  a well-directed  fire  on  us  with  five  guns — one  12-pounder, 
one  8 pounder,  three  6-pounders,  and  perhaps  one  5-pounder.  I imme- 
diately ordered  my  guns  into  battery  and  returned  their  fire  briskly, 
but  finding  my  guns  overmatched  I determined  to  charge  their  forti- 
fications ; but  while  my  officers  were  making  the  necessary  arrange-  1 
ments  for  carrying  the  order  out  I discovered  their  cavalry,  under 
command  of  Major  McWaters,  about  half  a mile  distant,  passing  rapidly 
along  a road  cut  through  the  woods,  back  of  the  fields,  parallel  to  the 
one  leading  to  the  river,  and  down  which  I had  marched.  I immedi- 
ately countermanded  the  order  to  charge  and  retraced  my  steps,  when 
in  less  than  1£  miles  from  the  river  the  rebel  cavalry  commenced  mak- 
ing its  appearance,  having  emerged  from  the  woods,  but  too  late  to 
ambuscade  us.  They  pushed  on  and  got  between  me  and  the  river, 
but  only  to  lose  several  of  their  number  and  be  driven  back  at  double 
the  speed  they  came  up.  I then  returned  to  the  river  bank,  with  my 
command  completely  exhausted  by  the  long  march  and  constant  skir- 
mishing,  frequently  going  at  double  quick.  I was  compelled  to  halt 
three  or  four  times  on  my  return  to  enable  the  men  to  rest. 

We  took  one  prisoner  in  arms  and  the  town  assessor  and  brought  a 
few  of  the  citizens  as  refugees.  I found  it  out  of  my  power  to  effect 
anything.  Force  and  transportation  insufficient  to  follow  on  down  the 
bayou  to  Kapoleonville,  Thibodeaux,  Terre  Bonne,  &c.,  and  as  I learned 
that  the  Spanish  refugees  preferred  remaining  and  fighting  the  rebels 
a la  mode  Seminole,  I resolved  to  return  to  this  camp. 

My  loss  was  one  (Lieutenant  Harding)  missing  and  one  artillerist 
slightly  wounded.  Rebel  loss  could  not  have  been  less  than  30  or  40. 
Some  of  the  citizens  reported  it  much  greater.  I captured  a few  horses 
only,  there  being  but  few  left  by  the  rebels. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  W.  McMILLAK, 
Colonel  Twenty  first  Indiana  Volunteers 


Maj.  George  O.  Strong,  A.  A.  G.,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf. 


Chap.  XXVH.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SABINE  PASS,  TEX.  143 

SEPTEMBER  24-25,  1862. — Engagement  at  Sabine  Pass,  Tex. 

REPORTS. 


No.  1. — Col.  X.  B.  Debray,  Debray’s  Texas  Regiment. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  Col.  A.  W.  Spaigbt,  Spaight’s  Texas  Battalion. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  X.  B.  Debray,  Debray’s  Texas  Regiment. 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 
Houston , Tex.,  September  25, 1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I received  to-day  at  7 a.  m.  an 
express  from  Beaumont,  bearer  of  a verbal  message,  that  one  gunboat 
and  three  or  four  transports  had  entered  the  Sabine;  that  Major  Irvine, 
commanding  at  Sabine  Pass,  applied  for  assistance  from  the  people  of 
Beaumont  and  Liberty,  and  that  the  messenger  from  Sabine  Pass  had 
heard  at  8 or  10  miles  from  that  place  a heavy  cannonade.  Major  Irvine 
has  at  the  fort  near  Sabine  Pass  only  30  men,  and  about  25  mounted 
men  3J  miles  from  the  fort.  1 have  to  state  that  Major  Irvine,  who  was 
in  command  of  Spaight’s  battalion  during  the  absence  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Spaight  on  court-martial,  did,  at  the  beginning  of  the  month, 
when  the  yellow  fever  broke  out  at  Sabine  Pass,  furlough  all  his  men, 
except  those  above  referred  to,  up  to  the  27th  instant,  to  rendezvous  at 
Beaumont.  This  irregular  proceeding  could  not  be  remedied  at  once. 
I instructed  Lieutenant-Colonel  Spaight  to  go  and  gather  up  his  men 
so  soon  as  possible,  and  expect  that  in  two  or  three  days  the  battalion 
shall  have  reunited. 

Meanwhile,  in  order  to  be  ready  to  meet  the  enemy,  should  he  have 
attempted  a landing  or  foray  up  the  river,  I ordered  Wilson’s  light 
battery  and  the  available  men  of  Griffin’s  battalion,  garrisoned  here  (80 
men),  to  start  at  once  by  an  extra  train  for  Beaumont.  They  left  at  1 
p.  m.  to-day.  I sent  an  express  to  Colonel  Elmore  at  Hempstead  to 
move  with  his  regiment  to  Houston  by  an  extra  train  which  I sent  to 
him.  I expect  them  to-night,  and  should  the  reports  which  I await  by 
the  Beaumont  train  at  5 o’clock  confirm  the  news  of  the  presence  of  the 
enemy,  I shall  start  with  that  regiment  for  Sabine  Pass  to-night  by  a 
train  which  I ordered  to  be  kept  in  readiness.  I have  also  ordered  a 
train  to  be  ready  on  the  Buffalo  Bayou,  Brazos  and  Colorado  Railroad 
to  start,  if  necessary,  to  take  a squadron  of  Debray’s  regiment  at  the 
same  time  that  the  rest  of  the  regiment  shall  move  on  along  the  railroad, 
to  take  transportation  so  soon  as  it  can  be  sent  to  them.  I cannot  draw 
troops  from  Galveston,  which  I will  not  leave  unprotected. 

8.30  p.  m. — The  Orange  train  has  arrived  without  any  further  news, 
except  the  report  of  heavy  cannonading  this  morning  in  the  direction 
of  Sabine  Pass.  Elmore’s  regiment  arrived  at  6 p.  m.,  700  strong. 
This,  the  men  of  Griffin’s  battalion,  and  some  citizens  of  Liberty  an# 
Beaumont,  said  to  have  moved  forward,  will  give  me  a force  of  about 
900  men,  exclusive  of  Wilson’s  battery.  I start  at  12  o’clock  to-night 
with  Elmore’s  regiment.  My  impression  is  that  an  attempt  has  been 
made  by  the  enemy  to  destroy  the  fort  and  the  shipping  at  the  mouth 
of  the  river,  and  that  all  the  harm  contemplated  has  been  done  and 
that  the  enemy  has  withdrawn.  Still,  should  he  have  taken  hold  of 
babine  Pass,  I shall  endeavor  to  retake  it.  It  has  proven  to  be  our 
Host  important  seaport.  I understand  that  the  enemy  is  about  to  make, 


144 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap. XXVIL 

or  lias  made,  a new  demonstration  on  Corpus  Christ!.  If  so,  Debray’s 
regiment  is  still  near  Alleyton  and  might  be  called.  I have  not  ordered 
it  to  move. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBBAY, 

. Colonel , Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston , Ter . 

Capt.  C.  M.  Mason, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Xo.  2. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  A.  W.  Spaight , Spaighfs  Texas  Battalion. 


Headquarters  Spaiuht’s  Battalion, 

Beaumont , Tex.,  September  26,  1862. 


Sir:  On  the  23d  instant  (Maj.  J.  S.  Irvine,  commanding  at  Sabine 
Pass  during  my  absence  under  orders  at  Houston)  two  armed  sail  ves- 
sels and  one  steam  propeller  came  to  anchor  just  outside  the  bar. 

Early  the  next  morning  the  two  sail  vessels,  having  crossed  the  bar, 
took  position  and  opened  fire  on  our  works,  to  which  we  promptly 
replied;  but  the  shots  from  both  sides  fell  far  short.  They  then  a] 
proached  nearer,  when  a brisk  fire  from  both  sides  was  resumed  an 
continued  until  dark.  To  the  chagrin  of  officers  and  men  our  shot  sti 
fell  short,  while  the  enemy  was  enabled,  with  his  longer-range  guns,  t 
throw  shot  and  shell  around  and  into  our  works.  I take  pleasure  ii 
'stating  that  our  men,  fighting  at  this  immense  odds,  and  seeing  that 
they  could  inflict  no  injury  whatever  on  the  enemy  and  while  his  shell 
were  bursting  over  their  heads  and  within  the  works,  stood  to  their 
guns  and  served  them  with  great  coolness.  They  could  not  be  re- 
strained from  mounting  the  works  and  shouting  and  waving  their  hats 
in  defiance. 

In  pursuance  to  orders  Capt,  G.  W.  O’Bryan,  of  Company  E,  with 
Lieut.  W.  A.  Junker  and  a detachment  of  26  of  his  company,  arrived 
at  the  fort  at  night-fall. 

When  night  came  on  Major  Irvine  determined  that  it  would  be  a 
fruitless  exposure  of  the  men  and  public  property  to  attempt  to  hold 
the  works  another  day,  and  commenced  at  once  to  remove  the  ordnance 
stores  and  other  property,  and  spiked  the  guns,  consisting  of  two 
32-pounders  and  two  18-pounders.  The  evacuation  was  completed  by 
daylight  the  next  morning  and  all  the  Government  property  saved.  I 
regret,  however,  to  state  that  two  of  the  men  recently  attacked  by 
yellow  fever  were  not  in  a condition  to  be  removed,  and  were  left  in 
the  hospital  in  the  care  of  competent  nurses. 

It  should  be  mentioned  here  that  on  the  breaking  out  of  the  yellow 
fever  among  the  troops  at  Sabine  City  they  were  withdrawn,  with  the 
exception  of  a detachment  of  artillery  (Company  B)  to  garrison  the 
works.  It  is  now  manifest  that  the  result  must  have  been  the  same,  no 
matter  what  the  number  of  the  force  there. 

To  Major  Irvine,  in  command  of  the  post,  and  to  Capt.  K.  D.  Keith, 
in  the  immediate  command  of  the  battery,  great  praise  is  due  for  the 


gallantry  of  the  resistance  offered  wTith  such  wholly  inadequate  means, 
and  not  less  tor  the  orderly  manner  in  which  the  evacuation  was  con- 


Chap.  XXVLL]  AFFAIR  ON  TAYLOR7S  BAYOU,  TEX.  145 

ducted,  whereby  none  of  the  public  property  was  permitted  to  fall  into 
the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

As  I learn  to-day  the  two  sail  vessels  have  anchored  opposite  the 
town  and  sent  some  men  ashore.  I have  no  information  as  to  the  force 
of  the  enemy  and  have  ho  clue  as  yet  to  his  future  movements. 

1 have  been  re-enforced  to-day  by  Elmore’s  regiment,  Wilson’s  bat- 
tery, and  one  company  of  Griffin’s  battalion,  Captain  Cook’s. 

I will  observe  the  movements  of  the  enemy  and  promptly  report  the 
result,  and  shall  lose  no  opportunity  of  inflicting  injury  upon  him. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

A.  W.  SPAIGHT, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  E.  M.  Franklin, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


SEPTEMBER  27,  1862. — Affair  on  Taylor’s  Bayou,  Tex. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  A.  W.  Spaight , Spaighfs  Texas  Battalion . 


Headquarters  Spaight’s  Battalion, 

Beaumont , Tex .,  September  29,  1862. 

< Sir:  On  the  night  of  the  27th  instant  the  enemy  sent  up  three 
■aunches  to  the  mouth  of  Taylor’s  Bayou  and  attempted  to  burn  the 
railroad  bridge  (Eastern  Texas)  across  that  stream.  The  fire  was  set 
just  before  day  and  was  extinguished  by  the  guard  stationed  there. 
The  damage  was  very  slight  and  has  been  repaired.  They  took  off 
with  them  three  citizens,  one  being  the  mail  boy,  who  happened  to  be* 
stopping  at  the  house  near  the  bridge. 

I sent  a cavalry  company  down  on  yesterday  to  the  bridge,  but  shall 
be  obliged  to  replace  it  with  infantry,  as  I have  just  learned  water  for 
horses  cannot  be  procured  in  that  vicinity.  Half  of  one  of  my  infantry 
companies  are  down  with  measles  and  quite  a number  of  two  others  not 
yet  entirely  convalescent  from  yellow  fever,  which  renders  me  short  of 
men  to  guard  all  points  and  do  the  work  on  hand.  I shall  endeavor  to 
entice  the  enemy  to  make  another  attempt  on  the  bridge.  Meanwhile 
I will  scout  actively  in  and  around  the  Pass.  I have  this  moment 
learned  they  were  out  again  last  night  in  the  lake  opposite  Taylor’s 
Bayou,  and  may  have  gone  higher  up.  I shall  experience  no  little  dif- 
ficulty in  concealing  my  designs,  or  rather  movements,  on  account  of 
the  unreliable  character  of  a portion  of  the  population  in  the  vicinitv 
of  the  Pass. 


Eo  depredations  have  been  committed  so  far  on  the  citizens  of  the 
town.  They  have  indicated  a line  below  the  town  beyond  which  their 
nien  are  not  permitted  to  go  and  the  citizens  are  forbidden  to  go  below 
it.  They  say  the  propeller  has  gone  for  two  light-draught  gunboats, 
which  will  be  here  in  two  weeks. 

I must  ask  for  an  order  to  charter  one  of  the  river  boats,  with  a view 
to  re-marking  the  stakes  that  mark  the  channels  across  the  bars  and  to 
obstructing  the  channels  in  the  event  of  an  attempt  to  ascend  the  river. 

Your  obedient  servant, 


A.  W.  SPAIGHT, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding , 
Lieut.  R.  M.  Franklin,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


10  r r — yol  xy 


146  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

OCTOBER  2,  1862.— Destruction  of  railroad  depot  near  Beaumont,  Tex. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  A.  W.  Spaight , Spaightfs  Texas  Battalion. 

Headquarters  Spaight’s  Battalion, 

. Beaumont , Tex .,  October  2,  1862. 

Sir  : No  further  attempt  has  been  made  to  destroy  the  Eastern  Texas 
Railroad  bridge,  but  to-day  the  railroad  depot,  a mile  above  the  town, 
was  burned.  In  conversations  with  Captain  Burch  to-day  Captain  Pen- 
nington said  there  should  be  no  more  travel  on  our  (Eastern  Texas)  rail- 
road ; he  would,  send  a light-draught  schooner  up  opposite  Taylor’s 
Bayou  bridge.  He  also  let  it  out  that  he  expected  soon  two  New  York 
ferry-boats  to  ascend  the  two  rivers.  They  have  brought  in  as  prize  a 
light-draught  schooner,  and  seem  to  be  fitting  her  up  with  guns.  The 
bridge  and  lower  part  of  the  road  are  at  their  mercy  whenever  they 
choose  to  bring  a light-draught  boat  to  bear.  They  can  also  prevent  the 
crossing  at  the  ferry  near  the  bridge,  and  this  will  cut  oft*  communica- 
tion with  the  Pass,  except  by  a long  and  bad  route  by  way  of  the  Gulf 
beach:  In  that  event  I shall  be  almost  forced  to  withdraw  my  cav- 
alry from  the  vicinity  of  the  Pass  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  trans- 
portation for  supplies.  To  prevent  this  I must  have  artillery.  If  I 
could  get  one  or  two  guns,  large  or  small,  to  place  at  the  mouth  of 
Taylor’s  Bayou,  just  below  the  bridge,  I could  defeat  their  purpose, 
keep  open  communication,  and  confine  them  to  their  boats  with  my  cav- 
alry. They  can  bring  no  heavy  guns  to  bear  on  the  bridge  and  cross- 
ing. A 24-pounder  or  two  would  answer  my  purpose.  If  they  are 
not  to  be  had  let  me  urge  upon  the  colonel  commanding  to  send  me 
such  as  are  to  be  had  without  delay.  It  certainly  should  be  our  aim 
to  yield  no  inch  of  ground  without  a fight,  especially  where  by  timely 
preparation  we  may  beat  them  off.  Besides,  we  lose  and  they  gain 
a great  deal  by  the  breaking  up  of  this  communication.  It  is  75  miles 
to  the  Pass  by  any  other  route  and  by  a road  almost  impassable  to 
wagons.  This  would  make  it  difficult  for  us  to  prevent  them  from 
obtaining  beeves  at  will. 

The  yellow  fever  and  the  measles  have  rendered  so  many  of  my  men 
unfit  for  duty  that  in  my  judgment  I ought  to  have  at  least  two  more 
companies  (one  of  cavalry  and  one  of  infantry)  to  guard  all  the  points,  > 
The  rivers  make  it  difficult,  to  concentrate  on  any  one  point  in  the  event 
it  should  become  necessary.  Since  it  wrould  be  as  easy  to  remove  troops 
from  Orange  or  Beaumont  to  any  other  point  on  the  coast  as  from  Hemp- 
stead, I would  suggest  that  it  might  be  well  to  send  a portion  of  the 
troops  stationed  there  to  this  locality.  The  colonel  commanding  has 
already  had  my  opinion  that  the  enemy  mean  more  than  simply  to  hold 
Sabine  Pass.  That  opinion  is  strengthened  every  day.  I nowT  be- 
lieve that  every  available  gun  at  our  command  should  be  sent  to  the 
Sabine  River  and  to  Taylor’s  Bayou,  and  that  without  delay.  I say 
every  gun,  because  I know  we  can  spare  but  few  at  the  most  for  any  one 
exposed  point.  I think  the  enemy  expect  to  take  possession  of  and  hold  1 
these  rivers  with  a small  outlay  of  strength,  and  we  ought,  if  possible, 
to  disappoint  them.  Considering  the  light-draught  boats  they  are  com- 
pelled to  operate  with,  I think,  with  even  the  limited  means  at  our  com- 
mand, we  may  be  able  to  keep  them  out.  I shall,  unless  ordered  to 
desist,  push  forward  the  work  of  obstructing  the  channels,  but  it  will 
take  time  and  may  be  too  late  for  our  purpose.  With  activity  the  guns 


Chaf.  XXVII.]  CAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX.  ” 147 

may  be  put  in  position  in  a few  days.  If  they  can  be  bad,  Major  Kellers- 
berg’s  assistance  is  very  desirable. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

A.  W.  SPAIGHT,' 
Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding. 

Lieut.  R.  M.  Franklin, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


OCTOBER  5,  1862. — Capture  of  Galveston,  Tex.,  by  Union  fleet. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Paul  O.  Hubert,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  District  of  Texas. 

No.  2. — Col.  X.  B.  Debray,  Debray’s  Texas  Regiment. 

No.  3. — Col.  Joseph  J.  Cook,  Cook’s  Texas  Regiment. 

No.  1. 

J Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Paul  0.  Hebert , C.  8.  Army , commanding  Hirst  Dis- 
trict of  Texas. 

Headquarters  First  District  of  Texas, 

8 an  Antonio , Tex.,  October  15,  1862. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I yesterday  received  dis- 
patches from  the  officer  in  command  at  Houston,  announcing  that  a 
naval  squadron,  which  had  suddenly  appeared  off  Galveston,  had  forced 
its  way  into  the  inner  bay  and  held  command  of  that  city  under  its  guns. 
The  island  was  always  untenable  with  the  very  few  guns  we  had  against 
any  respectable  naval  force,  and  most  of  these  guns  had  been  placed  in 
battery  on  the  main-land  at  Virginia  Point,  a position  commanding  the 
railroad  and  railroad  bridge.  The  garrison  retired  in  good  order  to  the 
main-land,  with  arms,  ammunition,  stores,  &c.,  leaving  nothing  behind 
that  can  be  of  any  service  to  the  enemy.  It  does  not  appear  that  they 
have  as  yet  any  land  forces. 

The  officer  in  command  of  the  squadron,  Captain  Eenshaw,  stated 
that  he  would  hoist  the  United  States  flag  over  the  city  of  Galveston  or 
over  its  ashes. 

Three  deserters  from  the  squadron,  under  examination  by  our  officers, 
stated  that  the  commander  of  the  squadron  had  sent  a steamer  to  Pen- 
sacola for  five  more  gunboats,  and  that  it  was  his  intention  to  scour  and 
ravage  the  whole  coast  of  Texas.  We  have  nothing  on  the  coast  to  resist 
them.  The  few  batteries  I have  at  different  points  west  of  Galveston 
are  mounted  with  18  and  24  pounders.  The  United  States  ships  are  all 
armed  with  the  latest  improvements  in  guns,  all  of  long  range.  Noth- 
ing will  be  left  undone  by  me  to  prevent  the  eifemy  from  penetrating 
into  the  interior,  al  though  I have  no  force  to  resist  a formidable  invasion. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  O.  HUBERT, 

Brigadier-  General , Provisional  Army. 

Col.  James  Deshler, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Trans-Miss.  Dept.,  Little  Bock,  Ark , 


148 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N MEX.  [Chap.  xxvn. 
No.  2. 


Reports  of  Col.  X.  B.  Debray , Debrayh  Texas  Regiment. 

Virginia  Point,  October  5, 1862. 

Just  arrived  here.  Galveston  cannot  be  defended,  and  a fight  in  the 
city  would  be  a useless  braggadocio  against  forty  guns,  or  about,  at  1 
mile  from  the  wharf.  The  place  shall  not  be  surrendered,  but  slowly 
evacuated  by  Colonel  Cook.  I have  arrived  too  late  this  evening  to 
make  a perfect  estimate  of  the  means  of  defense.  I shall  by  all  means 
prevent  a landing  and  protect  the  railroad.  I send  a company  to  Lib- 
erty to-morrow  to  guard  the  bridge.  I have  ordered  my  regiment  down 
to  scout  over  Simm’s  Bayou,  San  Jacinto,  and  Trinity.  The  want  of  fresh 
water  will  be  a great  difficulty.  I ordered  the  provost-marshal  at  Gal- 
veston to  remove  all  the  machinery  he  can.  The  citizens  are  moving 
fast  I notified  those  disposed  to  remain  that  should  the  United  States 
flag*  be  hoisted  over  Galveston  they  would  no  longer  be  allowed  to  com- 
municate with  the  continent  and  shall  receive  no  supplies.  The  four 
davs  allowed  by  the  enemy  for  the  citizens  to  move  expires  on  Wednes- 
day night,  when  I expect  an  attack  here.  Please  send  this  to  General 

Hubert  by  to-morrow’s  mail.  x B UEBRAY. 

Maj.  T.  S.  Moise. 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

j Houston,  Tex.,  October  12, 1862. 

Captain  : I have  not  yet  obtained  from  Colonel  Cook  his  official  re- 
port upon  the  attack  on  Galveston.  However,  I can  judge  from  his 
verbal  statements  that,  except  some  unimportant  mista 
given  by  the  papers  are  correct.  From  Colonel  Cook  s statement  that 
he  was  ordered  by  the  general  commanding  not  to  make  a useless  de- 
fense in  the  streets  of  Galveston,  I instructed  him  to  withdraw  to  Eagle 
Grove  and  Virginia  Point  (see  accompanying  Document  A).  The  evacua- 
tion of  the  city  was  effected  in  good  order;  but  very  few  citizens  re- 
mained in  the  city.  Although  I have  received  no  instructions  from  the 
general  commanding  anticipating  an  attack,  the  fact  that  batteries  were 
erected  on  both  sides  of  the  bridge  pointed  out  my  duty  to  defend  them 
and  to  strengthen  myself  if  possible.  I have  increased  the  defense  of 
Fort  Hubert  with  one  8-inch  columbiad,  one  24-pounder  rifled  gun,  and 
three  smooth-bore  32-pounders.  The  fort  at  Eagle  Grove  was  not  pro- 
tected from  a surprise  by  land.  I have  guarded  against  it,  as  you  will 
see  by  Document  B.  The  companies  of  Cook’s  regiment,  instructed  in 
artillery  practice,  have  been  “told”  off  into  detachments  to  serye  he 
pieces/  The  other  companies  of  that  regiment  shall  form  the  first  sup- 
port, with  station  at  about  400  yards  from  the  batteries.  f 

P Elmore’s  regiment  is  encamped  at  about  1 mile  from  the  works,  to  act 
as  support,  and,  if  necessary,  to  move  to  either  flank  to  resist  a landing 
party.  I am  establishing  a hospital  at  5 miles  m rear  on  the  nearest 
dry  ground  found,  and  I have  given  orders  to  remove  some  of  the  build- 
ings at  the  point  to  shelter  the  sick.  ,.  n« 

Document  C*  will  inform  the  general  commanding  of  my  dispositions 
to  secure  the  use  of  the  railroad  for  transportation,  and  also  to  remove 
our  supplies  ever,  during  a bombardment  I have  ordered  a switch  and 


* Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX. 


149 


platform  to  be  established  at  1£  miles  from  the  works.  I believe  1 can 
cripple  some  of  the  vessels  if  they  come  within  range  of  our  guns,  which 
are  all  in  a very  good  condition,  well  supplied  with  ammunition  and 
implements.  I am  laboring  under  great  difficulties  to  supply  the  troops 
with  water  and  fuel.  I impart  all  the  activity  1 can  to  the  officers  of 
the  quartermaster’s  department,  and  I hope  supplies  will  be  abundant. 

Document  D#  exhibits  the  measures  taken  to  defend  the  mouth  of 
the  San  Jacinto. 

Document  E # is  an  order  organizing  a system  of  scouts  along  the  coast 
throughout  the  sub-district. 

Lieutenant  Colonel  Bates  demands  troops  and  artillery.  I have  none 
to  give  him. 

I have  ordered  Major  Brown  to  Matagorda  to  protect  that  town.  The 
Xechez  and  Sabine  are,  I hope,  by  this  time  protected  from  incursion 
by  the  enemy.  I have  received  no  late  reports  from  that  quarter.  I 
have  cut  off  all  communications  with  Galveston  City.  I intend,  how- 
ever, to  send  parties  to  harass  the  enemy  if  he  lands,  and  to  compel  him 
to  give  protection  to  those  who  shall  apply  to  him  for  it.  His  only  means 
will  be  to  try  to  destroy  the  bridge.  To  do  this  he  must  wait  for  mortar 
boats,  which  he  has  sent  for,  if  the  information  I have  received  from 
deserters,  whom  I inteia*ogated  closely,  is  correct.  Meanwhile  the  other 
portions  of  our  coast  will  probably  be  free  from  their  incursions.  Docu- 
ment F * is  the  interrogatory  of  the  deserters. 

The  yellow  fever  has  broken  out  in  this  city.  I have  ordered  the  hos- 
pital to  be  evacuated  to  Columbus. 

I have  ordered  the  road  from  Alleyton  to  San  Antonio  to  be  stocked 
with  relays  of  mules,  to  bear  expresses  if  necessary.  The  relays  are  at 
Belmont,  Sweet  Home,  and  Alleyton — two  mules  and  one  driver  at  each 
station  for  a light  ambulance.  That  service  is  now  organized. 

Duty  calls  me  here  to  attend  to  business  left  behindhand.  I have 
a locomotive  in  readiness.  Three  hours  will  suffice,  when  I receive 
information  of  movements  by  the  enemy,  to  carry  me  to  Fort  Hubert, 
where  I shall  make  the  best  defense  I can. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

/ X.  B.  DEBRAY, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Sub- Military  District  of  Houston , Tex. 
Capt.  S.  B.  Davis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  &c.,  San  Antonio , Tex. 

P.  S. — His  Excellency  Governor  Lubbock  is  here.  I inclosed  to  you 
his  proclamation  ratifying  my  order  cutting  off  intercourse  with  Gal- 
veston. I forgot  to  state  that  in  the  evening  of  the  12th  Mr.  J.  Moore, 
formerly  city  clerk,  and  now  mayor  pro  tempore  of  the  city  of  Galveston, 
appointed  by  the  residents  who  remained,  came  to  see  me  within  our 
lines,  with  a message  from  the  inhabitants,  to  the  effect  that  Commander 
Renshaw,  commanding  the  United  States  flotilla,  had  kindly  consented 
to  the  passage  of  our  trains  over  the  bridge  to  Eagle  Grove,  where  we 
could  deposit  (to  be  transported  by  vehicles  to  Galveston)  such  articles 
of  subsistence  as  the  inhabitants  might  need.  I have  of  course  de- 
clined availing  myself  of  the  privilege  extended  to  me  by  the  enemy. 

October  13,  8 p.  m. — 1 have  just  received  your  communication  of 
the  11th  instant.  The  columbiad  is  still  here,  because  the  general  told 
me  it  was  worthless — could  not  be  fired  off  without  upsetting.  Major 


Not  found. 


150  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII 

Kellersberg  has  not  returned  from  the  Sabine  and  Nechez,  where  he  is 
making  works  of  defense.  Major  Von  Iiarten  is  superintending  the 
construction  of  platforms,  and  does  it  well.  I expect  that  by  11  o’clock 
this  morning  five  pieces  shall  be  in  position  in  addition  to  the  others. 

9 A.  m.— Nothing  new  at  Virginia  Point.  Troops  in  good  spirits. 

[Document  A.l 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Galveston , Tex.,  October  .5,  1862. 

Col.  Joseph  J.  Cook, 

Commanding  Post , Galveston , Tex. : 

Colonel:  The  enemy  having  possession  of  Galveston  Bay  with  an 
overwhelming  force  of  artillery,  you  will  avoid  making  within  the  city 
a resistance,  which  would  bring  about  the  destruction  of  the  property 
of  our  citizens  without  resulting  in  any  good  to  the  country.  You  will 
move  from  the  city  to  Virginia  Point  such  material  as  you  can  save  and 
the  troops  you  do  not  actually  need  to  maintain  good  order  in  the  city 
so  long  as  you  are  in  possession  of  it.  You  will  give  aid  and  assistance 
to  the  provost-marshal  in  removing  from  the  island  such  machinery  as 
can  be  removed.  You  will  cause  the  printing  presses  to  he  put  out  ot 
working  order  with  as  little  destruction  of  property  as  possible. 

You  will  cause  the  residents,  citizens  or  aliens,  to  understand  that 
should  the  enemy  hoist  his  flag  over  the  city  of  Galveston  they  shall 
at  once  be  cut  off  from  intercourse  with  the  continent  by  us,  and  that, 
if  falling  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  they  have  but  two  alternatives 
left,  viz,  abject  submission  or  persecution  and  insult.  You  will  inform 
them,  should  they  be  too  poor  to  provide  for  their  transportation,  the 
Government  of  the  Confederate  States  will  transport  them  to  Houston 
free  of  cost.  You  will,  when  an  attack  by  the  enemy  is  imminent,  with- 
draw to  Virginia  Point,  leaving  two  companies  to  garrison  Eagle  Grove, 
endeavoring  to  withdraw  without  loss  of  men. 

Very  respectfully,  x B DEBEAT, 

Colonel,  Comdg.  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston,  Tex. 


[Document  B.] 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Fort  Hebert , Tex.,  October  10,  1862. 

Col.  Joseph  J.  Cook, 

Commanding  Fort  Hebert,  Tex. : 

Colonel  : I shall  transfer  to-morrow  my  headquarters  to  Houston. 
You  will  telegraph  to  me  morning  and  evening  every  day  the  state  ot 
affairs  at  your  post.  Should  the  enemy  make  any  movement  causing 
you  to  anticipate  an  attack  you  will  telegraph  to  me  at  once.  You 
will  reserve  for  my  office  and  quarters  the  room  I now  occupy,  ine 
fort  at  Eagle  Grove  is  not  protected  against  a night  surprise  by  a land- 
ing force.  To  guard  against  such  a reverse,  always  disgraceful  tor  a 
commander  who  did  not  prevent  it,  you  will  send  a picket  of  2 non-com- 
missioned officers  and  10  mounted  men  to  take  station  half  a mile  be- 
vond  the  fort  on  the  road  to  Galveston,  with  orders  to  place  2 sentinels 
a quarter  of  a mile  in  advance.  Should  an  enemy’s  force  make  its  ap- 
pearance the  picket  shall  withdraw  slowly,  skirmishing,  sending  prompt 
intelligence  to  the  fort.  You  will  station  one  company  of  infantry  at 
the  fort  to  act  as  a support  to  the  company  of  artillery  now  garrison- 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX 


151 


ing  it.  You  will  order  the  sentinels  to  be  doubled  at  night.  A picket 
shall  be  stationed  by  day  and  night  in  advance  of  the  fort,  with  orders 
to  arrest  all  persons  attempting  to  pass  into  our  lines.  Should  a flag 
of  truce  present  .himself  he  shall  not  be  allowed  to  proceed  farther, 
and  such  intercourse  as  he  may  wish  to  have  shall  take  place  there. 
The  picket  stationed  at  night  upon  the  railroad  bridge  shall  upon  an 
alarm  from  the  fort  march  promptly  to  its  support.  I have  instructed 
the  ordnance  officer  to  supply  you  with  rockets  and  rocket-stands,  to 
be  used  at  the  fort  at  Eagle  Grove  and  at  the  draw-bridge  for  signals 
of  alarm,  which  the  sentinels  at  Fort  Hebert  shall  promptly  communi- 
cate to  you  by  the  officer  of  the  day.  The  companies  of  Debray’s  regi 
ment  not  engaged  in  scouting  duty  shall,  under  your  orders,  patrol 
actively  at  night  on  both  flanks  of  Fort  Hebert  and  harass  the  enemy 
at  Galveston  whenever  you  deem  it  expedient.  Yonr  judgment  will 
suggest  to  you  some  other  measures  of  precaution ; none  must  be 
omitted,  remote  as  the  danger  may  appear.  You  will  inform  me  of  all 
modifications  made  by  you  in  the  plan  of  defense  adopted. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

X.  B.  DEBRAY, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston , Tex. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  Joseph  J.  Coolc , CooFs  Texas  Regiment. 

Headquarters, 

Fort  Hebert , Tex.,  October  9,  1862. 

Sir  : On  the  morning  of  the  4th  the  blockading  fleet  off  the  bar  of 
Galveston  consisted  of  eight  vessels,  four  of  which  were  armed  steamers, 
one  a mortar-boat,  and  all  but  one  of  them  apparently  of  such  draught 
as  to  admit  of  their  crossing  the  bar. 

At  about  7 a.  m.  one  of  the  steamers  (the  Harriet  Lane)  crossed  the 
bar,  flying  a white  flag,  and  when  opposite  Fort  Point  a shot  from  our 
battery  was  fired  across  her  bow,  and  she  immediately  came  to  anchor. 
An  officer  soon  after  landed  from  the  steamer  in  front  of  the  battery 
and  asked  an  interview  with  the  commander  of  the  post.  Immediately 
upon  being  advised  of  this  I repaired  to  Fort  Point,  and  was  informed 
by  the  officer  who  had  landed  that  the  commander  of  the  fleet  desired 
me  to  send  out  a messenger  to  receive  a communication  from  him.  Hav- 
ing no  boat  at  the  Point,  I returned  to  the  city  and  immediately  dis- 
patched a messenger  in  a boat,  flying  a white  flag.  The  boat  left  the 
wharf  about  1 p.  in.,  and  before  she  could  be  worked  out  to  the  Point 
the  Harriet  Lane  weighed  anchor,  repassed  the  bar,  and  communicated 
with  the  fleet,  and  the  four  steamers,  with  the  mortar-boat  in  tow,  came 
in  over  the  bar  and  up  to  about  the  position  where  the  Harriet  Lane 
had  been  brought  to  anchor.  As  soon  as  this  movement  was  observed 
I started  for  Fort  Point,  but  before  I could  reach  there  a shot  was  fired 
from  our  battery  in  front  of  the  foremost  of  the  advancing  vessels — our 
flag  of-truce  boat  then  being  but  a short  distance  off — when  the  enemy, 
disregarding  their  own  white  flag,  immediately  opened  fire  from  all  the 
vessels  with  about  twenty  guns  on  oar  battery,  which  consisted  of  but 
one  gun,  a 10-inch,  and  "they  continued  to  play  upon  it  until  the  gun 
was  struck  by  a shot  and  so  disabled  as  to  be  unserviceable,  and  the 


152 


W.  FLA.,  S.  FLA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYII. 


officer  in  command  ordered  the  gun  to  he  spiked  and  the  barracks 
fired  and  the  men  retreated  across  the  low,  open  grounds  toward  the 
city.  I joined  them  soon  after  they  left  the  battery,  and  the  five  ves- 
sels of  the  enemy,  having  passed  entirely  around  the  Point  into  the 
harbor,  continued  to  throw  shot  and  shell  at  us  until  we  j>assed  out  ot 
their  range.  Upon  the  fleet  turning  up  the  channel  toward  the  city 
the  two  24-pounders  in  battery  on  the  bay  side,  near  the  east  end  ol 
the  city,  opened  fire  on  them,  but  our  shot  fell  short,  and  the  vessels 
having  now  come  up  to  our  flag-of-truce  boat,  ceased  firing  and  took 
our  messenger  on  board  their  flag- ship,  and  the  fleet  came  to  anchor. 

The  assemblage  of  vessels  off  the  bar  on  the  day  previous  had  given 
us  every  reason  to  expect  an  attack,  and  during  that  day  and  the 
morning  of  the  4th  I had  made  arrangements  with  the  railroad  com- 
pany to  be  ready  with  transportation  to  meet  any  emergency  that 
might  occur.  Having  some  time  previous  to  this  been  ordered  by  the 
general  commanding  this  department  to  withdraw  our  troops  from  the 
city  in  case  the  enemy  should  bring  to  bear  against  our  jiosition  such 
a force  as  to  overcome  our  defenses  at  Fort  Point  and  enable  them  to 
command  the  harbor,  and  after  the  gun  at  Fort  Point  was  silenced, 
having  no  further  effective  means  of  defending  the  harbor  or  protecting 
the  city  from  bombardment  by  the  enemy  or  inflicting  any  injury  on 
them,  immediately  after  our  troops  had  abandoned  Fort  Point  I ordered 
the  two  guns  which  were  in  position  at  South  Battery,  on  the  south 
side  of  Galveston  Island,  to  be  spiked,  and  all  our  material  at  that  and 
other  points  in  the  city  to  be  taken  to  the  railroad  depot,  which  was 

d°At*about  3.30  p.  m.  our  fiag-of-truce  messenger  returned  to  the  city, 
bearing  a demand  from  the  enemy  for  the  surrender  of  the  city  and 
demanding  an  immediate  answer.  I sent  a messenger  with  the  answer 
that  I should  not  surrender  the  city,  directing  the  messenger  also  to 
say  to  the  commander  of  the  fleet  that  there  were  many  women  and 
children,  and  to  demand  time  to  remove  them.  After  some  negotiation 
it  was  agreed  that  no  attack  should  be  made  upon  the  city  lor  tour 
days ; that  during  the  time  we  should  not  construct  any  new  or 
strengthen  any  old  defenses  within  the  city,  and  the  fleet  not  to  be 
brought  any  nearer  the  city.  This  arrangement  gave  us  ample  time 
for  the  removal  of  all  who  desired  to  leave  the  island,  and  also  tor  the 
removal  of  our  troops  and  material  of  every  kind. 

On  the  night  of  the  4tli  you  reached  the  city,  and  during  the  next 
day  I received  your  orders  in  relation  to  matters  at  Galveston.  During 
the  four  days  I removed  the  two  24-pounders,  and  also  the  two  guns  at 
South  Battery  were  unspiked  and  removed,  and  all  of  them  have  been 
safely  landed  at  Virginia  Point.  I caused  the  people  of  the  city  to  be 
fully  notified  in  relation  to  matters  which  you  directed  they  should  be 
advised  of.  All  machinery  of  any  value  was  removed.  The  civil  au- 
thorities removed  all  the  county  records  of  every  kind  and  all  the 
records  of  the  city  corporation  and  of  the  district  court.  The  railroad 
company  removed  all  their  material  of  every  kind,  and  by  11  a.  m.  o 
the  8th  we  had  removed  all  the  Government  property  of  any  value  ex- 
cept the  10-inch  gun  at  Fort  Point,  and  a large  majority  of  the  popula- 
tion of  the  city  had  left  their  houses  and  the  island. 

The  troops  having  all  been  removed,  in  accordance  with  your  orders 
I left  with  my  staff  for  Virginia  Point,  leaving  a sufficient  force  to  hold 
the  batterv  at  the  south  end  of  the  railroad  bridge,  and  that  evening  1 
reported  at  this  place  to  Col.  X.  B.  Debrav,  commanding  Sub-Military 
District  of  Houston. 


CHAP.  XXVII  ] EXPEDITION  FROM  FORT  UNION,  N.  MEX, 


153 


It  affords  me  great  pleasure  to  be  able  to  state  that  both  officers  and 
men  behaved  nobly,  executing  all  orders  promptly  and  correctly. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

Yours,  respectfully. 

JOS.  J.  COOK, 
Colonel , Commanding. 

Lieut.  R.  M.  Franklin, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston. 


OCTOBER  9-NOVEMBER  25,  1862.— Expedition  from  Fort  Union  to  the 
Canadian  River  and  Utah  Creek,  N.  Mex. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Capt.  William  H.  Backus,  Second  Colorado  Infantry. 

No.  2.— Lieut.  George  L.  Shoup,  Second  Colorado  Infantry. 

So.  1. 

Report  of  Capt.  William  H.  Backus , Second  Colorado  Infantry. 

Fort  Union,  N.  Mex.,  December  1,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  operations  of  my  com 
pany  since  my  last  report : 

On  November  1 one  of  the  men  sent  to  guard  the  wagons  that  had 
gone  to  Hatch’s  Ranch  for  forage  returned  and  reported  a camp  of 
Mexicans  about  45  miles  from  camp,  on  the  Fort  Smith  road.  From 
what  he  could  learn  from  the  drivers  they  were  a part  of  a large  party 
which  had  undertaken  to  go  down  the  Pecos,  but  had  been  turned  back 
by  the  troops  there,  and  were  now  waiting  for  the  remainder  of  their 
company  to  come  up,  and  were  then  determined  to  go  on  down  the 
country,  if  they  had  to  cut  the  soldiers’  throats.  The  man  left  the  camp 
at  night  and  rode  all  night  to  bring  me  the  information  at  camp. 

November  2 I started  for  the  road  at  midnight,  with  20  men,  to  be 
ready  for  them  when  they  came  along.  Arrived  at  the  road  at  day- 
light, but  saw  no  Mexicans  ; went  on  up  the  road  20  miles  farther,  to 
where  they  were  encamped  the  night  before;  found  that  they  had 
turned  back ; sent  2 men  on  after  them  and  marched  the  remainder 
back  to  camp.  The  2 men  sent  to  look  for  the  Mexican  train  returned 
to  the  camp  on  the  5th  instant,  at  4 p.  m.,  reporting  that  the  Mexicans 
were  encamped  about  15  miles  from  where  they  were  first  discovered, 
and  that  they  had  increased  in  number  to  30  wagons  and  over  100  men. 
I sent  out  a spy,  to  keep  well  up  the  road  and  give  me  timely  notice  of 
their  approach. 

November  6 they  came  in  at  10  p.  m.  and  reported  the  train  coming 
down  the  road.  Got  20  men  ready  and  started  at  midnight  for  the  road 
again  to  meet  them.  The  train  came  on  in  sight  at  4p.  m.;  arrgsted 
the  owners  and  had  the  train  camped.  Found  that  the  wagons  con- 
tained no  loading.  There  were  about  150  head  of  loose,  fat  cattle,  be- 
sides those  attached  to  the  wagons.  They  said  that  they  wished  to  go 
below  to  hunt  buffalo.  I told  them  that  they  could  go,  but  they  must 
leave  their  surplus  cattle,  which  they  declined  to  do,  and  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  8th  turned  back,  and  I marched  to  camp. 

While  I was  examining  the  Mexican  train  on  the  7tli  a messenger 


154 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chai>.  XXYIT. 


arrived  from  Lieutenant  Shoup,  stating  that  lie  had  overtaken  the 
wagons  that  he  was  sent  after  and  had  captured  24  prisoners,  and 
asked  for  more  men  to  help  bring  them  up.  As  soon  as  T was  through 
with  the  Mexicans  I dispatched  10  men  to  go  down  and  meet  Lieuten- 
ant Shoup.  Men  in  camp  not  on  other  duty  are  engaged  in  building 
stables. 

On  the  11th  ultimo  the  picket  guard  arrested  a party  of  Mexicans 
and  sent  for  me.  I went  over  to  the  road  and  found  them  to  be  buffalo- 
hunters  ; examined  them  and  let  them  pass  on.  Another  messenger 
arrived  from  Lieutenant  Shoup  after  rations.  I sent  a wagon  with 
rations  to  meet  him. 

November  13  Lieutenant  Shoup  and  the  prisoners  arrived  at  the 
picket  camp ; prisoners  sick  with  sm all-pox ; had  left  2 of  them  150 
miles  below ; they  were  unable  to  travel ; left  2 men  to  take  care  of 
them  and  bring  them  up  as  soon  as  they  were  able.  Returned  to  camp 
this  evening,  and  found  the  Indian  agent  who  went  down  with  Shoup’s 
party  had  returned  with  the  chiefs  Mouwa  and  Little  Buffalo,  accom- 
panied by  about  100  Indians  and  squaws.  They  staid  four  or  five 
days  with  us.  The  agent  gave  them  their-  presents,  and  Lieutenant 
Shoup  and  myself  had  several  talks  with  them.  They  professed  great 
friendship,  and  said  that  if  we  would  come  down  and  fight  the  Texans 
they  would  help  us,  and  directed  us  to  carry  a white  flag,  so  that  they 
might  know  us. 

November  16  the  2 men  left  back  with  the  sick  prisoners  came  into 
small  pox  camp.  The  prisoners  had  both  died. 

November  21  relieved  by  Lieutenant  Perry  and  marched  for  Fort 
Union. 

November  23  another  of  the  prisoners  died  of  small-pox. 

November  24  the  entire  command,  with  the  prisoners,  marched  for 
Fort  Union. 

November  25  I left  the  command  at  Bed  Lake  this  morning  and 
started  for  Santa  Fe. 

1 have  the  honor  also  to  inclose  the  report  of  Lieutenant  Shoup  of 
his  pursuit  and  capture  of  the  prisoners. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  H.  BACKUS, 

Captain  Company  C,  Second  Colorado  Volunteers. 

Assistant  Adjutant-General, 

Hdqrs.  Department  of  New  Mexico , Santa  Fe , N.  Mex. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  George  L.  Shoup , Second  Colorado  Infantry. 

For^t  Union,  N.  Mex.,  December  1,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  your  orders, 
No.  October  26,  1862,  I left  your  camp,  at  mouth  of  Utah  Creek, 
Canadian  River,  to  pursue,  and  if  possible  overtake  and  arrest,  a party 
who  had  gone  down  that  river.  I had  with  me  Sergeant  [S.  G.j  Marvin, 
Corporal  [A.  W.]  Allen,  and  17  privates;  also  Dr.  Rankin,  Indian  Agent 
Stapp,  and  Interpreter  Delisle. 

The  first  day,  about  2 p.  m.,  after  marching  about  25  miles,  we  dis- 
covered one  of  their  camps.  From  the  appearance  of  the  ashes,  the  tracks 


Chap.  XXVII.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  FORT  UNION,  N.  MEX. 


155 


of  the  animals,  and  other  signs  in  and  around  camp  we  judged  it  to  be 
at  least  three  days  old.  Forming  an  estimate  from  the  distance  they 
had  traveled  the  day  previous  to  encamping  here  I concluded  that 
they  must  be  some  80  or  90  miles  ahead  of  me.  This  camp  was  about 
10  miles  from  the  Fort  Smith  road  and  about  15  miles  from  the  Cana- 
dian Eiver,  between  the  road  and  river.  I had  some  knowledge  of  the 
country  for  about  250  miles  down  the  Canadian  Eiver  from  Utah  Creek. 

I knew  a trail  on  the  north  side  of  the  Canadian  that  intersects  the 
Fort  Smith  road  about  225  miles  below  the  mouth  of  Utah  Creek.  I had 
marched  over  that  trail  in  September  last,  while  scouting  after  Indians. 
It  was  then  reported  to  me  to  be  shorter  than  the  Fort  Smith  road. 

The  party  of  whom  we  were  in  pursuit  were  evidently  trying  to  leave 
the  country  without  being  detected.  The  direction  they  were  traveling 
would  indicate  that  they  were  going  to  Fort  Smith.  They  were  follow- 
ing a trail  that  had  been  recently  made  by  horses,  mules,  and  pack- 
animals,  about  40  in  number.  This  led  me  to  believe  that  they  might 
be  part  of  the  same  party.  I afterward  ascertained  that  this  trail  had 
been  made  by  Mexicans,  who  were  trading  with  the  Indians,  and  would 
join  at  some  point  below.  It  was  also  evident  that  they  knew  of  our 
presence  in  that  part  of  the  country.  I feared  that  they  might  have 
spies,  who  would  watch  our  movements,  and  as  I was  following,  to  all 
appearances,  a superior  number,  I feared  I might  be  led  into  some  trap 
and  get  surprised  ourselves  by  them.  I therefore  concluded  to  cross 
the  river  and  follow  the  trail  that  leads  down  the  north  side,  and  march 
as  rapidly  as  possible  to  the  junction  of  the  trail  with  the  Fort  Smith 
road.  Having  arrived  at  this  conclusion,  I informed  Sergeant  Marvin 
of  what  I had  determined  on  doing,  and  instructed  him  to  march  that 
evening  to  the  river,  and,  agreeing  to  meet  him  that  night  some  time,  I 
took  one  man  and  followed  the  trail  to  the  next  camp,  hoping  I might 
gain  some  more  information  concerning  the  number,  character,  &c.,  of 
the  party.  I discovered,  while  riding  to  their  next  camp,  distant  about 
10  miles,  and  which  I supposed  to  be  a noon  camp,  that  there  were  5 
wagons ; also  that  there  was  a lady  with  the  party.  I here  turned 
about  and  joined  my  men  the  same  night. 

After  arriving  in  camp,  on  October  30,  at  a point  about  175  miles 
below  the  mouth  of  the  Utah  Creek,  I concluded  to  reconnoiter  the 
country  southward  in  search  of  the  Fort  Smith  road,  as  I had  been 
informed  by  my  guide  that  the  Fort  Smith  road  came  near  the  river 
opposite  this.camp.  I took  Corporal  Allen  and  Private  [James]  Baird, 
rode  cautiously  to  the  river  and  crossed  over,  but  was  not  successful 
in  finding  the  road.  Thinking  that  we  must  soon  come  to  the  road,  we 
rode  on  southward  about  15  miles  till  about  midnight,  when  I gave  up 
the  search,  turned  about,  and  rode  for  camp,  where  I arrived  next  day 
about  11  a.  m.,  and  immediately  resumed  the  march  for  the  junction  of 
the  trail  with  the  road. 

On  November  2,  about  noon,  I arrived  at  a point  opposite  where  the 
Fort  Smith  road  comes  to  the  river  from  the  bluffs,  and  about  250  miles 
below  the  mouth  of  Utah  Creek.  I placed  a spy  on  a lookout  on  a 
high  bluff,  where  he  could  see  across  the  river  and  watch  the  maneuver- 
ing of  any  party  on  the  Fort  Smith  road  for  many  miles  either  way. 
Examining  the  road,  I found  that  the  party  of  whom  we  were  in  search 
had  not  yet  passed.  There  being  a village  of  Indians  a few  miles  below, 
I concluded  to  go  down  to  the  village  with  their  agent  (Stapp),  to  see  and 
have  a talk  with  them,  and  then  return  by  way  of  the  Fort  Smith  road 
to  meet  the  truant  party.  I was  not  out  of  sight  of  my  last  camp  before 
my  spy  on  the  lookout  discovered  the  party  approaching  and  irame- 


156 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYII. 

diately  informed  me  of  the  same.  A spy  was  immediately  concealed  in 
the  bluff  opposite  them  to  watch  their  movements,  and,  if  possible,  ascer- 
tain their  number,  means  of  defense,  &c.  I marched  down  the  river 
about  8 miles,  and  concealed  the  men  and  animals  in  a grove  of  timber 
near  the  river.  Several  Indians  were  seen  during  the  evening,  but  none 
came  to  our  camp.  After  dark  I took  a few  men  ami  rode  out  to  recoil - 
noiter  their  camp,  which  was  found  to  be  about  8 miles  above  and  about 
1 mile  from  the  river.  They  had  too  many  dogs  for  a night  surprise. 

About  11  o’clock  at  night  some  one  was  heard  hallooing  opposite  our 
camp  across  the  river.  I went  down  to  the  river  bank  and  saw  three 
men  on  the  opposite  shore.  One  of  the  men  asked  me,  in  broken  Eng-  j 
lish,  if  they  could  cross  the  river.  I replied  that  they  could  easily  ford 
it.  My  first  impression  was  that  it  was  a detachment  of  the  party  above, 
who  had  gone  ahead  and  had  mistaken  our  camp  for  theirs.  By  this 
time  some  of  my  men  had  come  to  me,  and  we  were  ready  to  arrest  them 
as  they  came  out  of  the  river.  Just  before  they  reached  the  shore  we 
discovered  that  they  were  Indians.  I recognized  one  of  the  Indians  to 
be  an  old  friend  of  mine.  He  commenced  hallooing,  and  other  Indians 
came  across.  I told  them  that  we  had  come  down  on  a friendly  visit,  and 
told  them  that  we  had  some  presents  for  them  at  our  camp.  I asked 
them  if  they  knew  who  the  party  was  in  the  camp  above.  They  pro- 
fessed to  be  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  another  party  in  the  vicinity, 
and  they  at  once  suspected  treachery  on  our  part.  They  thought  it  im- 
possible that  we  could  come  from  the  same  direction  and  not  know  who 
the  other  party  was.  However,  I,  with  the  assistance  of  Agent  Stapp, 
convinced  them  that  we  had  no  other  than  friendly  feelings  toward  them; 
that  we  were  telling  them  the  truth,  &c. ; that  if  the  party  on  the  other 
side  of  the  river  above  were  traders  I would  not  molest  them ; but  if  j 
they  were  going  to  Fort  Smith  or  to  any  other  part  of  the  Confederacy 
I must  take  them  back.  I told  the  Indian  who  could  talk  English  that 
if  he  would  go  to  their  camp  early  in  the  morning,  ascertain  whether  or 
not  they  were  traders,  their  number  of  men,  their  kind  of  arms,  &c., 

I would  reward  him  for  so  doing.  I told  him  upon  no  consideration 
to  let  them  know  of  our  presence  in  the  vicinity.  I then  gave  them  a 
midnight  meal  and  they  left. 

The  next  morning  at  day-break  we  crossed  the  river,  and  I selected 
a good  position  to  surprise  the‘ party.  Concealed  6ur  horses  behind 
a bluff,  about  250  yards  from  the  road,  leaving  a guard  with  them, 
while  we  took  our  position  behind  a -bluff  within  a few  feet  of  the 
the  road— a most  excellent  place  to  surprise  a party  coming  down  the 
road.  The  Indians  came  around  us  in  considerable  numbers.  Their 
suspicions  were  again  aroused,  and  the  messenger  had  not  gone  up  to 
the  camp,  as  agreed  upon  the  night  before.  But  we  soon  allayed  all 
suspicion  again,  and  Indian  Thomas  (who  speaks  English),  after  receiv- 
ing instructions  to  be  very  cautious  and  discreet,  started  for  the  camp 
above.  About  two  hours  later  he  returned,  bringing  a1  note,  directed  j 
to  the  chief  of  the  Comanche  Nation,  signed  Russell  & Co.  The  sub- 
stance of  the  note  was  that  they  were  a party  of  18  white  men,  from  Las 
Yegas,  N.  Mex.,  bound  for  Fort  Smith.  I told  the  Indians  I should  take 
the  party  back  with  me.  The  Indians  were  all  animated,  and  wished 
to  participate  in  the  capture  of  the  party.  They  were  instructed  that 
we  thought  ourselves  equal  to  the  task.  They  still  insisted  on  hewing 
us,  and  said  that  they  would  be  governed  by  my  orders.  I then  told 
them  that  if  any  of  the  party  should  escape  then  they  might  take  them 
prisoners,  and  I would  reward  them  for  so  doing.  This  satisfied  them. 
They  concealed  their  animals  behind  a bluff  near  ours  and  made  great 
preparations  for  a fight. 


CHAP,  XXVII.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  FORT  UNION,  N.  MEX. 


157 


About  11  a.  m.  the  party  came  in  sight.  The  Indians  came  very  near 
revealing  our  whereabouts  by  assembling  on  a bluff  near  by,  and,  by 
their  great  anxiety  to  see  all  that  was  going  on,  they  held  their  heads 
so  high  that  they  were  seen  by  the  party  approaching,  who,  on  seeing 
the  Indians  acting  in  this  manner,  suspected  an  attack  from  them  ; con- 
sequently they  halted  at  the  distance  of  a quarter  of  a mile,  examined 
their  arms,  and  made  every  preparation  for  a battle  with  the  Indians,- 
and  then  moved  on.  I had  previously  ordered  that  the  word  “ Surren- 
der” should  be  the  signal  for  my  men  to  spring  up,  with  muskets  cocked 
and  aimed,  on  our  opponents.  I let  them  come  fully  into  the  trap  set 
for  them,  when  I commanded  them  to  halt  and  surrender.  They  were 
completely  surprised.  They  were  watching  the  Indians,  and  did  not 
think  of  danger  so  close  by.  I repeated  the  command  to  surrender, 
which  command  they  immediately  complied  with  by  dropping  their  arms 
without  showing  resistance.  I took  from  them  6 double-barreled  shot- 
guns, 8 rifles,  6 revolvers,  10  mules,  10  horses,  10  sets  of  harness,  10 
bridles,  10  saddles,  1 side-saddle,  and  5 wagons.  I searched  their  per- 
sons and  baggage  for  papers,  taking  from  them  any  and  all  papers  liable 
to  be  of  any  service  whatsoever  in  ftirnishing  evidence  for  or  against 
them.  In  answer  to  questions  asked  as  to  where  they  were  going  the 
majority  answered  to  their  homes  in  Georgia,  two  or  three  to  Fort 
Smith,  one  to  Cherokee  Nation,  one  to  Kansas,  and  one  to  Missouri. 
At  the  time  of  their  surrender  they  had  three  cases  of  small- pox  among 
them.  In  searching  their  baggage  I found  some  treasure — gold  dust, 
watches,  chains,  rings,  &c.,  all  of  which  I allowed  them  to  keep. 

The  names  of  the  party  are  as  follows,  viz:  Green  Kussell,  Dr.  D.  I. 
Russell,  J.  O.  Russell,  Samuel  Bates,  John  Wallace,  Robert  Fields, 
James  Pierce,  James  Whiting,  A.  S.  Rippy,  H.  M.  Dempsey,  W.  I. 
Witcher,  William  Witcher,  D.  Patterson,  G.  F.  Rives,  J.  Gloss,  W. 
Odem,  Isaac  Roberts,  J.  P.  Potts,  and  family  of  six  children,  the  oldest 
a young  lady,  about  seventeen  years  of  age. 

I forwarded  to  you,  by  a messenger,  same  day,  the  result  of  the  ex- 
pedition, hastily  written  with  a pencil,  in  which  I neglected  to  state 
that  there  were  three  cases  of  small  pox  among  the  prisoners,  but  told 
the  messenger  to  be  sure  and  tell  you. 

There  were  about  100  Indians  at  my  camp  that  evening.  They  de- 
manded a prisoner.  They  said  that  they  had  been  fighting  the  Texans, 
and  that  they  must  have  a man  now,  that  they  might  have  a war-dance. 
I told  them  repeatedly  that  they  could  not  have  a man;  that  I should 
start  back  in  the  morning  with  all  the  prisoners;  that  Agent  Stapp 
and  two  others  would  stop  with  them  a few  days  to  show  them  that  we 
were  acting  in  good  faith  toward  them,  and  that  the  agent  would  then 
bring  them  to  our  camp  to  receive  their  presents.  They  started  a 
runner  immediately  for  their  head  chief,  Mouwa. 

Next  morning  I*  commenced  the  return  march.  After  marching  up 
the  river  about  10  miles  an  Indian  overtook  me,  stating  that  Mouwa 
and  other  Indians  were  coming  up  the  river;  that  Mouwa  wished  me  to 
stop,  as  he  wished  to  see  me.  I encamped  about  two  hours,  after  which 
Mouwa  came  up,  with  about  50  other  Indians  with  him.  I gave  them 
something  to  eat.  We  then  held  an  interview.  He  w'anted  a man, 
half  of  the  animals,  arms,  ammunition,  &c.,  taken  from  the  prisoners. 
I told  him  that  was  not  consistent  with  our  rules  of  warfare.  I told 
them  that  I was  willing  to  pay  them  for  the  information  they  had  given 
us,  and  would  be  willing  to  pay  them  for  all  information  received  here- 
after. I gave  them  some  silver  and  other  presents  for  the  information 
they  had  given  this  time.  Agent  Stapp  did  the  same.  After  talking 
all  evening  we  separted  the  best  of  friends,  with  a good  understanding. 


158 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Agent  Stapp  and  two  others  were  to  return  with  the  Indians,  stay  with 
them  three  days,  and  then  all  were  to  go  to  your  camp,  at  the  mouth  of 
Utah  Greek.  The  next  morning  we  resumed  our  march  up  the  river. 

On  the  morning  of  November  7 Dr.  Eussell  informed  me  that  two  of 
the  men  having  the  small-pox  were  too  sick  to  resume  the  march  on 
that  day,  but  thought  by  next  day  they  would  be  better,  after  one  day’s 
rest.  I laid  in  camp  that  day.  Next  morning  the  doctor  informed  me 
that  the  sick  were  no  better  and  could  not  be  moved.  At  this  time 
some  of  the  prisoners  were  out  of  rations  and  some  of  them  had  more 
than  eight  days’  rations.  I had  six  or  seven  days’  rations.  This,  when 
* divided  among  those  who  had  none,  made  it  necessary  to  make  your 
camp  as  soon  as  possible.  Acting  under  this  impulse,  I left  two  of  the 
sick  men  and  two  of  those  who  had  partially  recovered  as  attendants 
and  two  of  my  men  as  a guard,  with  fifteen  days’  rations,  and  leaving 
with  them  one  wagon  and  team,  while  I resumed  the  march. 

On  November  11 1 was  met  by  a detachment  of  10  men,  sent  out  by 
you  to  meet  me.  They  had  but  one  day’s  rations  left  when  I met  them, 
their  fourth  day  from  your  camp.  I sent  two  of  them  forward  the  same 
day,  with  a dispatch  to  you,  requesting  that  rations  be  sent  to  meet  me. 

On  the  13th  I met  a team,  sent  out  by  you,  with  rations  for  me.  The 
same  day  I arrived  at  your  picket  camp. 

The  general  conduct  and  behavior  of  the  prisoners  after  their  capture  ! 
was  that  of  high-toned  gentlemen.  They  made  no  attempt  to  escape. 
They  all  say  that  they  had  no  intention  of  joining  the  Confederate  Army, 
though  the  majority  of  them  acknowledge  that  their  sympathies  are 
with  the  {South. 

Our  men  in  this,  as  in  former  events,  deserve  the  highest  praise  for 
their  perseverance,  coolness,  courage,  and  discretion.  Sergeant  Marvin 
and  Corporal  Allen  were  untiring  in  their  exertions  for  the  safe-keep- 
ing of  the  prisoners. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  L.  SHOUP, 

Second  Lieutenant  Company  C,  Second  Colorado  Volunteers . 

Capt.  William  H.  Backus. 


OCTOBER  24-NO VEMBER  6,  1862.— Operations  in  the  La  Fourche  Dis- 
trict, La.,  including  capture  of  Donaldsonville,  October  25,  and  action 
at  Georgia  Landing,  near  Labadieville,  October  27. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Maj.  Gen.  Benj.  F.  Butler,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf. 
No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  Godfrey  Weitzel,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  expedition. 

No.  3.— Lieut,  John  A.  Vance,  Sixteenth  New  York  Infantry,  Acting  Signal  Officer. 
No.  4.— Maj.  Gen.  R.  Taylor,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  District  of  Western  Louisiana. 
No.  5.— Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  Mouton,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler , U.  S.  Army , commanding  De- 
partment of  the  Gulf. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , October  24,  1862. 

General  : While  I have  the  honor  to  report  a reasonable  degree  of 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


THE  LA  FOURCHE  DISTRICT,  LA. 


159 


health  on  the  part  of  my  troops  through  the  summer  and  an  entire  ab- 
sence of  epidemic  here,  I think  it  would  be  well,  in  view  of  the  coming 
summer,  to  change  the  regiments  for  the  coming  season,  and  for  that 
purpose  it  will  be  necessary  to  begin  now,  to  prevent  disarranging  the 
service.  I find  those  necessarily  kept  on  the  lines  at  Carrollton  suffer- 
ing greatly  from  the  malarious  swamp  fever,  to  which  the  debilitating 
effects  of  summer  predisposes  them. 

To  my  astonishment,  and  against  all  theory,  the  regiment  of  accli- 
mated Louisianians  which  I have  recruited  here,  and  one  of  the  most 
healthy  I had  while  in  barracks,  sent  there,  supposing  them  able  to 
resisLtke  effects  of  the  malaria  because  of  this  acclimatization,  have  * 
suffered  from  the  swamp  fever  the  most  considerably  of  any — much 
more  than  the  fresh  troops— the  Seventy-fifth  New  York,  which  I brought 
from  the  healthy  sands  of  Pensacola  and  placed  in  the  same  locality. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  two  regiments  of  Native  Guards  (colored) 
organized  and  mustered  into  the  service,  and  one  takes  the  field  to- 
morrow. 

I have  organized  an  expedition,  consisting  of  a brigade  (five  regiments 
of  infantry,  two  batteries  of  artillery,  and  four  companies  of  cavalry), 
under  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Weitzel,  to  move  upon  the 
western  bank  of  the  Mississippi  through  Western  Louisiana,  for  the 
purpose  of  dispersing  the  forces  assembled  there  under  General  Eichard 
Taylor. 

I propose  at  the  same  time  to  send  around  some  light-draught 
steamers,  which  I have  been  fitting  for  the  service  by  protecting  their 
boilers  and  engines  with  iron  coverings,  so  as  to  prevent,  if  possible, 
the  recurrence  of  the  dreadful  accident  which  occurred  on  the  Mound 
City  steamer  by  the  penetration  of  her  boilers  by  shot  and  by  mount- 
ing them  with  light  guns,  to  attack  some  batteries  at  Berwick  Bay,  to 
penetrate  the  waters  of  the  bay  and  tributaries,  and  cut  off  the  sup- 
plies of  cattle  for  the  rebel  army  from  Texas  via  Opelousas  and  New 
Iberia,  and  to  act  in  conjunction  with  Brigadier- General  Weitzel.  At 
the  same  time  I push  forward  a column  from  Algiers,  consisting  of  the 
Eighth  Eegiment  Vermont  Volunteers  and  the  First  Eegiment  of 
Native  Guards  (colored),  along  the  Opelousas  Eailroad  to  Thibodeaux 
and  Brashear  City,  open  the  railway  for  the  purpose  of  forwarding  sup- 
plies to  General  Weitzel’ s expedition,  and  to  give  the  loyal  planters  an 
opportunity  to  forward  their  sugar  and  cotton  to  this  city.  I can  easily 
hold  this  portion  of  Louisiana,  by  far  the  richest,  and  extend  the  move- 
ment so  far  as  to  substantially  cut  off  all  supplies  from  Texas  to  the 
enemy  this  coming  winter  by  this  route,  if  I can  receive  early  re-enforce- 
ments. Please  therefore  send  me  New  England  troops.  The  news- 
papers assure  me  that  there  are  thousands  waiting  in  Massachusetts. 
Letters  from  their  officers  are  received  by  me  begging  that  they  may 
come  to  this  department.  Of  course  I have  a preference  for  Massa- 
chusetts troops.  Those  that  I have  have  behaved  very  well.  I trust 
that  they  may  be  sent  to  me. 

I should  be  glad  if  General  Weitzel  should  be  able  to  move  upon 
Texas,  and  would  suggest  that  an  appropriate  base  of  operations  would 
be  through  Galveston,  which  I have  just  heard  has  surrendered  to  the 
naval  force  of  the  Union,  but  I have  hardly  a regiment  which  I can 
spare  to  hold  it,  although  I propose  to  send  one — not  that  I anticipate 
an  immediate  attack  upon  New  Orleans  nor  that  I fear  it,  unless  I am 
forced  to  receive  the  debris  of  the  Southwestern  wing  after  the  defeat 
of  Bragg  by  General  Buell,  while  if  I weaken  myself  here  1 may  in- 
vite an  attack  from  such  source. 


160 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA  , S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX  , N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Rear-Admiral  Farragut  is  very  desirous  that  we  should  make  a 
demonstration  on  Mobile,  or  at  least  Fort  Morgan,  to  save  the  neces- 
sity of  the  large  blockading  force  off  that  fort.  I think  3,000  men  would 
do  it  successfully ; but  again  I have  not  the  men  to  spare  and  to  do 
those  things  which  I think  of  more  immediate  necessity. 

I have  as  yet  received,  with  the  exception  of  60  men,  no  recruits  from 
the  North  for  any  of  my  old  regiments,  some  of  which  have  been  eighteen 
months  in  service,  so  that  my  regiments  appear  much  larger  in  numbers 
than  they  are  in  effective  strength. 

I am  sorry  to  report  the  very  sudden  and  serious  illness  of  Brigadier- 
J General  Arnold,  who  was  stricken  with  paralysis  while  attending  a re- 
view on  Saturday,  from  which  I think  he  will  not  recover  sufficiently 
to  resume  his  duties  for  some  months. 

I was  happy  to  receive  the  commendation  of  the  general  command- 
ing in  chief  of  the  action  of  Major  Strong  at  Ponchatoula. 

The  illness  of  General  Arnold  and  the  wide-spread  districts  over  which 
my  troops  are  disposed  make  it  necessary  that  I should  have  another 
brigadier-general.  Allow  me  to  recommend  for  promotion  Major  Strong, 
my  assistant  adjutant-general,  lieutenant  in  the  Ordnance  Corps,  who 
graduated  the  second  in  his  class  at  West  Point  in  1857,  and  also  has 
been  in  the  service  ever  since.  1 know  no  one  more  competent,  and 
certainly  he  has  shown  both  conduct  and  gallantry.  I have  been 
obliged  to  lose  his  services  a part  of  the  summer  through  his  ill-health, 
brought  on  by  overexertion  in  preparing  the  expedition  to  New  Or- 
leans : but  I think  that  he  has  now  fully  recovered  and  re-established 
his  health.  May  1 ask  your  kind  offices  to  recommend  to  the  President 
this  appointment  as  one  eminently  fit  to  be  made'? 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major- General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halle  ok, 

Commander -in-  Chief 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  October  27,  1862. 

General  : In  my  dispatch  of  the  [24th]  instant  I had  the  honor  to 
report  to  the  commanding  general  the  departure  of  an  expedition,  under 
Brigadier- General  Weitzel,  into  that  part  of  Louisiana  which  lies  west 
of  the  Mississippi  River.  I inclose  General  WeitzeFs  dispatch,  show- 
ing his  operations  so  far.  * i i T 

This  is  sent  by  hand  of  Captain  [A.  F.]  Puffer,  of  my  staff,  by  whom  I 
also  forward  a map  of  that  part  of  Louisiana  which,  though  not  strictly 
accurate,  will  give  you  a very  good  idea  of  the  country  through  which 
operations  are  being  made.  I have  explained  to  him  verbally  the  pro- 
posed action  of  the  expedition,  and,  if  you  desire,  by  the  aid  of  the  map 
he  may  make  it  clearer  than  I can  by  writing.  I trust  you  will  find 
him  a gentleman  of  such  intelligence  as  to  make  clear  the  difficulties 
we  encounter  and  the  necessity  of  the  expenditure  which  I have 
made  for  light-draught  steamers  for  the  numerous  bayous. 

I hope  that  on  Tuesday  morning,  the  28th  instant,  four  of  these 
steamers,  two  of  them  iron-clad  as  tar  as  the  boilers  are  concerned,  will 


That  of  October  25.  See  Report  No.  2. 


Chap.  XXVII.  ] 


THE  LA  FOURCHE  DISTRICT,  LA. 


161 


be  in  Brashear  City.  We  have  opened  the  railroad  as  far  as  the  point 
marked  “ Boutte  Station.”  The  enemy  have  a force  at  the  point  where 
the  Bayou  des  Allemands  is  crossed  by  the  railroad. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Major-General  Halle ck, 

Commander -in- Chief  JJ.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  November  2,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  recount  a very  successful  expedition,  under  Gen- 
eral Weitzel,  of  the  preparation  for  the  march  of  which  I have  previ- 
ously informed  the  commanding  general : 

General  Weitzel  landed  at  Donaldsonville  and  took  up  his  line  of 
march  on  Sunday,  October  26.  About  9 miles  beyond  Donaldsonville 
he  met  the  enemy  in  force.  A sharp  engagement  ensued,  in  which  he 
lost  18  killed  and  68  wounded*  Full  lists  of  the  casualties  have  been 
received  and  published.  The  commanding  officer  of  the  enemy,  Colonel 
McPheeters,  was  killed,  and  the  enemy  lost  quite  a large  number  in 
killed  and  wounded.  Two  hundred  and  sixty-eight  prisoners  were  cap- 
tured, and  also  one  piece  of  artillery.  Since  then  he  has  met  with  no 
opposition,  and  the  whole  of  that  country  is  now  open  to  him.  The 
enemy  has  evacuated  Brashear  City,  having  by  means  of  the  railroad 
got  away  before  our  gunboats  could  cut  off  their  retreat,  the  naval  forces 
having  been  delayed  by  a very  severe  storm. 

I send  you  General  Weitzel’s  report,  received  to-day.  f 

Sending  off  so  large  a proportion  of  my  effective  force  has  necessarily 
left  me  very  weak  here,  and  I beg  leave  to  urge  upon  the  commanding 
general  the  necessity  of  re-enforcements,  with  which  I can  operate  at 
Mobile  and  Texas,  or  up  the  river,  which  can  be  opened,  or  a march  on 
Jackson,  Miss.,  undertaken.  I am  organizing  some  companies  of  Texas 
Volunteers  as  cavalry,  which  I hope  will  grow  into  a regiment. 

I will  forward  by  the  next  mail  my  letter  of  instruction  to  General 
Weitzel  in  answer  to  his  dispatches  herewith  sent. 

I am  just  informed  that  our  railroad  communications  with  General 
Weitzel  are  opened,  and  his  messenger  has  just  come  in,  bringing  a 
dispatch  while  I write,  which  I inclose. 

I cannot  too  much  commend  the  energy  of  Colonel  Thomas,  with  his 
regiment,  the  Eighth  Vermont,  who  have  in  six  days  opened  52  miles 
of  railroad,  built  nine  culverts,  rebuilt  a bridge  (burned  by  the  enemy) 
435  feet  long,  besides  pulling  up  the  rank  grass  from  the  track,  which 
entirely  impeded  the  locomotive  all  the  way.  In  this  work  they  were 
assisted  by  Colonel  Stafford’s  regiment,  Native  Guards,  (colored). 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commander -in-  Chief  U.  8.  Army. 


* But  see  revised  statement,  p.  172. 
t That  of  October  29.  See  Report  No.  2. 

Hr  r — vol  xv 


162 


W.  FLA  , 8.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYII. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  November  6,  1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  copies  of  General  Weitzel’s 
reports*  of  his  operations  on  the  west  bank  of  the  river  and  of  my 

instructions  to  him.  ...  . ..  „ •„ 

I propose  to-day  to  visit  him  m person,  to  advise  whether  we  will 
cross  Berwick  Bay  without  awaiting  the  reconstruction  of  the  bridge 
at  Bayou  Bceuf.  It  will  be  apparent  that  General  Weitzel  brings  up 
the  interesting  question  of  the  war.  I trust  that  my  instructions  on  it 
will  meet  your  approbation.  The  President  and  yourself  are  aware 
that  I am  wholly  without  guide  in  this  matter. 

I take  occasion  to  call  to  the  attention  of  the  general  commanding 
in  chief  that  more  than  seventy  days  since  I called  the  attention  of  the 
War  Department  to  the  organization  of  three  colored  regiments  by  my 
General  Orders,  No.  63,  of  August  22,  1862,  subject  to  the  approval  of 
the  President,  and,  though  I have  had  many  communications  directly 
from  the  War  Department  and  from  the  general  commanding  m chief, 
no  communication  disapproving  of  that  organization  has  been  receded. 
I must  therefore  take  it  to  be  approved,  but  would  prefer  distinct 

orders  on  this  subject.  , - 

Awaiting  further  instructions  from  the  general  commanding-in-chiel, 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant,  -n-rrmr 

BENJ.  E.  hU  ILhli. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commander-in- Chief  of  the  Armies  of  the  United  Mates. 

[Incloaures.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans,  La.,  November  2,  1862. 

General  : Your  dispatch  of  November  1 is  received.!  As  I in- 
formed you  in  my  last,  I have  sent  forward  both  regiments  ol  Native 
Guards  (colored)  to  guard  the  road.  1 have  no  doubt  that  before  this 
reaches  you  Colonels  Thomas  and  Stafford  will  have  reported  to  you. 
They  will  receive  from  you  orders.  We  have  already  taken  measures 
about  the  organization  of  the  management  of  the  Opelousas  Railroad. 

Of  course  there  will  be  no  more  difficult  subject  for  you  to  deal  with 
than  the  negroes.  By  the  act  of  Congress,  independent  of  the  Presi- 
dent’s proclamation,  having  come  from  rebel  masters  into  our  lines  in 
occupation  of  rebel  territory  since  the  passage  of  that  actthey  are  tree. 
But  the  question  recurs,  What  shall  we  do  with  them  . While  we  have 
no  right  to  return  them  to  their  masters  as  such,  it  is  our  duty  to  take 
care  of  them,  and  that  can  include  employment.  Put  them  as  far  as 
possible  upon  plantations ; use  every  energy  to  have  the  sugar  crop 
made  and  preserved  for  the  owners  that  are  loyal,  and  for  the  United 
States  where  the  owners  are  disloyal.  I am  working  the  plantations 
along  the  river  below  upon  this  plan.  Let  the  loyal  planters  ma.  e 
arrangements  to  pay  their  negroes  $10  a month  for  able-bodied  men ; 
$3  to  be  expended  in  clothing,  and  so  in  proportion.  Disembarrass 
your  army  of  them  as  much  as  possible.  Especially  will  this  be  neces- 
sarv  in  the  case  of  Colonel  Stafford’s  command. 

Ihave  information,  more  or  less  reliable,  that  there  were  about  8,000 
troops  at  Port  Hudson,  Ponchatoula,  and  Camp  Moore  (about  equally 

* Those  of  November  1 and  5.  See  Report  No.  2. 
f See  Report  No.  2- 


Chap.  XXVn.] 


163 


THE  LA  FOURCHE  DISTRICT,  LA. 

divided  among  the  three)  on  October  27.  My  impression  is  that  they 
have  gone  north.  Bragg  is  undoubtedly  badly  beaten  and  is  in  full 
retreat.  There  has  been  no  battle  since  the  9th  (at  Perry ville)  up  to 
the  16th.  Nothing  new  on  the  Potomac.  I inclose  you  some  of  the 
latest  newspapers  with  this  dispatch. 

In  regard  to  disarming  the  people,  every  disloyal  person  must  be 
disarmed  5 and  I do  not  mean  by  loyalty  lip  service.  Besides,  we  must 
leave  force  enough  to  take  care  of  any  rising  of  the  negroes.  I think 
you  had  better  see  the  most  intelligent  of  the  negroes  in  person,  and 
assure  them  that  all  acts  of  Congress  and  laws  in  their  favor  will  be 
carried  out  to  them  with  the  same  effect  if  they  remain  on  the  planta- 
tions and  work  as  if  they  came  into  camp,  and  caution  them  that  there 
must  be  no  violence  to  unarmed  and  quiet  persons. 

You  had  better  send  back  a train  of  extra  artillery  and  cavalry  horses 
and  mule  wagons  to  Algiers,  on  a march,  without  waiting  for  the  rail- 
road. A small  guard  will  be  sufficient.  They  will  probably  have  to 
strike  the  river  road  at  Bonnet  Carrd ; but  of  that  your  knowledge  of 
the  topography  of  the  country  will  give  you  the  best  direction.  I need 
not  assure  you  that  I am  taking  every  means  to  open  railroad  and  tele- 
graphic communication. 

Captain  Kensel,  who  is  present  as  this,  dispatch  is  written,  is  only 
waiting  transportation  to  forward  the  ammunition. 

I think  the  gunboats  had  better  press-up  to  Franklin  and  capture  or 
destroy  some  boats  that  are  building  there.  Of  that  you  can  tell  better 
when  you  go  forward. 

I wish  to  disengage  McMillan’s  regiment  as  early  as  it  can  be  dis- 
pensed with,  if  at  all,  to  hold  Galveston. 

It  is  under  advisement  to  build  a fort  at  Donaldsonville,  at  the  junc- 
tion of  the  bayou  and  the  river.  We  have  32-pounders  here  with  which 
we  can  arm  it.  That  will  make  a station  easily  held  on  the  coast  half 
way  between  here  and  Baton  Bouge.  I think  a work  about  on  the  plan 
of  Fort  Macomb,  with  casemates  only,  to  flank  the  draw-bridge,  would 
be  the  better  plan.  Please  advise  me  on  the  subject. 

We  hear  flaming  reports  of  salt-works  at  New  Iberia.  If  practicable, 
will  it  not  be  better  to  reach  them  and  destroy  them?  But  that  I leave 
entirely  to  your  discretion. 

That -portion  of  Louisiana  lying  west  of  the  Mississippi  Biver  will  be 
constituted  a military  district,  under  your  command,  to  be  called  the 
District  of  the  Teche,  headquarters  wherever  you  may  be. 

Colonel  Thomas  writes  me  that  the  cars  will  pass  to  La  Fourche  to- 
day. Beport  to  me  early  what  rolling  stock  you  find  at  Brashear  or 
along  the  road. 

I think  the  iron  howitzers  at  Baceland  had  better  be  sent  here,  unless 
you  have  need  of  them. 

Your  attention  is  directed  to  the  practicability  of  so  fortifying  Bra- 
shear as  to  hold  it,  with  the  aid  of  a gunboat,  with  a small  force. 
Please  report  upon  this  subject.  Is  any  fortification  practicable  at 
Thibodeaux  or  Terre  Bonne? 

Nothing  else  occurs  to  me  of  interest  to  communicate. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler. 

GEO.  C.  STBONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Chief  of  Staff. 

Brigadier- General  Weitzel, 

Commanding  District  of  the  Teche. 


164 


. W.  FLA.,  S ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  ICur.  XXVII. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La November  6,  186 2. 

General  : Your  dispatches  of  November  5 have  been  received,  as 
also  your  telegram  of  this  evening*  I am  directed  by  the  major-gen- 

6r^ You ^suggestions  asPto  the  field  work  at  Donaldsonville  will  receive 
eonsideration.  It  will  be  necessary  to  make  a battery  at  Brashear  City 
and  Berwick  Bay  or  perhaps  a field  work.  Upon  this  subject  he  will 

^In^tabUstog  the  Military  District  of  the  Teche  he  was  aware  that 
at  the  moment  you  did  not  occupy  it  except  by  your  boats,  and  he  gave 
the  name  in  compliment  to  your  skill  and  gallantry,  as  it  was  n 
doubted  you  would  soon  be  in  occupation ; and  in  putting  the  very 
large  force  under  the  command  of  so  young  a general  he  designed  to 
show  a mark  of  confidence  in  your  discrimination  and  judgment.  11 
it  would  be  more  desirable  to  yourself,  he  will  change  th®  *° 
District  of  the  La  Pourche.  That  you  should  have  declined  the  com- 
mand is  the  occasion  of  regret,  arising  most  of  ail  froai  the  reasous 
given  for  so  doing.  As  they  are  comprehended,  they  resolve  them- 
selves into  two  : First,  that  under  your  command  are  put  two ^ reg  - 
ments  of  Native  Guards  (colored),  and  you  say  that  m these  organi- 
zations you  have  no  confidence.  As  your  reading  must  have  made 
you  aware,  General  Jackson  entertained  a different  opinion  upon  that 
subiect.  It  was  arranged  between  the  commanding  general  and  your 
self  that  the  colored  regiments  should  be  employed  in  guarding  the i rail- 
road. You  do  not  complain  in  your  report  that  they  either  failed  to 
do  their  duty  in  that  respect  or  that  they  have  acted  otherwise  th^ 
correctly  and  obediently  to  the  commands  of  their  officers  or  that  they 
have  committed  any  outrage  or  pillage  upon  the  inhabitants. 

The  general  was  aware  of  your  opinion  that  colored  men  will  not 
fight  You  have  fadld  to  show,  by  the  conduct  of  these  freemen  so 
far,  anything  to  sustain  that  opinion,  and  the  general  cannot  see  why 
you  should  decline  the  command,  especially  as  you  express  a willing- 
ness to  go  forward  to  meet  the  only  organized  enemy  with  your  own 
brigade  alone  without  further  support.  The  commanding  general  can- 
no  tf  see  how  the  fact  that  they  are  guarding  your  lines 
by  railroad  can  weaken  your  defense.  He  must  therefore  look  to  the 
other  reasons  stated  by  you  for  an  explanation  of  your  declining  the 

°°You  say  you  “ cannot  command  these  negro  regiments.”  Why  not  ? 
The  reason  must  be  found  in  these  sentences  of  your  report. 

Sim-e  the  arrival  of  the  negro  regiments  symptoms  of  servile  insurrections  are  be- 

make  myself  responsible  for  it. 

You  say  since,  the  arrival  of  the  negro  regiments  at  that  place jyou 
have  seen  symptoms  of  a servile  insurrection ; but,  as  the  on  y r g 

that  has  arrived  there  got  there  as  soon  as  thfs^nfe^r  wriva^ 
of  course  the  appearance  of  such  symptoms  is  since  their  airiv<  \ 
Have  you  not  mistaken  the  cause  ? Is  it  the  arrival  of  a 'negro  regi- 
ment or  is  it  the  arrival  of  United  States  troops,  carrying,  by  the  act  ot 

"Telegram  not" found.  For  other  dispatches  see  Report  No.  2. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


THE  LA  FOURCHE  DISTRICT,  LA. 


165 


Congress,  freedom  to  this  servile  race  ? Did  you  expect  to  march  into 
that  country,  drained  as  you  say  it  is  by  conscription  of  all  its  able-bodied 
white  men  without  leaving  the  negroes  free  to  show  symptoms  of  servile 
insurrection  ? Does  not  this  state  of  things  arise  from  the  very  fact  of 
war  itself?  You  are  in  a country  where  now  the  negroes  outnumber 
the  whites  ten  to  one,  and  these  whites  are  in  rebellion  against  the  Gov- 
ernment or  in  terror  seeking  its  protection. 

Upon  reflection,  can  you  doubt  that  the  same  state  of  things  would 
have  arisen  without  the  presence  of  a colored  regiment  ? Did  you  not 
see  symptoms  of  the  same  thing  on  the  plantations  here  when  we  ar- 
rived, although  under  much  less  favorable  circumstances,  for  a revolt  f 
You  say  that  the  prospect  of  such  an  insurrection  is  heart-rending,  and 
that  you  cannot  be  responsible  for  it.  You  are  in  no  degree  responsible 
for  it.  The  responsibility  rests  upon  those  who  have  begun  and  carried 
on  this  war,  who  have  stopped  at  no  barbarity,  no  act  of  outrage,  upon 
the  citizens  and  troops  of  the  United  States. 

You  have  forwarded  me  the  records  of  a pretended  court-martial, 
showing  that  seven  men  of  one  of  your  regiments,  who  enlisted  here  into 
the  Eighth  Vermont  Eegiment,  who  had  surrendered  themselves  pris- 
oners of  war,  were  in  cold  blood  murdered,  and,  as  certain  information 
shows,  were  required  to  dig  their  own  graves.  You  are  asked  if  this  is 
not  an  occurrence  equally  as  heart-rending  as  a prospective  servile  in- 
surrection ? 

The  question  is  now  to  be  met  whether  in  a hostile,  rebellious  part  of 
the  State,  where  this  very  murder  has  been  committed  by  the  militia, 
you  are  to  stop  in  the  operations  of  the  field  to  put  down  servile  insur- 
rection because  the  men  and  women  are  terror-stricken.  When  was  it 
ever  heard  before  that  a victorious  general,  in  an  unsurrendered  prov- 
ince, stopped  in  his  course  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  the  rebellious 
inhabitants  of  that  province  from  destroying  each  other  and  refused  to 
take  command  of  a conquered  province  lest  he  should  be  made  respon- 
sible for  their  self-destruction  I As  a military  question,  perhaps  the 
more  terror-stricken  the  inhabitants  are  that  are  left  in  your  rear  the 
more  safe  will  be  your  lines  of  communication.  You  say  there  have  ap- 
peared before  your  eyes  the  very  facts,  in  terror-stricken  women,  chil- 
dren, and  men,  which  you  had  before  contemplated  in  theory.  Grant 
it.  But  is  not  the  remedy  to  be  found  in  the  surrender  of  the  neighbors, 
fathers,  brothers,  and  sons  of  the  terror-stricken  women  and  children, 
who  are  nowin  arms  against  the  Government  within  20  miles  of  you  ? 
And  when  that  is  done,  and  you  have  np  longer  to  fear  from  their  organ- 
ized force,  and  they  have  returned  peaceably  to  their  homes,  you  will 
be  able  to  use  the  full  power  of  your  troops  to  insure  their  safety  from 
the  so-much -feared  (by  them,  but  not  by  us)  servile  insurrection. 

If  you  desire  you  can  send  a flag  of  truce  to  the  commander  of  these 
forces  embracing  these  views,  and  placing  upon  him  the  responsibility 
which  belongs  to  him.  Even  that  course  will  not  remove  it  from  you, 
for  upon  you  it  has  never  rested.  Say  to  them  that  if  all  armed  oppo- 
sition to  the  authority  of  the  United  States  should  cease  in  Louisiana 
on  the  west  bank  of  the  river  you  are  authorized  by  the  commanding 
general  to  say  that  the  same  protection  against  negro  or  other  violence 
will  be  afforded  to  that  part  of  Louisiana  that  has  been  in  the  part 
already  in  the  possession  of  the  troops  of  the  United  States,  If  that 
is  refused,  whatever  may  ensue  is  upon  them,  and  not  upon  you  or  upon 
the  United  States.  You  will  have  done  all  that  is  required  of  a brave, 
humane  man  to  avert  from  these  deluded  people  the  horrible  conse- 
quences of  their  insane  war  upon  the  Government, 


166 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


With  or  without  such  a message  the  commanding  general  can  see  in 
your  reasons  nothing  which  should  justly  cause  you  to  decline  a high 
and  honorable  command, mor  does  he  see  how  the  remedy  which  you 
propose  will  aid  the  matter ; and  that  remedy  is  that  either  he  or  some 
one  of  his  officers  should  take  command  of  the  negro  regiments  and  re- 
lieve you  of  them.  Do  you  think  that  change  would  be  less  likely  to 
incite  a servile  insurrection  under  his  command,  or  that  of  any  of  his 
officers,  than  under  your  own?  Will  the  horrors  be  less  if  they  are 
under  the  command  of  an  officer  not  present  on  the  scene  to  check  and 
allay  these  horrors  than  if  they  were  commanded  by  an  officer  present 
and  ready  to  adopt  proper  measures? 

If  your  negro  or  other  regiments  commit  any  outrage  upon  the  unof- 
fending and  unarmed  people,  quietly  attending  to  their  own  business, 
let  them  be  most  severely  punished;  but  while  operations  in  the  field 
are  going  on  I do  not  see  how  you  can  turn  aside  from  an  armed  enemy 
before  you  to  protect  or  defend  the  wives  and  children  of  these  armed 
enemies  from  the  consequences  of  their  own  rebellious  wickedness. 

Consider  this  case : General  Bragg  is  at  liberty  to  ravage  the  homes 
of  our  brethren  of  Kentucky  because  the  Union  army  of  Louisiana  is 
protecting  his  wife  and  his  home  against  his  negroes.  Without  that 
protection  he  would  have  to  come  back  to  take  care  of  his  wife,  his 
home,  and  his  negroes.  It  is  understood  that  Mrs.  Bragg  is  one  of 
those  terrified  women  of  whom  you  speak  in  your  report. 

This  subject  is  not  for  the  first  time  under  the  consideration  of  the 
commanding  general.  When  in  command  of  the  Department  of  An- 
napolis, in  May,  1861,  he  was  asked  to  protect  a community  against 
the  consequences  of  a servile  rebellion.  He  replied  that  when  that 
community  laid  down  its  arms  and-  called  upon  him  for  protection  he 
would  give  it,  because  from  that  moment  between  them  and  him  war 
would  cease.  The  same  principles  enunciated  there  will  govern  his  and 
your  action  now,  and  you  will  afford  such  protection  as  soon  as  the  com- 
munity, through  its  organized  rulers,  shall  ask  it. 

Your  reports  and  this  reply,  I am  instructed  to  say,  will  be  forwarded 
by  to-morrow’s  mail  to  the  commanding  general  of  the  Army.  In  the 
mean  time  these  colored  regiments  of  freemen,  raised  by  the  authority 
of  the  President,  and  approved  by  him  as  the  Commander-in- Chief  of 
the  Army,  must  be  commanded  by  the  officers  of  the  Army  of  the 
United  States  like  any  other  regiments. 

The  commanding  general  does  not  doubt  that  everything  that  pru- 
dence, sagacity,  skill,  and  courage  can  do  will  be  done  by  you,  general, 
to  prosecute  the  campaign  you  have  so  successfully  begun. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Brigadier- General  Weitzel, 

Commanding  District  of  the  Teche , La. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Godfrey  Weitzel , V.  S.  A .,  commanding  expedition. 

Headquarters  Reserve  Brigade, 

Donaldsonville , La .,  October  25,  1862. 
Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  accordance  with  orders, 
I left  Carrollton,  La., yesterday  afternoon  with  my  command,  and  landed, 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


THE  LA  FOURCHE  DISTRICT,  LA. 


167 


in  accordance  with  my  design,  at  Miner’s  Point,  6 miles  below  this  place, 
directing  my  transports  to  follow  up  the  column,  carrying  the  baggage 
and  caissons.  I entered  this  place  without  opposition  at  about  10  a.  m. 
I heard  so  many  conflicting  reports  as  to  the  strength  and  position  of  the 
enemy’s  forces  that  I sent  out  a reconnaissance  of  two  companies  of 
infantry,  of  the  Thirteenth  Connecticut,  under  the  command  of  Captains 
McCord  and  Schlieter,  and  Perkins’  cavalry,  accompanied  by  my  adju- 
tant-general, Captain  Hubbard.  They  drove  in  the  enemy’s  pickets, 
and  report  the  force  encamped  on  both  sides  of  Bayou  La  Fourche,  and 
represented  to  them  as  numbering  3,000.  I could  not  get  my  train  off 
soon  enough  and  loaded  to  start  to-day,  as  I would  thus  come  upon  the 
enemy  too  late  in  the  evening ; but  I propose  to  start  to-morrow  early. 

Captain  [Bichard]  Barrett  and  Lieutenant  [S.  A.]  Perkins,  in  a fine 
dash  upon  the  enemy’s  pickets,  captured  a number  of  prisoners  (13),  all 
of  whom  I released  on  parole. 

I have  not  the  least  doubt  but  that  the  enemy  will  concentrate  to 
meet  me  at  Thibodeaux ; in  what  force  I cannot  positively  state,  but  it 
is  said  to  be  pretty  large.  I am  informed  that  General  Mouton  is  now 
in  command,  and  has  with  him  the  remainder  of  the  Eighteenth  Lou- 
isiana Begiment,  which  has  seen  some  service.  I will  leave  the  First 
Louisiana  here  to  hold  this  post,  and  must  request  you  to  order  them 
supplied  with  provisions  from  the  city.  I hope  you  will  give  me  a vig- 
orous co-operation  from  the  railroad. 

In  conclusion  I must  thank  Capt.  [George  M.]  Bansom,  in  command 
of  the  Kineo  and  the  gunboat  fleet,  for  his  vigorous  and  efficient  co-op- 
eration with  me  thus  far  in  my  expedition.  He  manifested  that  same 
disposition  to  co-operate  with  the  Army  to  the  full  extent  of  his  pow- 
ers for  which  he  has  already  become  famous.  The  same  praise  is  due 
to  Capt.  [Beigart  B.]  Lowry,  commanding  the  gunboat  Sciota;  Capt. 
[Francis  A.]  Boe,  commanding  the  gunboat  Katahdin,  and  Capt.  [B. 
F.  B.]  Lewis,  commanding  the  gunboat  Itasca.  My  transports  were 
not  fired  upon  at  all,  so  well  were  they  covered  by  the  gunboats. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brig.  Gen.  TI.  S.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Reserve  Brig.,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf. 

Maj.  George  C.  Strong, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf  \ Neiv  Orleans , La. 


Headquarters  Beserve  Brigade, 

Bayou  La  Fourche,. near  Thibodeaux , La.,  October  29,  1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  this  morning  at  6 o’clock  I 
dispatched  Colonel  Birge,  in  command  of  his  regiment  (the  Thirteenth 
Connecticut),  Barrett’s  cavalry,  and  one  section  of  Carruth’s  battery, 
down  the  Bayou  La  Fourche  to  open  communication  with  the  city.  I 
have  just  received  a dispatch  from  him  from  Baceland  Station,  in  which 
he  says  that  he  has  communicated  with  Colonel  Thomas,  who  is  1|  miles 
from  him.  He  found  at  the  station  three  freight  cars,  one  passenger 
car,  two  barbette  guns,  spiked  (32-pounders),  two  12-pounder  iron  how- 
itzers, in  good  order,  and  guns,  equipments,  &c.,  scattered  along  the 
road. 

I therefore  propose  now  to  give  you  a more  detailed  report  of  my 
operations  since  I left  Donaldsonville.  I left  this  place  at  6 o’clock  on 
Sunday  morning  last  and  marched  on  the  left  bank  until  I was  within 


168 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIT. 

1 mile  of  Napoleon ville,  where  I bivouacked  in  line  of  battle.  Believ 
ing  that  the  enemy  would,  by  means  of  the  numerous  flat-boat  ferries 
which  I knew  were  in  the  bayou,  probably  cross  from  one  side  of  the 
bayou  to  the  other,  I took  in  tow  a flat-boat  bridge  and  carried  it  with 
me  all  the  way,  and  have  it  with  me  now.  I destroyed  every  boat  I 
passed  as  a prudential  military  measure.  It  has  proved  of  invaluable 
service  to  me.  I moved  on  the  first  day  with  but  one  company  of  the 
Eighth  New  Hampshire  on  the  right  bank.  The  enemy’s  scouts  were 
continually  in  sight  of  my  advance  guard  of  cavalry,  and  just  before 
going  into  camp  1 captain  of  the  enemy  was  killed  by  my  advance 
guard  and  3 prisoners  were  taken.  Immediately  afterward  one  of  the 
Eighth  New  Hampshire  privates  on  the  right  bank  was  taken  prisoner 
by  the  enemy. 

I started  on  Monday  morning  again  at  6 o’clock,  but  feeling  that  the 
enemy  was  in  some  force  on  the  right  bank  I threw  over  the  whole  of 
the  Eighth  New  Hampshire  and  Perkins’  cavalry  by  means  of  my  float- 
ing bridge,  and  in  this  order  moved  down  the  bayou. 

At  11  o’clock,  when  I was  about  2 miles  above  Labadieville,  I received 
the  report  that  the  enemy  was  in  force  about  1 mile  ahead,  on  the  left 
bank,  and  that  they  had  six  pieces  of  artillery.  I immediately  ordered 
four  pieces  of  Carruth’s  battery  up  (two  pieces  were  with  the  rear  guard 
and  Thompson’s  was  already  ahead),  and  formed  the  Thirteenth  Con- 
necticut and  Seven  ty-fifth  New  York  in  link  of  battle  to  support 
Thompson. 

These  two  regiments  formed  splendidly,  and  moved  at  onee  forward 
to  the  attack  through  a dense  cane  field.  I moved  on  with  them,  and 
after  emerging  from  the  cane  field  I received  the  report,  which  was 
that  the  enemy  was  in  position  on  the  right  bank  also,  and  that  he  had 
four  pieces  of  artillery  on  that  side.  At  the  same  time  I received  the 
report  that  the  enemy’s  cavalry  was  in  the  rear  of  my  rear  guard.  I 
immediately  swung  my  bridge  across  the  bayou,  ordering  eight  com- 
panies of  the  Twelfth  Connecticut  over  to  support  the  Eighth  New 
Hampshire,  leaving  two  companies  of  this  regiment,  one  section  of 
Carruth’s  battery,  and  Williamson’s  cavalry  to  guard  the  rear.  I 
immediately  ordered  also  that  a road  be  cut  up  the  steep  bank  on  both 
sides  of  the  bayou  for  the  passage  of  artillery  and  my  train.  I found 
soon  that  the  enemy  on  the  left  bank,  after  delivering  only  the  fire  of 
its  advance  guard,  which  killed  one  of  my  cavalry  and  wounded  an- 
other and  killed  two  horses,  had  disappeared  for  some  unaccountable 
reason.  Fearing  some  ruse,  I immediately  ordered  the  Thirteenth  Con- 
necticut across  the  bayou  to  support  the  Eighth  New  Hampshire  and 
the  Twelfth  Connecticut ; Thompson’s  battery  to  play  upon  the  en- 
emy’s artillery,  on  the  right  bank,  which  was  firing  splendidly  upon 
our  forces  and  my  bridge ; ordered  Carruth  to  cross  over  with  his  two 
advanced  sections  and  the  Seventy-fifth  New  York  to  support  Thomp- 
son and  guard  the  head  of  the  bridge  and  the  front  of  the  train.  I then 
crossed  over,  ordered  the  Eighth  New  Hampshire  to  form  line  of  battle 
across  the  road,  the  Twelfth  Connecticut  to  form  on  its  right,  and  or- 
dered these  forward  to  attack  at  once.  They  had  scarcely  commenced 
moving  when  the  Thirteenth  Connecticut  arrived  on  a double-quick 
from  across  the  bayou.  I immediately  ordered  this  in  reserve.  Subse- 
quently, as  the  center  guides  of  the  Eighth  New  Hampshire  and  the 
Twelfth  Connecticut  moved  in  different  lines  of  direction,  they  became 
sufficiently  separated  to  allow  me  to  throw  the  Thirteenth  Connecticut 
on  the  line  between  the  two.  I ordered  this  regiment  forward  in  line  of 
battle.  The  line  thus  formed  advanced  steadily  at  my  command  for- 


CHAr.  urn]  THE  LA  FOURCHE  DISTRICT,  LA.  169 

ward.  In  a very  short  time  the  enemy’s  battery  retreated  and  also  the 
infantry  support.  The  fight  did  not  last  long.  I found  that  the  enemy 
had  four  pieces  of  artillery  in  the  road.  It  was  Connor’s  battery,  Com- 
pany A,  Withers’  light  artillery,  commanded  by  Capt.  G.  Ralston*  (who 
was  wounded  and  is  now  a paroled  prisoner) ; this  battery,  supported 
by  the  remnants  of  the  Eighteenth  Louisiana  and  the  Crescent  City 
Regiments,  numbering  together  about  500  men.  They  were  lying  down 
in  a ditch  on  the  lower  side  of  a plantation  road  in  the  edge  of  woods 
at  Georgia  Landing,  and  immediately  on  the  left  of  the  battery. 

I ordered  skirmishers  at  once  in  the  woods  to  secure  prisoners.  Car- 
ruth  arrived  about  this  time,  and  I sent  him  with  one  section  and  Per- 
kins’cavalry  in  pursuit.  They  pursued  about  4 miles,  Carruth  firing  upon 
the  retreating  forces  on  both  sides  of  the  bayou.  I have  since  learned 
that  Semmes’  battery  of  six  pieces,  supported  by  Colonel  Clark’s  [Clack’s] 
(the  Thirty-third)  regiment  of  Louisiana  Volunteers,  was  in  front  on 
the  left  bank.  I lost  18  killed  and  74  wounded.f  Lieutenant  Francis,  of 
the  Twelfth  Connecticut,  was  taken  prisoner  before  the  fight.  We  have 
buried  5 of  the  enemy  and  have  17  wounded  in  our  hospital,  but  I have 
proof  that  their  loss  was  greater.  I took  166  of  the  enemy  prisoners 
the  day  of  the  battle  and  42  of  them  since ; total,  208.  I released  them 
all  on  parole.  Col.  G.  P.  McPheeters  was  killed.  I delivered  his  body 
to  some  of  his  brother  officers  who  were  prisoners,  and  he  was  decently 
buried  near  the  battle-field,  the  chaplain  of  the  Eighth  New  Hampshire 
officiating.  One  of  the  pieces  of  the  enemy’s  artillery  broke  down  in 
the  retreat.  We  secured  it  and  have  it  now  in  our  possession.  All  of 
my  command  did  very  well,  both  officers  and  men.  The  Eighth  New 
Hampshire  advanced  steadily  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  battery.  The 
Twelfth  and  Thirteenth  Connecticut  crossed  the  bridge,  formed  in  line 
of  battle  under  the  very  accurate  and  splendid  fire  of  the  enemy’s  artil- 
lery without  seeming  to  notice  it  at  all.  My  cavalry  has  been  of  inval- 
uable service  to  me ; both  officers  and  men  have  done  splendidly.  I 
wish  I had  four  times  the  number.  The  Signal  Corps  also  has  been  of 
great  service  to  me.  I crossed  over  my  train  and  encamped  on  the  bat- 
tle-field ; had  my  own  and  the  enemy’s  wounded  put  in  a house  which  I 
took  as  a hospital  near  where  I went  into  camp.  The  next  morning 
(yesterday)  I moved  down  the  right  bank  of  the  bayou,  throwing  over 
the  Seventy-fifth  New  York  and  Williamson’s  cavalry  on  the  left  bank. 
I left  about  30  wounded  of  my  own,  who  could  not  be  moved,  and  the 
enemy’s  wounded,  in  charge  of  Surg.  B.  N.  Comings,  of  the  Thirteenth 
Connecticut,  and  left  with  him  provisions,  money,  and  supplies  for  their 
care.  I entered  Thibodeaux  at  3 o’clock  p.  m.  without  opposition.  I 
certainly  expected  a fight  at  this  place.  When  I arrived  a short  dis- 
tance from  it  I found  from  the  smoke  of  burning  bridges  that  they  were 
retreating,  and  immediately  ordered  my  cavalry  in  pursuit.  They  fol- 
lowed as  closely  as  their  force  would  allow,  and  prevented  the  total  de- 
struction of  two  railroad  bridges,  the  one  across  Bayou  La  Fourche,  the 
other  across  Bayou  Terre  Bonne.  I found  three  freight  cars  at  La  Fourche 
Crossing  uninjured,  one  containing  arms,  shovels,  and  sugar,  and  another 
containing  a lot  of  arms,  ammunition,  and  accouterments.  I also  found 
papers  by  the  side  of  the  road,  which  were  thrown  away  in  their  retreat, 
proving  that  the  enemy  had  left  Bayou  des  Allemands.  I went  into 
camp  on  Burton’s  plantation,  about  1 mile  below  Thibodeaux.  I will 
repair  the  damage  on  the  two  bridges  to-morrow.  The  enemy  has  re. 

*No  record  found  of  Connor’s  as  a Mississippi  battery.  Capt.  George  Ralston  ap- 
pears on  the  rolls  as  captain  of  Battery  H. 

1 See  revised  statement,  p.  172. 


170 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

treated  to  Berwick  Bay.  I send  you  a list  of  my  killed  and  wounded.* 
I also  send  you  a list  of  prisoners  I paroled.  I think  it  would  he  well 
to  publish  the  latter  list,  as  a great  many  are  from  New  Orleans. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier -General,  U.  8.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Reserve  Brigade. 

Maj.  George  C.  Strong, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Reserve  Brigade, 

In  Gamp , near  Thibodeaux , La.,  November  1,  1862. 

Major:  Since  my  last  dispatch  I have  received  information  that  the 
enemy  has  evacuated  Berwick  Bay,  and  in  such  a hurry  (as  our  gun- 
boats were  in  sight)  that  they  left  over  400  wagon  loads  of  negroes 
behind  at  Brashear  City.  To  substantiate  this  report  the  negroes  are 
already  returning.  Now,  what  shall  I do  with  them?  I have  already 
twice  as  many  negroes  in  and  around  my  camp  as  I have  soldiers  within. 

I cannot  feed  them;  as  a consequence  they  must  feed  themselves.  The 
community,  of  whom  already  quite  a number  have  taken  the  oath  of 
allegiance,  is  in  great  terror,  fearing  trouble  with  the  negroes.  They 
beg  me  to  allow  them  to  retain  their  arms.  I cannot  do  this  without 
authority  from  headquarters.  Last  night  my  pickets  were  fired  upon 
by  some  person  armed  with  a shot-gun.  This  would  make  it  prudent 
to  allow  only  those  to  retain  arms  who  have  taken  the  oath  or  are 
paroled.  Please  to  give  me  instructions  on  this  point. 

There  is  plenty  of  sugar  here.  I have  already  collected  a large  num- 
ber of  cavalry  and  artillery  horses  and  mules.  Please  organize  that 
railroad  now  properly  with  a superintendent  and  proper  employes,  so 
that  we  may  run  regular  trains,  and  not  have  our  rolling  stock  ruined 
by  bad  management.  Tell  Captain  [George  A.]  Kensel  to  hurry  up  the 
ammunition  asked  for. 

I have  sent  a force  to  Berwick  Bay  to  take  possession  of  the  road 
from  Tigerville  to  Berwick  Bay,  communicate  with  the  gunboats,  and 
repair  the  bridges  across  the  Bayou  Bceuf.  I will  have  the  bridges 
across  Bayou  La  Fourche  completed  at  4 o’clock  this  afternoon,  and 
the  bridge  at  Terre  Bonne  will  be  completed  to  morrow.  Then,  when 
the  Bayou  Bceuf  Bridge  is  ready  the  whole  road  will  be  all  right  to 
Brashear  City.  All  the  planters  nearly  wish  to  make  their  crops  very 
excellent  this  year,  if  I will  order  back  their  negroes  or  allow  them  to 
make  some  arrangement  with  them. 

Neither  Colonel  Thomas  nor  Colonel  Stafford  have  been  yet  seen  by 
me.  I understand  that  the  Native  Guards  were  to  picket  the  road. 
They  want  to  hold  Boutte  Station,  Bayou  des  Allemands  Bridge, 
Tigerville,  Bayou  La  Fourche  Bridge,  Terre  Bonne  Bridge,  &c.  Do 
this  and  throw  out  pickets,  so  as  to  communicate  with  each  other.  The  ’ 
telegraph  should  be  repaired  at  once.  I have  undisputed  possession  of 
this  country  now,  and  this  part  of  the  campaign  is  a perfect  success. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General,  TJ.  8.  Volunteers . 

Maj.  George  C.  Strong, 

Asst  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  New  Orleans , La.  


* Embodied  in  revised'statement,  p.  172. 


Chap.  XXVn.]  THE  LA  FOURCHE  DISTRICT,  LA.  171 

Headquarters  Reserve  Brigade, 

In  Camp,  near  Thibodeaux , La.,  November  2,  1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  1 yesterday  sent  a force  up 
the  bayou  to  communicate  with  my  hospital  above  Labadieville.  The 
hospital  had  been  undisturbed.  All  the  people  in  the  neighborhood 
were  vieing  with  each  other  in  kindness  and  attention  to  the  wounded 
of  both  sides.  This  country  is  as  safe  to  travel  now  as  Canal  street. 

Three  men  have  died  from  their  wounds  since  we  left  up  there.  1 
propose  to  remove  the  rest  down  here  on  a flat-boat  and  send  them  all 
to  the  city. 

On  Friday  evening  I received  information  that  a company  of  the 
enemy’s  militia  force  was  encamped  a short  distance  northeast  of  Thibo- 
deaux, near  a swamp.  I sent  out  Perkins  to  capture  them.  He  started 
yesterday  morning  at  3 o’clock,  took  a circuitous  route,  through  cane 
fields,  over  ditches,  through  swamps,  completely  outflanked  them,  and 
took  53  (nearly  the  whole  company)  prisoners,  with  their  arms,  horses, 
and  ammunition . It  was  a complete  success.  This  Perkins  is  a splendid 
officer,  and  he  deserves  promotion  as  much  as  any  officer  I ever  saw.  I 
have  not  yet  heard  from  [Hawkes]  Fearing,  whom  I pushed  on  toTiger- 
ville  to  communicate  with  the  gunboats  and  repair  the  bridges.  I 
expect  to  hear  from  him  to  day. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General,  U.  S.  Vols.,  Comdg.  Reserve  Brigade. 

Maj.  George  O.  Strong, 

Asst  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  New  Orleans,  La. 


Headquarters  Reserve  Brigade, 

In  Camp,  near  Thibodeaux,  La.,  November  5,  1862. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  your  communication 
of  the  2d  instant.  I think  it  would  be  very  proper  to  place  a field  work 
at  or  near  Donaldsonville.  A permanent  work,  involving  the  construc- 
tion of  masonry,  would  be  too  slow  an  operation.  I think  you  had  better 
send  Lieutenant  [John  0.]  Palfrey  up  there  to  locate  and  construct  it. 
He  could  carry  on  Ship  Island  and  that  too.  A battery  also,  I think, 
would  be  very  appropriate  at  Berwick  Bay.  I can  direct  the  position 
and  the  construction  of  this  battery.  It  would  not  be  proper  to  build 
a work  near  here,  as  the  communication  with  it  can  be  easily  cut  off, 
and  it  could  be  turned  readily.  And  now  I desire,  most  respectfully,  to 
decline  the  command  of  the  district  which  has  been  just  created,  and 
which,  as  we  have  not  yet  secured  a foot  of  ground  on  the  Teche,  ought 
properly  to  be  called  the  District  of  the  La  Fourche.  The  reason  I must 
decline  is  because  accepting  the  command  would  place  me  in  command 
of  all  the  troops  in  the  district. 

I cannot  command  those  negro  regiments.  The  commanding  general 
knows  well  my  private  opinions  on  this  subject.  What  I stated  to  him 
privately,  while  on  his  staff,  I see  now  before  my  eyes.  Since  the 
arrival  of  the  negro  regiments  symptoms  of  servile  insurrection  are 
becoming  apparent.  I could  not,  without  breaking  my  brigade  all  up, 
put  a force  in  every  part  of  this  district  to  keep  down  such  an  insur- 
rection. I cannot  assume  the  command  of  such  a force,  and  thus  be 
responsible  for  its  conduct.  I have  no  confidence  in  the  organization. 
Its  moral  effect  in  this  community,  which  is  stripped  of  nearly  all  its 


172 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

able  bodied  men  andjwill  be  stripped  of  a great  many  of  its  arms,  is 
terrible.  Women  and  children,  and  even  men,  are  in  terror.  It  is 
heart-rending,  and  I cannot  make  myself  responsible  for  it.  I will 
gladly  go  anywhere  with  my  own  brigade  that  you  see  fit  to  order  me. 
I beg  you  therefore  to  keep  the  negro  brigade  directly  under  your 
own  command  or  place  some  one  over  both  mine  and  it.  I have  given 
instructions  to  collect  as  much  transportation  as  possible,  so  that  I can 
cross  Berwick  Bay  with  my  brigade,  and  will  go  down  to-morrow  in 
person  to  hurry  up  things.  I canjnot  move  my  brigade  there  yet,  as 
there  is  not  sufficient  drinking  water,  and  this  is  a better  camp. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier  General , U.  S.  Vols .,  Gomdg.  Reserve  Brigade. 

Maj.  George  O.  Strong, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf  \ New  Orleans , La. 


Headquarters  Beserye  Brigade, 

Ln  Gamp,  near  Thibodeaux , La.,  November  5,  1862. 

Major:  In  still  further  confirmation  of  what  I wrote  to  you  in  my 
dispatches  of  this  morning  relative  to  servile  insurrection,  I have  the 
honor  to  inform  you  that  on  the  plantation  of  Mr.  David  Pugh,  a short 
distance  above  here,  the  negroes  who  had  returned  under  the  terms 
fixed  upon  by  Major-General  Butler,  without  provocation  or  cause  of 
any  kind,  refused  this  morning  to  work,  and  assaulted  the  overseer 
and  Mr.  Pugh,  injuring  them  severely;  also  a gentleman  who  came  to 
the  assistance  of  Mrs.  Pugh.  Upon  the  plantation  also  of  Mr.  W.  J. 
Miner,  on  the  Terre  Bonne  road,  about  16  miles  from  here,  an  outbreak 
has  already  occurred,  and  the  entire  community  thereabout  are  in 
hourly  expectation  and  terror  of  a general  rising. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier -General,  U.  S.  Vols.,  Gomdg.  Reserve  Brigade. 

Maj.  George  0.  Strong, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  New  Orleans,  La. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  at  Georgia  Landing,  La.,  October  27, 1862. 
[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casnalties,  returns,  &c.] 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured  or 
missing. 

Aggregate, 

i ■ ..  ! 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

1 04- Vi  Tnfo.'ntrv  __  

3 

16 

1 

20 

lOfL  O ATvnAplipnt  Tnfnnt.rv 

1 

5 

1 

7 

1st  Louisiana  Cavalry,  Companies  A,  B,  and  C 

1 

18 

1 

20 

AQ 

8tli  IN"  ew  Hampshire  Infmtry*  . , , r ......... 

2 

10 

1 

34 

1 

4o 

75th  New  York  Infantry 

1 

1 

2 

Total 

2 

16 

1 

73 

1 

1 4 

97 

* Capts.  John  Q.  A . Warren  and  J ohn  Kelleher  killed. 


Chap.  XXVH.J  THE  LA  FOURCHE  DISTRICT,  LA,  173 

No.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  John  A.  Vance , Sixteenth  New  York  Infantry , Acting 

Signal  Officer. 

Thibodeaux,  La.,  November  1, 1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Friday,  October  24,  1862,  the 
party  under  my  command  embarked  with  the  reserve  brigade  at  Car- 
rollton, La.  The  officers  were  distributed  as  follows : Lieutenant  Eaton 
on  the  Iberville,  the  leading  transport ; Lieutenant  Butterfield  on  the 
Sallie  Bobinson,  the  rearmost  transport $ Lieutenant  Dana  on  the  Kineo, 
the  leading  gunboat,  and  myself  on  the  General  Williams,  in  the  center. 
General  Weitzel  was  also  on  this  transport.* 

# # # # # * # 

Early  in  the  evening  the  general  gave  me  orders  not  to  allow  the  line 
to  extend  more  than  1£  miles,  and  during  the  night  I was  in  almost 
constant  communication  with  some  of  the  officers,  directing  those  in 
advance  to  go  slower  and  the  transports  in  the  rear  to  close  up. 

Saturday,  October  25,  we  landed  at  daylight  and  marched  to  Donald- 
sonville. 

Sunday  we  commenced  our  march  down  the  left  bank  of  Bayou  La 
Fourche $ Lieutenant  Eaton  I sent  with  the  advance  guard,  Lieutenant 
Butterfield  with  the  rear  guard,  Lieutenant  Dana  at  the  head  of  the 
column,  while  I occupied  the  center.  During  the  entire  day  we  had 
comparatively  nothing  to  do. 

Monday  we  were  disposed  in  the  same  manner,  with  the  exception  of 
Lieutenant  Dana,  who  crossed  with  the  Eighth  New  Hampshire  to  the 
right  bank  of  the  bayou.  At  noon  our  advance  on  the  right  bank  fell 
in  with  the  enemy,  concealed  in  a woods.  Lieutenant  Dana  instantly 
called  Lieutenant  Eaton  and  sent  S.  W.  F.  55,  F.  O.  Lieutenant  Eaton 
received  this  message  and  Communicated  it  to  the  assistant  adjutant- 
general,  and  at  the  same  time  I communicated  it  to  General  Weitzel, 
who  ordered  up  four  pieces  of  Thompson’s  battery  to  shell  the  woods. 
The  range  being  too  high,  Lieutenant  Dana  sent  S.  O.  E.,  which  mes- 
sage Lieutenant  Eaton  delivered  to  officer  in  charge  of  the  battery, 
but  it  was  unheeded.  A bridge  was  then  thrown  across  the  bayou  and 
the  Twelfth  and  Thirteenth  Connecticut  ordered  to  cross.  Lieutenant 
Butterfield  crossed  with  the  Twelfth,  and  during  the  engagement  which 
ensued  his  horse  was  struck  by  a piece  of  shell,  became  unmanageable, 
threw  his  rider,  and  escaped  to  the  lines  of  the  enemy.  Lieutenant 
Butterfield  fortunately  escaped  uninjured.  Our  forces  on  the  left  bank 
fell  back  to  the  crossing,  and  from  there  one  section  of  Thompson’s 
battery  opened  upon  the  enemy  on  the  opposite  side,  when  Lieutenant 
Dana  sent  the  following  messages,  which  were  received  by  me: 
####### 

During  the  time  Lieutenant  Dana  was  sending  these  messages  he 
” was  exposed  to  a fire  of  artillery  and  musketry.  Lieutenant  Eaton 
during  this  time  was  pushing  from  and  on  the  left  bank,  endeavoring 
to  ascertain  the  position  of  a battery  which  was  playing  upon  us. 
Soon  as  -the  enemy  retreated  they  were  followed  by  our  cavalry  and 
with  them  went  Lieutenant  Dana.  When  they  had  advanced  about  a 
mile  he  sent,  u Send  Thompson’s  battery  here.”  This  was  received  by 
Lieutenant  Butterfield.  Private  Abbott  was  thrown  from  his  horse, 

*Some  unimportant  messages  here  inserted  by  Lieutenant  Vance  omitted. 


174 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS  , LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


rendered  unfit  for  duty,  so  that  Lieutenant  Dana  had  for  a time  but  one 
man.  It  would  be  invidious  to  speak  of  any  of  the  party  when  all  did 
so  well.  All  acted  with  coolness  and  bravery.  The  engagement  con 
tinued  about  an  hour,  and  during  the  whole  time  every  officer  was 
active. 

Tuesday  Lieutenant  Eaton  was  on  the  left  bank  with  the  Seventy- 
fifth  New  York,  and  he  and  I were  in  almost  constant  communication. 
Soon  as  he  received  any  intelligence  of  the  enemy  he  communicated  it 
to  me  and  I informed  the  general. 

Wednesday  Lieutenant  Eaton  and  I went  with  a force  under  Colonel 
Birge  to  communicate  with  Colonel  Thomas  and  returned  Thursday. 
The  party  has  been  well  tested,  and  I am  fully  satisfied  with  what  it 
accomplished.  If  we  do  not  receive  an  honorable  mention  from  the 
general  I shall  think  it  great  injustice. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  VANCE, 

First  Lieut.  1 6th  N.  Y.,  and  Actg.  8ig.  Off.  in  Charge  of  Far ty. 

Lieut.  E.  D.  Bussell. 

Lieutenant  Eaton  sent  to  Dana:  “The  acting  assistant  adjutant- 
general  says  send  out  infantry  skirmishers.”  The  engagement  did  not 
continue  more  than  forty -five  minutes. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor , C.  8.  Army , commanding  District 

of  Western  Louisiana. 

Headquarters  District  Western  Louisiana, 
Bayou  Teche , November  9,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  a copy  of  the  report  of  Briga- 
dier-General Mouton  concerning  the  recent  operations  on  the  La  Fourche 
which  have  resulted  in  the  falling  back  of  the  troops  to  the  line  of  the 
Bayou  Teche.  I had  availed  myself  of  all  the  resources  at  my  command, 
in  men  and  guns,  to  protect  the  rich  and  populous  territory  lying  be- 
tween the  Mississippi  and  Atchafalaya  Bivers  from  the  occupation  of 
the  enemy,  and  had  hoped  that  the  forces  placed  there  were  for  the 
moment  adequate  to  its  protection,  though  it  would  appear  from  General 
Mou ton’s  report  that  the  necessity  of  guarding  so  many  detached  posi- 
tions rendered  an  effectual  concentration  of  the  troops  at  any  one  point 
impracticable.  As  I stated  to  the  department  in  the  first  report  I had 
the  honor  to  make  after  assuming  command  of  the  district,  the  defense 
of  that  section  of  it  was  rendered  extremely  difficult  from  the  many 
lines  of  approach  by  which  it  could  be  penetrated — a difficulty  which 
was  greatly  augmented  by  the  withdrawal  of  a considerable  portion  of 
the  forces  menacing  New  Orleans  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  river  about 
the  period  of  my  arrival  here. 

It  will  be  seen  from  General  Mouton’s  report  that  the  enemy  effected 
his  landing  at  Donaldsonville  on  Saturday,  the  25th  of  October  last. 
On  the  19th  of  that  month  I had,  at  the  urgent  request  of  Lieutenant- 
General  Pemberton,  left  Alexandria  and  proceeded  to  his  headquarters 
at  Jackson,  Miss.,  for  the  purpose  of  having  a conference  with  him.  I 
arrived  there  on  Friday,  the  24th,  and  on  Sunday,  the  26th,  came  down 


chap,  xxvn.j 


THE  LA  FOURCHE  DISTRICT,  LA. 


175 


with  him  to  Vicksburg.  On  my  return  to  Alexandria,  which  place  I 
reached  on  the  evening  of  Wednesday,  the  29th,  receiving  no  advices 
from  General  Mouton  of  the  landing  of  the  enemy  or  of  the  subsequent 
events  on  the  La  Fourche,  I the  next  day  went  down  the  Red  River, 
with  an  engineer  officer,  to  examine  and  select  a site  for  the  construc- 
tion of  a work  for  the  defense  of  that  river.  It  was  only  on  my  return 
to  Alexandria  from  this  trip,  on  the  evening  of  Friday,  the  31st,  that  I 
received  a communication  from  General  Mouton,  announcing  simply 
the  fact  of  the  landing  of  the  enemy,  though  by  telegraph  and  couriers 
information  could  reach  me  from  the  La  Fourche  in  thirty-six  hours. 

On  the  next  day  I received  by  this  means  a dispatch  from  him  from 
the  west  side  of  Berwick  Bay,  informing  me  that  my  presence  here  was 
needed.  On  the  next  morning,  which  was  Sunday,  the  2d  instant,  I 
left  Alexandria  for  this  point  and  arrived  here  on  Thursday,  the  6th. 
A careful  inspection  of  the  position  occupied  by  the  troops  here  leads 
me  to  indulge  the  hope  that  I can  hold  it  successfully  against  the  force 
which  the  enemy  has  now  probably  at  his  disposal  to  throw  upon  it, 
and  I have  made  arrangements  to  bring  forward  every  additional  man 
I can  command.  But  from  the  topography  of  this  portion  of  Louisiana, 
permeated  by  so  many  navigable  streams,  it  must  be  obvious  to  the 
department  that  the  rich  district  bordering  on  the  Teche,  including 
the  salt  mines  on  Marsh  Island,  of  incalculable  value  to  the  Confed- 
eracy, will  eventually  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  unless  I receive 
considerable  accessions  of  force,  both  in  men  and  guns. 

The  possession  of  Berwick  Bay  by  the  enemy  renders  the  attempt 
possible  by  him  to  move  with  his  gunboats  up  the  Atchafalaya  to  Red 
River.  Had  the  alterations  upon  the  steamer  Cotton  been  completed 
in  season,  or  had  the  gunboats  Mobile  and  Saint  Mary  been  permitted 
to  remain  at  the  bay,  its  entrance  by  the  enemy  would  have  been  pre- 
vented at  this  time.  In  view  of  the  contingency  I have  mentioned,  of 
an  attempt  to  move  up  the  Atchafalaya,  I have  ordered  a work  to  be 
put  up  on  that  river,  for  which  I shall  need  guns,  which  I urgently  ap- 
peal to  the  Department  to  have  sent  to  me  without  delay,  there  being 
no  heavy  guns  within  this  district,  except  a few  abandoned  in  the  forts 
around  Berwick  Bay  on  the  fall  of  New  Orleans.  I also  renew  the  re- 
quest to  have  the  Mobile  and  Saint  Mary  sent  down  from  the  Yazoo  to 
the  mouth  of  Red  River,  so  as  to  be  ready  to  enter  the  Atchafalaya  at 
the  first  rise  of  those  rivers.  I have  no  reason  to  apprehend  that  the 
use  of  the  salt  mines  can  be  materially  interfered  with  by  the  enemy 
for  the  present.  By  the  aid  of  a short  portage  from  the  Teche  to  the 
Atchafalaya  the  water  conveyance  of  salt  to  the  east  side  of  the  Missis- 
sippi can,  I trust,  be  preserved. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  General  Mouton  mentions  in  his  report  the 
presence  of  some  regiments  of  militia  in  the  operations  on  the  La  Fourche. 
I found  these  troops  engaged  in  protecting  that  part  of  the  State  on  my 
first  arrival  there.  As  fast  as  their  places  could  be  supplied  by  regular 
organizations  in  the  Confederate  service  I made  arrangements  to  cause 
them  to  be  disbanded,  in  order  that  the  conscripts  among  them  might 
be  brought  into  the  camp  of  instruction  within  the  least  possible  delay. 
The  straggling  to  their  homes  of  such  of  them  as  were  in  service  at  the 
time  of  the  retreat  of  the  forces  from  the  La  Fourche  shows  the  impolicy 
of  employing  troops  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  their  own  homes,  and,  in 
this  connection,  the  Department  should  be  made  acquainted  with  the 
fact  that  the  exemption  act  passed  by  the  present  Congress  practically 
puts  an  end  to  the  further  operations  of  the  conscript  act  in  Louisiana, 
since  the  almost  exclusively  agricultural  character  of  its  population 


176 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chai*.  XXYTJ. 


gives  the  benefit  of  exemption  from  military  service  to  so  large  a class 
as  to  preclude  the  expectation  of  any  serviceable  addition  being  made 
to  the  number  of  conscripts  now  in  service. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ JR.  TAYLOR. 

General  S.  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 


Ko.  5. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  Mouton , C.  S.  Army. 

At  Mrs.  Meade’s,  November  4, 1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  of  submitting  the  following  report  of  the 
movements  preceding  and  following  the  engagement  of  the  27th  Octo- 
ber, 1862,  and  details  relative  thereto. 

Late  on  the  25th  of  October,  1862,  I received  information  that  the 
gunboats  and  transports  of  the  enemy  were  moving  up  the  river  slowly 
and  cautiously,  and  that  in  all  likelihood  they  would  soon  be  at  Donald- 
sonville.  They  arrived  there  on  the  evening  of  the  25th  and  commenced 
landing  troops,  completing  the  landing  on  the  26th.  Immediately  I 
moved  to  Donaldsonville,  and  found  that  our  troops  at  that  point  had 
fallen  back,  under  command  of  Colonel  [W.  G.]  Vincent,  to  the  Rac- 
eonici,  in  the  parish  of  Assumption,  about  12  miles  from  Donaldsonville. 
Colonel  Vincent  informed  me  that  from  all  the  information  he  had  ob- 
tained the  enemy  numbered  from  2,500  to  3,000  infantry,  250  cavalry,  and 
two  batteries  of  field  artillery.  To  oppose  this  force,  which  was  mainly 
on  the  left  descending  bank  of  La  Fourche,  Colonel  Vincent  had  only  600 
infantry  and  about  250  cavalry,  with  Semmes’  field  battery.  The  dis- 
parity was  so  great  that  I deemed  it  my  duty  still  to  recede  until  the 
re-enforcements  I had  ordered  up  arrived,  and  accordingly  fell  back 
to  the  plantation  of  Mr.  Winn,  2 miles  above  Labadieville,  where  the 
Eighteenth  and  Crescent  Regiments  and  Ralston’s  battery  reached  me 
at  about  2 p.  in.,  coming  in  from  .Berwick  Bay  and  Bayou  Boeuf,  where 
they  were  stationed.  I had  also  ordered  the  Terre  Bonne  regiment 
militia  forward,  and  they  arrived  at  about  8 a.  m.  On  the  27th  Fa- 
ries’  battery  was  ordered  up,  but  it  reached  me  only  on  the  morning  of 
the  28th.  The  columns  of  the  enemy  were  advancing  on  both  banks 
in  about  equal  force,  and  in  consequence,  to  prevent  being  outflanked, 
it  became  necessary  to  hold  positions  on  both  sides  of  the  bayou.  The 
Eighteenth  and  Crescent,  supported  by  Ralston’s  battery,  were  placed 
on  the  right  descending  bank,  and  the  Terre  Bonne  regiment  moved 
over  to  the  left  bank.  Thus  to  oppose  the  enemy  on  the  right  bank  I 
had,  according  to  returns  made,  viz  : 

Eighteenth  Regiment 240 

Crescent  Regiment I35 

Ralston’s  battery o4 

Detachment  of  cavalry 1UU  ron 

And  on  the  left  bank,  viz : 

Thirty-third  Regiment* 594 

Terre  Bonne  regiment - 34 

Semmes’  battery "J 

Second  Louisiana  Cavalry 150 

■ OOO 

1,392 

* Composed  of  Clack’s  and  Fournet’s  battalions.  Battalion  organization  restored 
November  21,  1862. 


Chap.  XXVH.3 


THE  LA  FOURCHE  DISTRICT,  LA. 


177 


The  enemy  moved  down  about  equally  strong  on  both  banks,  his 
force  being  from  1,500  to  1,800  on  each  side.  The  column  on  the  right 
bank  pressed  on  more  speedily  than  that  on  the  left,  and  approached 
our  line  of  battle  at  about  9 a.  m.  near  the  road  leading  into  the  settle- 
ment called  Texas,  in  Assumption.  Our  forces,  though  much  inferior 
in  numbers,  resisted  their  onward  march  and  effectually  succeeded  in 
checking  them,  until,  unfortunately,  Ralston’s  battery  was  so  severely 
injured  by  the  enemy’s,  and  their  ammunition  giving  out,  they  were 
compelled  to  fall  back,  which  was  done  in  some  confusion,  owing  to  the 
loss  of  their  commander.  I then  took  position  about  a mile  and  a half 
below,  at  Labadieville,  at  about  4 p.  m.,  and  awaited  the  advance  of 
the  enemy.  This  retrograde  movement  was  rendered  the  more  neces- 
sary from  the  fact  that  the  enemy  was  crossing  troops  on  pontoon 
bridge  to  the  right  bank  and  there  massing  forces.  Immediately  I also 
threw  across  part  of  the  infantry  stationed  on  the  left ; and  at  the  close 
of  the  day  the  force  of  the  enemy  numbered  about  2,000  infantry,  100 
cavalry,  and  a battery,  while  my  own  barely  reached  1,000,  including 
infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery.  Informed  that  the  enemy  would  make 
simultaneous  movements  via  Donaldsonville,  Des  Allemands,  and  Ber- 
wick Bay,  I had  foreseen  that  the  necessity  would  arise  of  abandoning^ 
Des  Allemands  and  concentrating  our  forces,  believing  that  the  salva-* 
tion  of  the  troops  required  the  adoption  of  this  course.  On  the  27th,  at 
about  12  m.,  I gave  orders  to  Major  Sanders,  assistant  quartermaster,  to 
send  over  the  train  to  get  Culonel  [T.  E.]  Vick's  command,  consisting  of  the 
La  Fourche  militia  regiment,  about  500  strong,  and  a detachment  from 
the  Thirty-third  of  about  300,  with  instructions  to  save  everything  he 
could  and  to  destroy  everything  he  might  be  compelled  to  leave  behind. 
At  the  same  time  I gave  orders  to  the  Saint  Charles  and  Saint  John  the 
Baptist  regiments  and  to  the  cavalry  picket  at  the  Vacherie  and  at  the 
Boutte  to  fall  back  without  delay  on  the  main  body. 

Major  Sanders  executed  his  orders,  and  in  person  directed  the  con- 
ductor of  the  train  to  move  off  from  the  Terre  Bonne  Station  to  the  Des 
Allemands  to  bring  in  Colonel  Vick’s  command.  The  engineer  on 
board,  a Mr.  Jacobs,  laboring  under  a misapprehension  of  the  orders 
given  to  Captain  Kerr,  superintendent,  refused  to  go  unless  by  orders 
in  writing  from  Captain  Kerr  or  from  my  headquarters.  This  man,  I 
am  inclined  to  believe  from  all  the  information  I could  obtain,  acted 
conscientiously,  but  he  certainly  caused  me  much  embarrassment.  Mr. 
Kelson,  the  assistant  superintendent,  arriving  at  about  3 p.  m.,  went 
over  with  the  train,  but  fearing  lest  he  might  be  violating  orders  he 
and  the  conductor  merely  ran  through  to  deliver  the  orders  and  re- 
turned only  with  the  sick  and  a portion  of  the  baggage. 

In  the  mean  time  Colonel  Vick  prepared  for  destroying  everything 
at  the  Des  Allemands  Station,  and  after  burning  the  bridge  took  up 
his  line  of  march  to  join  me.  Colonel  Vick’s  command  was  so  worn-out 
by  the  labor  required  to  destroy  the  Des  Allemands  Bridge  and  the 
depots  and  their  tedious  march  over  the  bed  of  the  road,  that  he  reached 
me  only  at  about  3 p.  m.  of  the  28th,  notwithstanding  the  most  stren- 
uous efforts  on  his  part  to  get  in  earlier. 

My  object,  could  I have  united  my  force,  was  to  make  a desperate 
resistance  and  to  drive  the  enemy  back  if  possible,  but  when  my  re- 
enforcements failed  to  come  in  no  alternative  was  left  to  me  but  to 
maneuver  with  the  enemy  and  save  my  force.  In  consequence  I issued 
orders  for  the  removal  of  the  sick  to  Berwick  Bay,  and  made  all  need* 
ful  preparation  for  the  removal  of  the  stores. 

12  R R — VOL  XV 


178  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYn. 

On  the  28th,  whilst  slowly  receding,  I held  the  enemy  in  check,  and 
at  about  12  m.  concluded  that  I was  reduced  to  the  sad  alternative  of 
evacuating  the  place  or  have  my  entire  command  captured.  Resistance 
with  the  small  force  I had  was  no  longer  possible,  especially  as  the  men 
were  worn-out  with  fatigue  and  loss  of  rest ; besides,  the  mounted  picket 
at  Boutte  had  been  driven  in  by  the  enemy,  who  was  advancing  by  the 
Des  Allemands  to  re-enforce  the  enemy  in  front  of  me,  and  vague  rumors 
were  afloat  that  the  expedition  to  Berwick  Bay  had  reached  its  destina- 
tion. Information  also  came  to  me  that  two  transports  and  two  gun- 
boats had  gone  down  from  Donaldsonville  to  New  Orleans,  and  that 
they  had  returned  and  were  landing  re-enforcements  at  the  Assumption 
Cut-off.  Hence  I fell  back  to  the  Terre  Bonne  Station,  embarked  all 
the  stores  and  troops,  and  moved  them  over  to  Berwick  Bay.  Colonel 
Vick’s  command  had  not  yet  arrived,  and  I remained  at  the  station  with 
the  cavalry  to  protect  and  cover  it,  while  I sent  on  the  artillery  and 
wagon  train  via  Chucahoula  by  land  to  rendezvous  at  Tigerville  for 
transportation,  the  cars  being  already  tilled  with  troops  and  stores. 
About  3 p.  m.  such  portion  of  Colonel  Vick’s  command  as  he  could 
bring  up  arrived,  and  it  was  sent  on  over  the  railroad  track  till  it  met 
a return  train  which  had  been  ordered  up  to  receive  it. 

At  4 p.  m.  all  the  troops  which  could  be  collected  having  been  sent  for- 
ward I caused  the  Thibodeaux  Bridge,  the  La  Fourche  Crossing  Bridge, 
and  the  Terre  Bonne  Station  to  be  burned,  and  moved  on  with  the 
cavalry,  reaching  the  bay  on  the  29th,  and  crossing  everything  by  the 
30  th. 

The  casualties  in  the  engagement  of  the  27th  are,  according  to  returns 
made,  as  follows,  viz  : Killed,  5;  wounded,  8;  missing,  186 $ 3 horses  were 
killed  and  9 wounded ; one  12-pounder  howitzer  axle  broken,  since  re- 
placed by  one  from  Des  Allemands. 

The  enemy’s  loss  reaches  fully  250  to  300,  as  I have  been  informed  by 
an  officer  of  the  Eighteenth  Regiment,  who  was  taken  prisoner  and 
released  on  parole. 

It  is  my  painful  duty  to  record  the  death  of  Colonel  McPheeters, 
commanding  the  Crescent  Regiment,  who  fell  gallantly  and  nobly  de- 
fending our  sacred  cause  at  the  head  of  his  command.  Captain  Rals- 
ton, commanding  the  battery,  was  wounded  and  captured.  Efforts 
were  made  to  bring  him  from  the  field,  but  failed,  owing  to  the  rapid 
advance  of  the  enemy.  This  officer  managed  his  battery  with  coolness 
and  ability,  and  deserves  much  praise  for  the  efficient  services  which 
he  rendered. 

Captain  [B.  S.]  Story,  commanding  Company  D,  Eighteenth  Regi- 
ment, and  Lieutenant  [J.  D.]  Burke,  of  same  company,  were  captured 
and  paroled.  The  former  went  over  to  New  Orleans  and  the  latter  re- 
turned to  New  Iberia,  their  respective  domiciles.  Colonel  Armant,  of 
the  Eighteenth  Regiment,  commanded  the  troops  and  disposed  of  them 
with  ability  and  judgment,  availing  himself  of  every  cover  and  pro- 
tection at  hand  and  falling  back  in  perfect  order. 

The  bridge  at  Bayou  Bceuf,  after  all  the  troops  and  stores  had  been 
crossed,  was  burned,  and  all  the  public  property  at  the  bay  which  could 
not  be  saved  was  destroyed  before  abandoning  the  latter  position,  as 
hereafter  explained.  On  the  retreat,  I am  sorry  to  say,  many  of  the 
conscripts  attached  to  Colonel  Vick’s  command  lagged  behind  and  are 
now  in  the  enemy’s  lines,  he  reaching  the  bay  with  only  82  of  them  out 
of  about  300. 

Having  been  constantly  moving  since  the  26th  and  closely  watching 
and  engaging  the  enemy  has  prevented  me  sooner  from  making  a full 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


THE  LA  FOURCHE  DISTRICT,  LA. 


179 


report,  and  even  now  it  is  very  imperfect,  from  tlie  reason  that  I have 
been  unable  to  obtain  from  the  different  commands  all  the  information 
needed.  I,  however,  had  the  honor  on  the  29th  ultimo  of  submitting  a 
brief  statement  of  results,  in  the  mean  time  urging  upon  General  Taylor 
the  necessity  of  his  presence  here*.  This  communication  was  forwarded 
by  mail  to  the  care  of  Colonel  Burke,  with  request  that  he  would  for- 
ward without  delay.  On  the  30th,  to  the  care  of  Captain  Lindsay,  I sent 
on  a telegram  to  General  Taylor  of  the  same  import.  While  at  the  bay 
with  my  troops  at  about  3 in  the  morning  on  the  30th  the  Seger  came 
up  from  the  Passes  and  informed  me  that  four  of  the  enemy’s  boats  were 
in  sight,  but  the  information  obtained  from  the  captain  was  so  confused 
that  I immediately  dispatched  Captain  Puller  on  board  the  Hart  to  as- 
certain the  facts.  Upon  his  return  he  confirmed  the  presence  of  the 
boats  outside  the  obstructions  placed  in  the  Passes  and  reported  four 
• visible,  two  of  which  fired  into  him  after  he  had  opened  on  them  to  draw 
their  fire  to  ascertain  their  caliber. 

In  the  mean  time,  knowing  full  well  that  I could  offer  no  resistance 
to  gunboats  at  the  bay,  I dispatched  Colonel  Sulakowski  up  the  Teche 
to  select  a defensible  position  and  erect  fortifications.  The  position 
chosen  was  about  half  a mile  up  the  bayou,  along  a heavy  point  in  the 
neighborhood  of  Mr.  Charpan tier’s,  where  intrenchments  were  imme- 
diately commenced  and  preparations  made  to  obstruct  the  stream  a lit- 
tle above  this,  at  Mr.  Cornay’s  bridge,  it  being  impossible  to  do  so  effect- 
ually anywhere  below.  Favored  with  a low  tide,  I had  hoped  the 
enemy  would  be  prevented  from  removing  the  obstructions  or  finding 
a channel,  and  the  work  was  urged  forward  with  all  the  expedition 
possible  under  the  circumstances,  having  obtained  hands  sufficient  only 
by  the  31st.  From  this  time  forward  all  dispatch  was  used  and  every 
means  in  my  power  employed  to  offer  a successful  resistance  at  this 
point  before  the  arrival  of  the  boats,  but  in  this  I was  grievously  dis- 
appointed. On  the  1st  Captain  Fuller,  who  was  constantly  on  the  alert, 
informed  me  that  one  of  the  boats  was  within  the  obstructions  and  that 
the  others  were  making  their  way  past  them.  I bade  him  hold  them 
in  check  and  give  me  all  the  time  he  could,  which  he  did  to  the  best  of 
his  ability,  and  I immediately  selected  another  position  about  2 miles 
above  the  obstructions  at  Mrs.  Meade’s,  where  I commenced  intrench- 
ments with  a view  of  establishing  heavy  guns. 

On  the  1st  the  four  boats  of  the  enemy  had  come  within  the  obstruc- 
tions and  moved  up  the  bay  cautiously  and  slowly,  and  I again  ordered 
Captain  Fuller  with  the  Cotton  to  face  and  delay  them  as  long  as  he 
could.  This  he  accomplished  by  retarding  them  at  the  bay  on  the  1st. 
On  the  2d  they  moved  up  the  bay  reconnoitering,  and  exchanged  several 
shots  with  the  Cotton  without  injuring  her,  and  they  finally  dropped 
back  to  the  bay  at  night,  anchoring  one  of  their  boats  at  Gibbon’s 
Point.  Deeming  it  all  important  to  save  the  Cotton,  with  the  hope  that 
I might  perhaps  check  them  with  her  in  the  bayou,  should  they  remove 
the  obstructions  at  Cornay’s  previous  to  the  completion  of  the  in- 
trenchments, 1 ordered  him  to  back  her  up  the  Teche  a little  above  the 
works,  and  there  hold  himself  in  readiness  to  engage  the  boats  should 
they  come  up,  while  I urged  on  the  intrenchments.  All  the  while  I kept 
scouts  forward,  who  informed  me  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy.  On 
the  3d  the  enemy  moved  up  with  his  whole  force,  and  at  2 p.  m.  en- 
gaged the  Cotton  and  an  uncovered  land  battery  of  rifled  pieces,  which 
I had  stationed  in  such  manner  as  to  co-operate  with  and  protect  the 
Cotton.  The  engagement  lasted  till  3.30  p.  in.,  when  the  enemy’s  boats 
came  within  such  close  range  that  the  battery  and  the  Cotton  were 


180 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  TChap.  XXVT1. 

compelled  to  retire,  and  tlie  enemy  moved  up  to  tlie  obstructions.  I 
was  also  compelled  to  withdraw  the  troops  so  as  to  get  out  of  the  range 
of  the  enemy’s  shells.  As  soon  as  the  firing  commenced  all  the  negroes 
on  the  works  stampeded,  and  it  was  impossible  to  collect  them  until 
late  last  night,  when  I placed  them’ in  the  intrenchments  again  and 
commenced  mounting  what  guns  I could  so  as  to  resume  my  position 
by  4 a.  m.  this  morning,  which  I did  and  now  hold.  Captain  Fuller 
deserves  much  praise  for  the  valuable  services  which  he  has  rendered 
me  and  for  the  courage  and  boldness  with  which  he  has  met  the  enemy 

at  every  step.  . 

The  casualties  of  the  engagement  of  the  3d  are  1 private  killed  and 
2 wounded  on  the  Cotton.  She  received  no  serious  injury,  though 
slightly  damaged.  The  enemy  must  have  suffered  seriously,  as  many 
of  our  shots  reached  the  boats  and  shrieks  and  groans  were  heard. 

Permit  me  to  repeat  that  the  presence  of  General  Taylor  is  indis- 
pensably necessary  here. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J ’ ALFE.  MOTJTOK, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  E.  Surget, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


OCTOBER  29,  1862.— Affair  at  Sabine  Pass,  Tex. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  A.  W.  Spaight , Spaightfs  Battalion. 

Headquarters  Spaight’s  Battalion, 

Beaumont , November  3,  1862. 

Sir:  I beg  leave  to  report  that  on  Wednesday  night,  29th  ultimo,  a 
small  portion  of  my  command,  consisting  of  Company  A,  commanded 
by  Captain  Marsh,  had  a slight  affair  with  the  enemy  at  Sabine  Pass. 
Under  instructions  to  seek  every  opportunity  of  inflicting  damage  on 
the  enemy  he  posted  his  men  about  night-fall  below  the  town  on  the 
Pass,  and  awaited  the  approach  of  the  steamer  Dan,  with  a schooner  iu 
tow,  then  making  her  way  up  the  channel. 

As  soon  as  the  boats  came  in  point-blank  range  of  his  carbines  (about 
100  yards)  he  opened  fire  upon  them,  and  continued  the  fire  until  they 
swung  around  out  of  range  and  opened  upon  him  with  canister  and 
grape.  He  then  withdrew  without  loss.  Captain  Marsh  is  sure,  from 
the  facts  that  the  decks  of  both  vessels  were  crowded  with  men  who 
were  distinctly  visible  by  moonlight,  that  the  fire  was  deliberate,  that 
screams  and  groans  arose  from  the  vessels,  and  that  the  yellow  flag  at 
half-mast  was  displayed  for  the  two  succeeding  days,  that  his  fire  did 
some  execution.  We  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  the  loss  oi  the 
enernv,  but  it  is  conjectured  that  it  could  not  have  been  less  than  25 
to  30.  They  then  shelled  the  town  without  material  damage.  On  the 
next  morning,  after  throwing  shot  and  shell  vehemently  in  the  vicinity, 
they  sent  out  a party,  under  the  protection  of  their  guns,  and  burnt 
Wingate’s  mill  and  dwelling  and  Stamp’s  dwelling.  The  fire  upon 
them  was  used  as  a pretext  for  destroying  this  property,  but  it  was 
doomed  to  destruction  with  or  without  a pretext.  Several  days  pre- 
viously they  had  told  the  citizens  to  burn  the  lumber  at  the  mill  for 
fire-wood,  for  Wingate’s  and  Stamp’s  property  was  confiscated  to  the 
United  States  Government. 

. . 


Chap.  IX VII.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  LAVACA,  TEX. 


181 


Unless  otherwise  ordered,  I shall  fire  upon  them  whenever  I can  do 
so  with  effect,  and  whenever  they  take  a position  within  range  of  my 
mountain  howitzers  1 shall  bring  them  to  bear  upon  them.  I do  not 
believe  that  security  to  private  property  can  be  purchased  by  with- 
holding our  hands. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

A.  W.  SPAIGHT, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding . 

Lieut.  R.  M.  Franklin,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


OCTOBER  31-NOVEMBER  1,  1862. — Bombardment  of  Lavaca,  Tex. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Hamilton  P.  Bee,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Sub-District  of  the 
Rio  Grande. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  George  E.  Conklin,  C.  S.  Army,  Post  Adjutant  at  Lavaca. 

Ro.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Hamilton  P.  Bee , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Sub-Dis- 
trict of  the  Rio  Grande. 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  District  of  the  Rio  Grande, 

San  Antonio , Tex .,  November  15,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  an  official  dispatch*  from  Maj.  D.  D. 
Shea,  0.  S.  Provisional  Army,  commanding  the  forces  at  Lavaca,  report- 
ing the  bombardment  by  the  gunboats  of  t.he  enemy  of  that  city  on  the 
31st  ultimo  and  1st  instant  and  their  repulse. 

It  gives  me  great  satisfaction  to  call  the  attention  of  the  general  com- 
manding to  the  gallantry  of  Major  Shea  and  his  command.  Although  his 
ranks  had  been  decimated  by  the  yellow  fever,  his  means  of  defense 
limited,  and  the  force  of  the  enemy  far  superior  in  guns  and  caliber,  yet, 
sustained  by  patriotism  and  courage,  he  compelled  the  enemy  to  retire. 
I would  especially  call  the  attention  of  the  general  commanding  to  the 
barbarous  conduct  of  the  Abolitionists  in  allowing  one  hour  and  a half 
to  remove  the  women  and  children,  the  sick  and  the  dying,  from  the  town 
of  Lavaca.  I think  I am  warranted  in  saying  that  it  was  the  most  atro- 
cious of  all  the  acts  which  have  so  marked  their  conduct  in  this  war, 
and  retributive  justice  but  claimed  her  right  when  defeated  and  injured 
they  slunk  back  whence  they  came.  The  patriotism  and  iove  of  country 
displayed  by  the  citizens  of  Lavaca,  who  willingly  gave  up  their  homes 
to  destruction  rather  than  that  the  enemy  should  land,  is  worthy  of  all 
praise,  and  will  serve  as  a bright  example  to  their  fellow-countrymen. 
I have  received  information  that  one  of  the  heavy  guns  of  the  enemy 
burst  on  the  forty-first  round,  doing  great  damage,  but  to  what  extent 
is  not  known.  The  Abolition  fleet  has  retired  from  the  waters  of  Lavaca 
Bay,  the  objects  of  their  visit  being  entirely  frustrated. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army. 
Capt.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis, 

A.  A.  G .,  First  District  of  Texas , San  Antonio  Tex. 


See  Report  No.  2. 


182  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII.’ 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  George  E.  Conklin,  C.  8.  Army , Post  Adjutant  at  Lavaca. 

Headquarters, 

Lacava , Tex.,  November  1,  1862. 

Sir  : By  order  of  Maj.  Daniel  D.  Shea,  commanding  this  post,  I have 
the  honor  to  make,  for  the  information  of  the  general  commanding  this 
district,  the  following  report  of  an  engagement  between  the  Federal 
steamers  and  the  batteries  at  this  point: 

On  the  morning  of  October  31  two  Federal  steamers  appeared  in  sight, 
evidently  steering  for  this  place.  About  11  a.  m.  they  arrived  within  a 
short  distance,  when  they  cast  anchor.  At  1 p.  m.  they  sent  a boat  with 
a flag  of  truce  on  shore,  which  was  met  by  Major  Shea,  accompanied  by 
four  of  the  citizens  of  the  town.  A short  interview  succeeded,  during 
which  a demand  was  made  for  the  surrender  of  the  town.  They  were 
answered  by  the  commanding  officer  that  he  was  there  to  defend  it,  and 
should  do  so  to  the  best  of  his  ability  with  all  the  means  he  had  at  hand. 
A demand  was  then  made  for  time  to  remove  the  women,  children,  and 
sick  persons  from  town.  The  officer  in  charge  of  the  flag  replied  that 
one  hour  was  the  time  he  was  authorized  to  grant,  but  in  consideration 
of  the  fact  that  an  epidemic  (yellow  fever)  was  still  raging  in  the  town 
he  would  extend  the  time  to  one  hour  and  a half;  at  the  expiration  of 
which  period  they  moved  up  abreast  the  town  and  opened  fire  from  both 
steamers  upon  both  the  town  and  batteries.  At  this  time  there  were 
many  women  and  children  still  in  the  place,  they  having  been  unable, 
for  want  of  time,  to  leave.  Our  batteries  promptly  returned  the  fire. 
Captain  [John  A.]  Yernon  commanded  one  of  the  batteries,  assisted  by 
Lieutenant  [T.  D.]  Woodward,  and  Captain  [J.  M.j  Beuss,  assisted  by 
Lieutenants  [O.  L.]  Schnaubert  and  [CL]  French,  the  other,  and  nobly 
did  both  officers  and  men  perform  their  duty,  working  their  guns  as 
coolly  as  though  on  inspection,  while  a perfect  storm  of  shot  and  shell 
rained  around  them ; and  this,  although  yellow  fever  had  decimated 
their  ranks,  and  that  many  of  the  men  who  manned  the  batteries  had 
but  partially  recovered  from  the  fever,  entitles  them  to  the  highest 
praise.  The  steamers  were  struck  several  times  and  one  of  them  par- 
tially disabled,  as  they  immediately  steamed  off  out  of  range  of  our  bat- 
teries, where  they  again  cast  anchor  and  kept  up  a steady  fire  upon 
the- town  and  batteries  until  night  shut  in. 

On  the  next  morning,  November  1,  they  again  opened  fire  upon  the 
town  and  batteries,  but  owing  to  their  being  entirely  out  of  range  of 
our  guns  we  did  not  reply  to  them.  At  about  11  a.  m.  they  ceased  their 
fire  and  steamed  down  the  bay  in  the  direction  of  Indianola,  having  in 
tow  the  schooner  Lecompt,  which  they  had  captured  in  the  bay  a few 
days  before.  One  of  the  steamers  went  outside  the  bar  and  steered  in 
the  direction  of  Galveston,  probably  for  a mortar-boat  or  some  other 
additional  force  to  assist  them. 

I am  glad  to  report  that  no  lives  were  lost  on  our  side,  but  the  enemy 
succeeded  in  doing  considerable  damage  to  the  town,  tearing  up  the 
streets  and  riddling  the  houses  and  otherwise  damaging  the  place.  The 
enemy  fired  in  all  252  shot  and  shell,  174  the  first  day  and  78  the  second, 
nearly  all  of  them  from  32  and  64  pounder  rifled  guns. 

Capt.  H.  Willke,  acting  ordnance  officer,  rendered  very  efficient  serv- 
ice in  keei>ing  the  batteries  supplied  with  ammunition  and  freely  expos- 
ing himself  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


BERWICK  BAY,  LA. 


183 


The  citizens  of  this  town  acted  nobly,  particularly  Mr.  Dunn  and  Mr. 
Charles  Oglesbury,  who  remained  in  the  town  and  materially  assisted 
the  commanding  officer,  suffering  their  property  to  be  destroyed  without 
a murmur,  and  only  regretting  they  could  do  no  more  to  serve  their 
country. 

The  ladies  of  the  place,  among  whom  Mrs.  Chesley  and  Mrs.  Dunn 
and  the  two  beautiful  and  accomplished  daughters  of  the  former  bore  a 
conspicuous  part,  acted  the  part  of  true  Southern  heroines,  supplying 
our  tired  soldiers  with  coffee,  bread,  and  meat  even  during  the  thickest 
of  the  fight. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEORGE  E.  CONKLIN, 

Lieutenant  and  Adjutant . 

Maj.  E.  F.  Gray, 

Aetg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  San  Antonio,  Tex . 


NOVEMBER  1-6,  1862.— Naval  operations  on  Berwick  Bay,  La. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1.— Lieut.  Commander  Thomas  McKean  Buchanan,  U.  S.  Navy,  commanding 
U.  S.  steamer  Calhoun. 

No.  2. — Capt.  E.  W.  Fuller,  commanding  Confederate  steamer  Cotton. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Commander  Thomas  McKean  Buchanan,  U.  S.  Navy,  com- 
manding U.  S.  steamer  Calhoun. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

November  6,  1862. 

Rear-Admiral  Farragut, 

Commanding  Western  Blockading  Squadron : 

I am  pleased  to  return  to  you  a copy  of  Lieutenant-Commander  Buch- 
anan’s report  of  his  operations  at  Berwick  Bay.  I am  sorry  to  say  that 
owing  to  the  storms  and  delays  necessary  and  unnecessary  in  moving 
our  fleet  we  were  not  able  to  get  there  three  days  sooner,  when  we  should 
have  infallibly  bagged  the  whole  rebel  party.  Now,  as  it  is,  we  must  do 
the  best  we  can. 

We  are  proposing  to  go  farther,  and  may  yet  be  employed  some  days 
upon  this  matter.  I will  keep  you  informed  of  all  further  operations. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  &c., 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-  General,  Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 

United  States  Steamer  Calhoun, 

Off  Brasliear  City,  November  4,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  we  arrived  off  here  on  the  night 
of  the  1st,  but  unfortunately  too  late  to  stop  the  rebels  from  crossing. 
We  had  a great  deal  of  difficulty  in  getting  over  the  bay,  and  felt  the 
want  of  our  light-draught  vessels  very  much.  The  day  the  Kinsman 


See  also  Appendix,  p.  1087. 


184 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYTL 

arrived  I crossed  in  her,  and  tried  to  get  the  Estrella  over,  but  she 
grounded.  I came  up  to  the  mouth  of  the  river  but  saw  nothing  but 
the  Hart,  which  we  chased  but  could  not  catch.  We  got  the  Estrella 
and  Saint  Mary’s  over  the  next  day,  and  the  following  day  the  Calhoun 
came  up  with  the  Diana. 

The  night  of  our  arrival  here  we  chased  the  rebel  gunboat  Cotton, 
but  she  got  away  from  us  by  her  superior  speed.  The  same  night  we 
captured  the  rebel  steamer  A.  B.  Seger.  She  is  a small  boat,  about 
the  size  of  the  Fancy  Katchez,  and  is  very  useful. 

Yesterday  I went  with  all  the  gunboats  up  Bayou  Teche,  and  found 
the  enemy  about  14  miles  from  here,  posted  above  the  obstructions  they 
had  sunk  in  the  Teche.  We  engaged  them  for  two  hours  and  drove 
them  off,  as  we  also  did  the  Cotton.  The  Kinsman  bore  the  brunt  of  it, 
and  received  fifty -four  shots  in  her  upper  works  and  hull  and  had  1 man 
killed,  a soldier  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana,  and  5 wounded.  The  pilot, 
John  Bellino,  had  his  leg  badly  shattered  and  died  to-day  from  the 
effects  of  amputation.  Captain  Cooke,  in  the  Estrella,  received  three 
shots  and  had  2 soldiers  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  killed  whilst  work- 
ing the  guns  and  1 badly  wounded.  The  Diana  received  three  shots,  but 
had  no  person  hurt.  She  will  have  to  be  hauled  out,  as  her  stem  is 
shot  away.  I received  eight  in  the  Calhoun,  but  fortunately  they  did 
no  material  damage. 

Captain  Wiggins  fought  his  ship  nobly.  He  was  in  such  a position 
that  he  received  all  the  fire  from  the  artillery  on  shore  and  at  the  same 
time  had  the  Cotton  playing  upon  him ; he,  however,  drove  the  artillery 
away  and  put  several  shots  into  the  Cotton.  The  whole  rebel  force 
was  there,  numbering  between  3,000  and  4,000  men,  with  seventy  field 
pieces.  We  hear  to-day  we  did  them  a great  deal  of  damage  and  that 
the  Cotton  is  sunk.  They  had  thrown  up  a mud  fort  this  side,  but 
evacuated  it  on  our  arrival.  We  tried  to  remove  the  obstructions  but 
could  not  succeed,  but  I think  that  when  General  Weitzel  arrives,  so  as  to 
protect  us  from  the  sharpshooters  on  the  bank,  we  can  do  so.  I keep 
running  up  and  down  all  the  time,  so  as  to  keep  the  river  clear  of  the 
obstructions. 

We  can  make  all  our  repairs  here,  and  I will  have  the  Kinsman  ready 
for  service  to-morrow.  The  Diana  is  getting  timber  out  for  Colonel 
Thomas  to  repair  the  bridge  at  Bayou  Bceuf.  The  enemy  destroyed 
about  1,000  hogsheads  of  sugar,  a lot  of  molasses,  and  also  burned  98 
cars  and  3 engines. 

I send  requisitions  for  ammunition  for  the  three  gunboats,  which  we 
want  very  badly,  as  we  fired  away  a good  deal  yesterday,  and  I expect 
to  have  a good  deal  more  firing  to  do,  and  also  for  some  blouses  and 
shoes  for  the  men  that  have  been  shipped.  It  is  absolutely  necessary 
that  they  should  have  some  clothing,  and  I hope  you  will  order  the 
quartermaster  to  furnish  it.  We  have  got  all  the  steamers  above  us, 
but  I am  afraid  they  will  burn  them.  The  officers  and  men  behaved 
splendidly.  The  Cotton  is  iron  cased,  and  did  some  excellent  shooting. 
She  mounts  one  long  32-pounder,  four  24-pounders,  and  two  6-pounder 
rifle  guns. 

The  iron  casing  on  the  Kinsman  and  Diana  turned  the  shot  beauti- 
fully. Captain  McLaflin,  who  was  on  board  of  the  Calhoun  with  his 
company,  went  on  shore  with  his  men  and  tried  to  get  opposite  the  Cot- 
ton, but  before  he  got  up  to  her  she  had  left.  If  she  has  not  been  sunk 
we  will  get  her  yet.  I shall  send  the  coal  schooner  back,  as  we  do 
not  want  her,  there  being  plenty  of  coal  here. 


Chap.  XXV 11.  ] 


BERWICK  BAY,  LA. 


185 


November  5, 1862. 

I have  just  returned  from  another  trip  up  the  Teche  with  the  Estrella. 
I had  3 men  killed  by  a shot.  The  Cotton  was  there.  They  had  a bat- 
tery on  each  bank,  but  we  succeeded  in  driving  them  all  off.  I can  do 
nothing  until  General  Weitzel  arrives.  They  are  now  strongly  posted 
at  the  obstructions,  and  although  I can  drive  them  off,  I cannot  work 
at  them.  We  want  some  more  ammunition  now  badly.  I think  the 
Cotton  is  casemated,  as  our  shell  glanced  off.  We  had  him  on  fire 
once.  We  could  plainly  see  our  shot  strike  him,  but  he  fights  bows  on. 
I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  McKEAN  BUCHANAN, 

Lieutenant , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  E.  W.  Fuller , commanding  Confederate  steamer  Cotton. 

Department  of  State,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Fa.,  December  3, 1862. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  a report  of  a recent  naval 
action  on  the  Bayou  Teche,  in  Western  Louisiana,  in  which  Captain 
Fuller,  with  an  artillery  company  on  board  of  a small  steamer,  success- 
fully repulsed  four  gunboats  carrying  twenty-seven  guns,  and  thus  se- 
cured control  of  that  important  stream. 

The  indorsement  of  General  Taylor  recommends  the  bestowal  of  some 
mark  of  favor  on  this  gallant  officer,  and  I hope  it  will  be  in  your  power 
to  give  him  promotion  as  a reward  for  his  service. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN. 

[Indorsement.] 

December  13,  1862. 

If  we  were  to  give  additional  rank  to  our  officers  for  gallant  and  dis- 
tinguished services  in  affairs  with  the  enemy  we  would  interfere  with 
the  proper  organization  of  the  Army  and  incur  a heavy  additional  ex- 
pense. There  is  no  law  which  provides  brevets  for  gallant  and  dis- 
tinguished conduct.  All  that  could  be  done  therefore  in  the  present 
case  is  to  write  a complimentary  letter  to  Captain  Fuller,  thanking  him 
in  the  name  of  the  Department  for  the  services  he  has  rendered,  and 
when  a vacancy  occurs  to  which  he  could  be  appointed  agreeably  to 
law  to  promote  him  to  fill  it. 

Respectfully  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

[In  closure.] 

Gunboat  Cotton,  November  7, 1862. 

Sir  : I embrace  the  first  opportunity  of  making  my  report  of  the  recent 
afiairs  between  the  Cotton,  under  my  command,  and  the  squadron  of 
Federal  gunboats  that  have  occupied  Berwick  Bay. 


186 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVXL 


On  Saturday  evening,  November  1,  the  smoke  from  the  enemy’s  boats 
warned  me  of  their  near  approach  in  such  force  that  resistance  at  the 
bay  was  considered  by  me  to  be  rashness.  Acting  upon  your  order,  re- 
ceived but  a few  minutes  previously,  I immediately  gave  the  necessary 
orders  for  leaving  the  bay.  The  steamers  Hart  and  Seger  were  there  at 
the  time,  also  Launch  No.  1,  under  the  command  of  J.  M.  Rogers,  who  I 
had  temporarily  appointed  to  the  position  of  acting  master.  My  orders 
to  the  officers  of  those  boats  were  to  get  immediately  under  way — the 
Hart,  under  the  command  of  Lieut.  G.  Montague,  to  proceed  up  to  the 
Teche  with  a barge  loaded  with  Government  sugar  in  tow.  This  was 
safely  done  according  to  orders,  with  one  exception — Lieutenant  Mon- 
tague at  one  time  dropped  his  barge  and  returned  like  a gallant  soldier 
to  aid  the  Cotton  in  an  unequal  conflict.  As  soon  as  I could  communi- 
cate to  him  my  wishes  he  resumed  his  tow  and  proceeded  safely  to  des- 
tination. Launch  No.  1 also  obeyed  the  order  given  to  her  commander, 
and  conveyed  the  launch  up  the  lake  to  a place  near  Indian  Bend,  from 
where  he  has  since  safely  reported,  and  is  now  in  position  to  render 
valuable  service.  The  Seger,  under  the  command  of  Acting  Master  I. 
0.  Coons,  disobeyed  the  order  I gave  of  proceeding  up  the  lake  and 
turned  up  the  Atchafalaya,  and  was  ignobly  abandoned  to  the  enemy 
at  a time  when  the  Cotton  was  between  the  enemy  and  the  Seger.  The 
commanding  officer  has  not  since  reported.  I have  been  informed  that 
he  abandoned  his  men  and  proceeded  as  fast  as  possible  to  Saint  Mar- 
tinville.  Up  to  the  present  time  the  only  reliable  fact  I have  about  the 
Seger  is  that  it  is  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  prowling  about  Grand 
Lake  and  bayous  in  the  vicinity ; of  the  crew,  nothing. 

The  enemy  came  into  Berwick  Bay  on  Saturday  evening  just  at  dark. 
As  the  Cotton  was  in  range,  having  had  to  wait  to  get  the  other  boats 
off,  they  immediately  opened  fire  upon  us  and  gave  chase  up  the  bay 
with  three  boats,  continuing  the  fire,  which  I did  not  return  until  round- 
ing into  the  Atchafalaya,  when  one  of  our  guns  was  brought  to  bear, 
and  we  fired  one  shot,  which  sped  straight  to  its  mark,  striking  one  of 
the  Federal  boats  in  her  bow,  breaking  many  timbers,  and  1 have  since 
been  informed  that  it  killed  3 and  wounded  5 men.  The  Federals*con- 
tinued  to  fire  shot  and  shell  at  us  from  eighteen  guns  for  about  thirty 
minutes,  when  they  gave  up  the  chase.  The  Cotton  came  up  to  the 
Teche,  turned  bow  down  and  backed  iuto  it,  keeping  our  teeth  to  the 
enemy.  We  backed  up  to  the  Turelier  plantation,  where  we  stopped 
for  the  night. 

On  Sunday  morning,  the  2d  instant,  I received  orders  to  move  the 
jCotton  above  Cornay’s  bridge,  which  I did  as  soon  as  possible.  The 
bayou  had  some  obstructions  thrown  across  at  that  point,  which  I was 
ordered  to  defend  until  it  got  too  hot  for  me  and  then  to  fall  back,  turn 
my  boat  across  the  bayou  at  the  second  bridge,  and,  if  pursued,  sink 
her. 

On  Monday,  at  2 p.  m.,  the  four  Federal  boats,  mounting  twenty- 
seven  guns,  came  up  and  opened  fire  upon  us.  They  came  up  in  full 
confidence  of  overpowering  numbers,  giving  us  broadside  after  broad- 
side, frequently  the  whole  four  delivering  their  fire  at  once.  The  shot 
and  shell  literally  rained  on  and  about  our  boat,  several  striking  us, 
but  without  doing  serious  damage.  We  returned  their  fire,  my  brave 
boys  cheering  frequently  when  a well-directed  shot  struck  the  Federal 
boats.  One  of  them  retired  from  the  contest  in  about  fifteen  minutes, 
her  place  being  taken  by  another.  One  boat  for  several  minutes  had 
her  colors  down,  whether  accidentally  down  or  that  they  hauled  it 
down  to  indicate  a surrender  we  had  no  means  of  learning ; however, 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


BERWICK  BAY,  LA. 


187 


they  hoisted  them  again  after  a delay  of  about  twenty  minutes.  One, 
more  adventuresome  than  the  rest,  steadily  steamed  up  the  bayou  5 
when  in  about  100  yards  of  the  obstructions  we  gave  her  a plunging 
shot  from  each  of  our  guns,  which  all  struck  near  the  water  on  the 
starboard  quarter.  The  boat  immediately  ran  her  head  upon  shore, 
and  was  listed  down  so  as  to  throw  her  guns  out  of  use  and  ceased 
her  fire,  except  occasionally  from  one  gun  on  the  bow.  At  this  time, 
when  but  one  of  the  enemy’s  boats  fired  with  any  vigor,  when  victory 
seemed  to  be  within  our  reach,  it  was  announced  that  we  had  no  more 
cartridges,  having  fired  the  last  one.  Retreat  was  all  that  remained  for 
us ; but  as  we  slowly  backed  up  we  had  some  sacks  made  by  cutting 
off  the  legs  from  the  pantaloons  of  some  of  our  men,  which  we  filled 
and  returned  fire  with  as  often  as  we  could  in  that  manner  obtain  a 
cartridge.  This  we  continued  until  out  of  range  and  the  enemy  ceased 
their  fire.  We  had  to  mourn  the  loss  of  one  brave  soldier,  killed  by  an 
accidental  discharge  of  his  gun,  which  severely  wounded  another.  An- 
other was  accidentally  wounded  at  another  gun  by  the  recoil  of  the 
carriage  and  has  since  died.  One  man  was  wounded  by  a piece  of  the 
enemy’s  shell.  These  are  all  the  casualties  that  occurred.  The  boat 
sustained  no  perceptible  damage. 

On  Tuesday  morning  we  resumed  our  original  position  near  the  ob- 
structions, the  enemy  having  previously  retired.  We  worked  hard  to 
improve  the  condition  of  our  boat  and  got  up  some  iron  to  shield  the 
engines.  Nothing  occurred  worthy  of  note  during  the  day. 

On  Wednesday,  the  5th  instant,  the  enemy  again  opened  fire  upon 
us  with  four  boats  at  about  10.30  o’clock.  They  fired  from  behind  a 
point  out  of  our  range  for  about  twenty  minutes,  then  two  of  them 
steamed  up  into  sight.  We  then  immediately  returned  their  fire,  and 
with  such  effect  that  the  enemy  retired  and  abandoned  the  contest  in 
fifty-five  minutes  from  firing  their  first  shot.  The  two  boats  that  came 
into  sight  were  badly  damaged  and  their  loss  heavy;  ours  nothing;  the 
onty  damage  being  a trifling  break  in  the  cabin  roof.  This  day  victory 
was  clearly^  ours.  The  enemy  retired  from  the  action  badly  discouraged, 
with  severe  loss.  We  were  unhurt. 

On  Thursday  the  enemy  came  up  and  opened  fire  upon  us,  but  took 
care  not  to  come  into  sight.  I did  not  return  their  fire.  They  threw 
shells  at  us  for  half  an  hour  and  retired  without  doing  us  any  damage. 
Since  that  up  to  present  date  they  have  not  assailed  us. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  returning  thanks  to  officers  and 
men.  Where  all  did  their  duty  gallantly  it  may  seem  invidious  to 
mention  particular  names,  yet  I must  particularly  mention  the  good 
conduct  of  O.  S.  Burdett,  pilot,  who  for  two  hours  and  a half  during 
the  fierce  combat  on  the  3d  instant  maneuvered  the  boat  with  the  utmost 
coolness  ; also  the  same  gallant  conduct  on  the  5th  instant.  Each  of 
my  lieutenants  did  his  duty  nobly  and  ably.  Also  F.  G.  Burbank,  gun- 
ner, and  Privates  F.  D.  Wilkinson  and  Henry  Doming  deserve  particu- 
lar mention  for  their  gallant  conduct.  But  all  did  their  duty  well,  and 
are  again  ready  to  meet  the  enemy  should  they  come  up  and  try  us 
again. 

Respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  W.  FULLER, 

Captain , Commanding  Gunboat  Cotton. 

General  Alfred  Mouton, 

Commanding  Forces  South  of  Bed  Biver. 


188 


W.  FLA.,  8.  ALA 


8.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXTTL 


[Indorsement.] 


Dear  Benjamin  : I send  you  Fuller’s  report,  every  word  of  which 
is  true.  I applied  to  have  a naval  officer  sent  here  to  give  me  some 
assistance ; no  one  was  sent.  Any  little  aid  by  the  Navy  Department 
would  have  saved  Berwick  Bay.  Something  might  be  done  for  Fuller; 
he  certainly  deserves  it;  he  defeated  four  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats. 

Truly,  yours, 

E.  TAYLOR. 


NOVEMBER  20,  1862.— Affair  near  Matagorda,  Tex. 

Report  of  Col.  X.  B.  Debray , Debratfs  Texas  Regiment. 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Houston , Tex.,  November  25,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  20th  instant  the  scouts 
of  Brown’s  battalion  captured,  8 miles  below  Matagorda,  1 master’s 
mate  and  9 seamen,  part  of  the  crew  of  the  mortar  schooner  Henry 
Janes,  who  had  landed  to  kill  beef.  The  capture  was  effected  without 
loss  of  life  on  either  side.  Three  ordinary  muskets  and  seven  Enfield 
rifles  fell  into  our  hands,  with  cartridge  boxes,  and  the  launch  on  which 
the  party  came  was  burned.  None  of  the  landing  party  escaped.  The 
prisoners  were  brought  here  to-day  and  have  been  placed  in  charge  of 
the  guard  of  Griffin’s  battalion. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBRAY, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston. 

Capt.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  &c.,  San  Antonio , Tex. 


NOVEMBER  21,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Bayou  Bonfouca,  La. 

Report  of  Col.  A.  R.  Witt , Tenth  Arkansas  Infantry. 

Headquarters, 

Ponchatoula , La.,  December  1, 1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  a scouting  party  of  25  men,  under 
my  orders,  belonging  to  Captain  Bredow’s  company  of  Partisan  Rangers, 
commanded  by  Lieutenant  Evans,  attacked  Federal  steamboat  G.  Brown, 
mounting  two  guns.  Lieutenant  Evans  reports  killing  2 men  and  mor- 
tally wounding  1 on  said  boat.  The  boat  was  running  up  the  river  Bon- 
fouca, 60  miles  east  of  here  and  10  miles  from  Fort  Pike.  After  the 
first  fire  she  backed  down  the  river,  shelling  the  woods  as  she  went. 

1 have  the  honor  further  to  report  that  at  this  time  there  are  no  boats 
in  the  lakes.  I would  also  report  that  the  Federals  have  made  an  en- 
campment 40  miles  above  New  Orleans  on  the  Mississippi  River,  at 
Luke’s  plantation,  and  I have  reliable  information  that  they  have  moved 
30  miles  on  the  Mississippi  River  above  that  encampment.  However, 
this  will  come  under  General  Beall’s  notice,  it  being  not  far  below  Baton 


Chat,  xxvn.]  CAPTURE  OF  STEAMER  LONE  STAR.  189 

Rouge.  Only  2,000  Federals  reported  in  New  Orleans  at  this  time  by 
persons  coming  out. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  R.  WITT, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


NOVEMBER  21-22,  1862. — Affairs  at  Petite  Anse  Island,  La.  (See  Ap- 
pendix, p.  1088.) 


NOVEMBER  27,  1862. — Capture  of  the  steamer  Lone  Star. 

Report  of  Capt.  V.  L.  Terrell , Terrell  Dragoons , Mississippi  Cavalry. 

Hampton’s  Ferry,  La.,  November  29,  1862. 

Colonel  : I beg  leave  to  submit  the  following  special  report  : 

On  the  morning  of  the  27th  I learned  that  a force  of  the  enemy,  con- 
sisting by  report  of  a force  which  I could  meet,  were  out.  I therefore 
took  my  command  and  proceeded  down  to  the  Mississippi  River  at  New 
River  Landing,  but  found  that  the  enemy  had  withdrawn.  I further 
learned  that  only  two  of  the  enemy  had  gone  up  the  river.  I placed  my 
command  under  charge  of  Orderly  Sergt.  R.  S.  Magee,  and  ordered  him 
back  to  camp.  I took  First  Lieut.  John  Pope  and  Privates  F.  M.  Rogers, 
W.  Waddell,  J.  T.  Bland,  and  Volunteer  L.  Roorthe,  and  proceeded  up 
the  river  to  intercept  the  enemy  above  mentioned.  I learned  during  the 
night  that  they  had  also  gone  down  the  river.  I then  continued  up  the 
river,  and  just  below  Plaquemine,  on  the  opposite  shore,  I saw  a steam- 
boat. I waited  until  night  fall,  and  being  joined  by  F.  R.  Vorheis,  a vol- 
unteer, I immediately  crossed  the  river  and  landed  1£  miles  above  the 
boat.  I immediately  went  down,  boarded  and  captured  the  boat,  with 
all  the  crew  and  two  passengers.  I then  brought  the  boat  down  to 
Captain  Stockdale’s  pickets,  10  miles  below,  on  this  side  of  the  river, 
and  sent  a courier  for  Captain  Stockdale’s  company,  to  which  call  the 
captain  promptly  responded.  The  prisoners  were  then  turned  over  to 
Captain  Stockdale,  together  with  a planter,  Mr.  Avery,  who  positively 
refused  to  render  me  any  assistance,  and  refused  to  allow  me  to  take 
his  carts  or  hands.  I put  him  under  guard  and  sent  him  on  with  the 
balance  of  the  prisoners.  I endeavored  to  save  the  cargo,  which  con- 
sisted of  sugar.  The  hogsheads  could  not  be  raised  up  the  bluff  by  my 
small  force.  I took  ashore  some  20  or  30  hogsheads  and  burned  the 
boat.  The  name  of  the  boat  burned  was  Lone  Star.  Some  small  articles, 
mattresses,  &e.,  together  with  one  hogshead  of  sugar  and  one  barrel 
of  molasses,  were  brought  to  my  camp  and  distributed  to  my  company. 

I would  especially  state  that  the  action  both  of  my  first  lieutenant 
and  every  private  was  in  every  way  commendable,  and  they  have  my 
best  thanks;  also  Captain  Stockdale  and  men  have  my  thanks  for  assist- 
ance and  prompt  response. 

All  of  which  I respectfully  submit. 

V.  L.  TERRELL, 

Captain  Terrell  Dragoons , Mississippi  Cavalry. 
Colonel  Commanding  Post,  Baton  Rouge , La. 


190  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVlL 

DECEMBER  7,  1862.— Affair  at  Padre  Island,  Tex. 

Report  of  Capt.  H.  Willke , C.  8.  Army. 

Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  December  8,  1862. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  5th  instant  myself, 
Capt.  John  Ireland,  and  7 of  his  men  went  on  a surveying  expedition  in 
the  Queen  of  the  Bay,  to  ascertain  the  depth  of  the  channel  at  Corpus 
Christi  Pass  by  actual  measurement.  The  boat  was  in  charge  of  Jack 
Sands,  Pat  Beil,  and  Tom  Simpson.  Corpus  Christi  Pass  is  about  5 
miles  long,  and  has  a bar  outside  to  the  Gulf  and  another  inside  one 
toward  the  bay.  We  found  5J  feet  water  on  the  former  and  3£  feet  on 
the  latter.  The  wind  was  very  contrary,  and  it  took  us  one  day  and  a 
half  to  ascertain  these  facts,  when  we  were  compelled  to  cast  anchor 
and  stay  overnight  in  the  middle  of  the  channel,  the  wind  being  due 
north  and  the  channel  being  too  narrow  to  beat. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  we  detected  the  bark  Arthur  outside,  evi- 
dently cruising  for  us,  for  when  they  had  detected  us  they  stood  off 
into  sea  to  beat  back  to  Aransas  Pass.  Captain  Ireland  and  myself 
went  to  Mustang  Island  to  watch  her,  but  arrived  late  at  the  Gulf  shore 
to  find  out  if  she  had  left  any  boat  behind.  We  watched  ber  until  11 
o’clock,  when  the  wind  turned  toward  the  east,  and  we  returned  to  the 
boat  to  weigh  anchor. 

At  12  o’clock  we  started  homeward.  When  near  the  inner  bar  we 
detected  two  of  the  enemy’s  launches  fully  manned,  who  had  come  into 
our  rear  over  the  Mud  Flats  near  Shell  Bank.  They  were  about  2 
miles  from  us,  and  we  could  not  find  out  if  there  were  any  more  hidden 
behind  the  shore,  so  I gave  orders  to  turn  our  boat  around  and  run 
nearly  before  the  wind  back  toward  the  Gulf.  The  boats  were  in  hot 
pursuit,  using  both  sails  and  oars,  and  gained  slightly  on  us,  so  that 
they  were  a little  over  a mile  behind  us  when  we  arrived  at  the  bluffs 
of  Padre  Island.  We  ran  the  Queen  ashore  close  to  the  hills,  jumped 
out  with  the  most  necessary  baggage,  in  case  we  should  lose  the  boat, 
and  took  position  on  ihe  hills,  keeping  ourselves  hid.  They  came  in 
close,  and  at  about  200  yards  we  opened  fire  on  them.  The  first  two 
shots  disabled  2 of  their  men,  and  they  at  once  changed  their  course 
and  took  position  in  the  center  of  the  Pass,  all  the  while*  shooting  at 
us,  but  without  any  effect,  while  our  balls  were  flying  close  to  their 
boats,  probably  wounding  some  of  them,  for  they  at  once  went  across 
the  channel  to  Mustang  Island,  ran  both  boats  ashore  and  jumped  out 
as  fast  as  they  could,  leaving  everything  in  their  boats  except  their 
guns,  which  were  not  fastened  to  their  bodies,  and  ran  farther  up  the 
beach,  taking  position  about  1,000  yards  opposite  to  ns.  From  there 
they  fired  occasionally  on  us,  but  their  shot  fell  short,  while  one  of  our 
men  at  that  distance  killed  one  of  theirs.  When  they  saw  that  even  at 
that  distance  they  were  not  safe  against  our  shot  they  retired  still  far- 
ther and  disappeared  behind  the  hills.  During  the  time  the  breeze  had 
become  stronger  and  driven  their  boats  from  shore.  One  came  right 
toward  us,  and  Captain  Ireland,  with  2 men,  went  waist-deep  into 
water,  securing  her.  He  found  one  dead  body  and  a wounded  man  in 
it,  besides  a good  many  articles  of  clothing  and  arms.  The  other  boat, 
whose  sail  was  still  flying,  drifted  toward  the  Gulf,  and  Jack  Sands 
took  a small  boat,  went  over,  and  took  her  also.  Captain  Ireland  then 
succeeded  in  shoving  the  Queen  into  deep  water,  and  after  securing 
the  corpse  of  the  man  who  lay  shot  on  Mustang  Island  we  soon  after- 


Chap.  XXVn.|  REOCCUPATION  OF  BATON  ROUGE,  LA.  191 

ward  made  good  our  retreat  toward  Corpus  Christi,  where  we  safely 
landed  about  9 o’clock  in  the  evening  with  our  whole  booty. 

I must  mention  here  the  bravery  of  all  the  men.  Captain  Ireland’s 
men  were  selected  from  among  the  best  shots  of  bis  company,  and  1 
take  pride  in  mentioning  their  names,  for  they  did  really  such  very 
good  execution.  They  were  W.  E.  Goodrich,  W.  Saffold,  F.  G.  Roberts, 
S.  N.  Elliott,  John  Neill,  John  Haley,  and  Nat  Henderson,  all  from  or 
near  Seguin.  About  Captain  Ireland  I need  not  mention  anything  to 
you,  for  he  behaved  exactly  as  you  would  have  a brave  man  to  behave. 
We  were  7 armed  men  against  their  22,  for  Captain  Ireland  and  myself 
had  only  six-shooters  and  the  three  boatmen  h ad  nothing.  The  latter  did 
their  part  in  shouting  and  urging  on  our  men. 

We  took  2 launches  (one  metallic),  with  full  equipments  in  sail  and 
oars,  6 great-coats,  4 percussion  muskets,  1 double-barrel  shot-gun,  3 
holster  pistols,  4 cutlasses,  1 bayonet,  3 cartridge  boxes,  3 pistol  cases, 
and  sundry  small  articles,  which  I had  turned  over  to  the  quartermaster 
and  ordnance  officer.  Three  of  the  great-coats  were  issued  by  my  order 
to  the  three  sailors,  two  of  whom  have  since  they  are  in  the  service  re- 
ceived neither  pay  nor  clothing  and  scarcely  any  rations,  for  they  belong 
to  no  company,  and  nobody  has  ever  drawn  for  them.  I believe  I can 
direct  the  quartermaster  to  issue  to  them  rations  and  pay  them  their 
wages  and  let  some  of  the  captains  draw  their  clothing  for  them. 
They  are  good  sailors,  and  I wish  to  retain  them  in  that  branch  for  our 
boats.  Have  I a right  to  do  that  or  must  they  join  a company?  I 
would  request  you  to  send  me  an  answer  to  that  question. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient, 

H.  WILLKE, 
Captain , Commanding  Post. 

Maj.  E.  F.  Gray, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


DECEMBER  17,  1862. — Reoccupation  of  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  by  the  Union 

forces. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Cuvier  Grover , TJ.  S.  Army. 

. Headquarters, 

Baton  Rouge , La December  17,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I reached  this  point  at  day- 
break to-day,  upon  which  the  enemy  (probably  500  strong)  immediately 
evacuated  the  town.  I landed  my  force  as  soon  as  means  at  hand 
would  admit  of  and  occupied  the  place,  which  I now  hold.  I have  reason 
to  believe  it  not  improbable  that  the  enemy  will  attack  in  force  at  a very 
early  hour — perhaps  to-night  or  to-morrow  morning.  I have  about 
4,500  effective  meu,  which  would  be  amply  sufficient  behind  the  lines 
we  occupy  if  they  were  well  drilled ; as  it  is,  a trial  will  only  test  their 
efficiency.  We  have  no  adequate  means  of  debarking  our  batteries,  but 
I hope  to  be  able  to  have  four  pieces  in  position  to-night.  Captain 
Alden,  commanding  the  Richmond,  has  kindly  furnished  me  with  details 
to  work  the  guns.  I consider  it  at  least  prudent  that  every  exertion 
be  made  to  increase  the  force  here  as  soon  as  possible. 

I am  greatly  indebted  to  Captain  Alden,  commanding  the  fleet,  for 
his  efficient  co-operation  in  making  our  landing.  A few  shells  were 


192 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVtL 

dropped  around  our  position  by  the  gunboats  previous  to  landing.  My 
infantry  did  not  lire  a gun.  1 will  make  a report  in  full  at  as  early  an 
hour  as  practicable. 

It  is  highly  important  that  either  a river  or  wharf  boat  be  sent  here 
immediately.  I do  not  intend  to  send  back  any  of  the  transports  to- 
day, as  it  is  impracticable  to  unload  what  we  want  until  to-morrow  at 
the  earliest. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

0.  GROVER, 

Brigadier- General  of  Volunteers. 

Assistant  Adjutant-General, 

Headquarters  Banks’  Expedition. 


DECEMBER  29,  1862.— Affair  near  Plaqnemine,  La. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Commander  F.  A.  Roe , U.  S.  Navy,  commanding  United 
States  gunboat  Katahdin. 

United  States  Gunboat  Katahdin, 

Off  Plaquemine , December  29,  1862. 

Sir:  I came  to  this  place  last  night  by  request  of  Captain  Perkins, 
of  the  cavalry.  This  morning  he  attacked  the  enemy,  heavily  picketed 
about  7 miles  in  rear  of  this  place.  A smart  skirmish  ensued,  but 
owing  to  the  strong  position  of  the  enemy  he  could  not  be  driven  out. 
Captain  Perkins  estimates  the  force  of  the  enemy  at  about  500  to  600 
strong.  Opposed  to  this  force  he  has  about  70  men  only.  It  is  Cap- 
tain Perkins’  wish  to  draw  the  enemy  out  and  fight  him,  having  the 
Katahdin  to  support  him.  This  I shall  do,  as  we  have  a series  of  sig- 
nals agreed  upon  to  operate  in  conjunction.  Appearances  seem  to  in- 
dicate that  the  rebels  are  meditating  a descent  somewhere  along  the 
coast.  All  those  who  have  taken  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United 
States  are  threatened  with  hanging  and  instant  death.  But  we  shall 
harass  the  rebels,  and  if. possible  entrap  them  into  a disaster.  Three 
good  companies  of  infantry  would  be  of  great  service  if  they  could  be 
stationed  to  occupy  Plaquemine,  and  would  give  assurance  to  many 
people  who  need  them. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  A.  ROE, 
Lieutenant  Commander. 

Commander  James  Alden, 

Commanding  Forces  off  Baton  Rouge , La. 


DECEMBER  31,  1862-JANUARY  3,  1863.— Affairs  at  Plaquemine,  La. 

Reports  of  Mag.  James  H.  Bogart , One  hundred  and  sixty -second  New 
York  Infantry , and  resulting  correspondence. 

Plaquemine,  La.,  January  2, 1863. 

Sir  : Pursuant  to  Special  Orders,  No.  2,  Headquarters  One  hundred 
and  sixty-second  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers,  I embarked  with 
three  companies  on  the  31st,  at  8 p.  in.,  proceeded  up  the  river  as  far  as 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


AFFAIRS  AT  PLAQUEMINE,  LA. 


193 


Bayou  Goula,  where  we  met  Gunboat  No.  3,  also  Lieutenant  Perkins, 
in  command  of  cavalry  force  stationed  there.  Upon  consultation  it  was 
decided  to  land  my  force  at  once  at  Plaquemine  and  take  possession  of 
the  town,  which  I did  without  any  opposition  at  4 p.  m.,  Lieutenant 
Perkins’  cavalry  joining  me  with  his  whole  force,  75  strong,  at  12  mid- 
night. 

From  a reconnaissance  made  last  night  as  far  down  as  Indian  Tillage, 
on  Bayou  Plaquemine,  we  find  the  enemy’s  cavalry  in  some  force,  but 
pickets  only  on  this  side  of  the  bayou.  My  position  is  quite  strong,  as 
you  will  see  by  the  rough  map  I send*  If  possible  to  send  me  100 
more  men,  even  of  some  other  regiment,  they  could  be  made  the  best 
use  of,  and  ere  the  transport  returns  will  become  a necessity.  I have 
rations  up  to  the  8th,  and  if  decided  to  retain  the  command  here  would 
respectfuly  ask  ten  days’  additional. 

I further  ask  full  instructions  in  regard  to  citizens.  They  are  mostly 
of  French  extraction.  Some  have  taken  the  oath  and  some  not.  Also 
in  regard  to  contrabands.  My  course  so  far  has  been  to  keep  them  on 
their  plantations  and  allow  them  in  no  case  to  gather  in  the  town. 

I would  further  ask  attention  to  the  following:  Lieutenant. Perkins’ 
command  have  had  no  rations  for  some  time,  and  they  actually  need  the 
regular  army  supply.  They  are  also  in  great  need  of  clothing,  of  which 
the  quartermaster-sergeant  has  sent  a list  needed.  It  is  60  miles  to 
Thibodeauxville,  where  he  drew  his  last  requisitions.  His  horses  also 
need  forage;  oats  especially. 

Hoping  that  the  above  report  will  meet  with  approbation  at  head- 
quarters, I am,  sir,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  BOGART, 

Major  07ie  hundred  and  sixty-second  New  Yorlc  Volunteers. 

Colonel  Benedict,  Commanding  Brigade. 

[Indorsements.] 

. Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Camp  Parapet,  January  3,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  to  Brigadier-General  Sherman,  commanding 
division. 

LEW.  BENEDICT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Carrollton,  January  3, 1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  department  headquarters.  The  detachment 
ordered  from  here  under  directions  from  headquarters  department  took 
ten  days’  rations  and  200  rounds  ammunition  per  man. 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 

Brigadier- General. 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Plaquemine , La.,  January  3,  1863. 

Sir  : My  small  command  still  occupy  the  same  position  in  the  town 
of  Plaquemine.  Last  night  we  were  under  arms  all  night,  and  from  10 
until  daylight  in  position  behind  levee  to  resist  contemplated  attack 


13  R R — VOL  XV 


Not  found. 


194 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTL 

from  the  enemy.  Information  received  from  citizens,  contrabands,  and 
especially  from  my  own  cavalry  scouts,  led  me  to  expect  an  attack. 
Their  force  I estimated  to  be  at  least  one  regiment  of  infantry,  two 
pieces  of  artillery,  and  about  500  cavalry.  My  information,  gleaned 
from  all  the  different  sources,  tallied  as  to  their  strength,  and  to  their 
being  immediately  across  the  bayou  at  Indian  Village,  9 miles  from  here.^ 
Their  cavalry  have  been  (at  8 o’clock  last  evening)  seen  within  1 mile  of 
the  village  of  Plaquemine,  some  150  strong,  on  Mr.  Gay’s  and  Stone’s 
plantations. 

At  1 o’clock  this  morning  the  enemy  attacked  my  pickets  from  across 
the  Bayou  Plaquemine  in  considerable  force,  but  with  no  effect.  I re- 
plied, and  they  drew  back  into  the  woods.  From  the  precision  and  unity 
of  their  volleys  I judged  them  to  be  well-drilled  troops  and  not  guerrillas. 
At  my  request  Captain  Roe,  of  Gunboat  No.  8,  threw  some  eight  or  nine 
shells  over  the  town  into  the  woods  where  the  enemy  were  posted,  evi- 
dently scattering  them,  for  we  heard  no  more  from  that  point  during  the 
night.  From  the  falseness  of  a fuse  one  shell  from  the  gunboat  ex- 
ploded over  Company  B,  instantly  killing  Sergt.  Joseph  A.  Baker,  seri- 
ously wounding  Private  C.  Mayer  in  shoulder  and  head,  and  slightly 
wounding  Corpl.  Edward  Many  in  hand. 

At  2 a.  m.  I sent  cavalry  scouts  down  Bayou  Plaquemine,  who  re- 
turned by  3 o’clock  and  reported  that  they  saw  the  enemy  across  the 
bayou  all  along,  and  that  at  3 miles  down  he  met  their  pickets,  who 
chased  them  some  miles. 

At  daybreak  Gunboat  No.  7 arrived  from  up  the  river,  and  remained 
off  the  town  to  co-operate  with  Captain  Roe,  of  Gunboat  No.  8.  Dur- 
ing the  morning  contrabands  canie  in  from  Bayou  Jacob,  Bayou  Grosse 
Tete,  and  Grand  River,  all  of  whom  reported  the  enemy’s^  force  much 
larger  than  they  have  been  heretofore. 

Donaldsonville,  La.,  January  4,  1863. 

In  the  continuing  of  my  report  I would  say  that  at  9 o’clock  yesterday 
morning  Lieutenant  Perkins  sent  out  a squad  of  cavalry,  with  orders  to 
push  to  Indian  Village,  if  possible.  They  returned  at  4 p.  m.  with  the  re- 
port that  they  had  gone  within  a mile  of  that  place,  and  that  the  enemy 
were  erecting  a fort  there  and  had  a large  force  of  infantry  with  artillery. 
Infantry  5,000  strong,  two  batteries  of  artillery,  and  a large  force  of 
cavalry,  with  General  Sibley  in  command.  The  reports  of  Lieutenant 
Perkins  I have  implicitly  relied  upon,  for  he  has  been  in  this  section  of 
the  country  some  time  and  knows  it  well.  At  1 p.  m.  the  river  boat  Morn- 
ing Light  came  up  the  river,  bound  for  Baton  Rouge.  I sent  for  re-en- 
forcements to  that  place.  After  receiving  the  information  of  the  force 
at  Indian  Village,  and  upon  consultation  with  Lieutenant  Perkins, 
of  the  cavalry,  I decided  it  to  be  necessary,  unless  I was  re-enforced 
strongly  by  5 p.  m.,  to  evacuate  the  town,  my  men  were  in  such  an  ex- 
hausted state,  having  been  almost  continually  on  the  alert  and  not  hav- 
ing had  their  accouterments  off  since  entering  the  town.  I immediately 
communicated  my  decision  to  Capt.  F.  A.  Roe,  who  said  that  he  could 
take  us  aboard  the  two  gunboats  and  either  take  us  up  or  down  the 
river.  I decided  to  go  down  to  this  place,  and  from  there,  unless  ordered 
by  Colonel  Holcomb,  return  to  Camp  Parapet. 

I was  compelled  to  leave  my  rations,  or  rather  the  remainder  of  them, 
which  amounted  to  about  three  and  a half  days  for  my  160  men.  I 
would  have  had  more  remaining,  but  my  surgeon  considered  it  neces- 
sary to  issue  extra  rations  of  coffee,  &c.,  to  the  men  on  account  of 
their  exhausted  state.  I also  gave  some  to  Lieutenant  Perkins’  cav- 


Chap.  XXVII.]  AFFAIRS  AT  PLAQUEMINE,  LA.  195 

airy  upon  his  informing  me  that  his  command  were  totally  without 
and  in  need. 

I was  also  compelled  to  leave  my  ammunition,  22  boxes,  of  caliber  .54. 

On  communicating  to  the  captain  of  the  gunboat  at  5 p.  m.  he  said 
he  would  render  me  all  assistance  before  dark,  but  could  do  nothing  for 
me  after.  To  have  taken  my  ammunition  on  board  would  have  occu- 
pied at  least  an  hour’s  more  time.  I had  another  and,  as  I considered, 
important  reason  for  moving  nothing.  The  citizens  had  constant  com- 
munication across  the  Bayou  Plaquemine  by  means  of  skiffs ; for  with 
my  small  force  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  post  sentries  close  enough 
to  prevent  that  evil,  and  had  they  any  idea  of  my  evacuating  it  would 
have  been  immediately  communicated  to  the  enemy,  who  could  have 
crossed  on  the  flats  in  sufficient  numbers  to  have  annoyed  me,  and 
most  probably  deterred  my  embarking. 

All  of  my  small  command,  including  the  wounded  whom  I sent  off  on 
the  first  boat,  was  aboard  the  gunboats  by  7 o’clock,  and  we  then  took 
our  course  for  Donaldson  ville,  running  slowly  to  cover  the  retreat  of 
Lieutenant  Perkins’  cavalry  by  the  river  road.  Had  we  been  attacked 
while  embarking  it  would  have  resulted  in  the  total  destruction  of  not 
only  my  own  men  but  those  of  the  gunboats  and  of  the  boats  also,  for 
I could  not  defend  myself,  nor  could  the  gunboats  render  me  any  assist- 
ance with  their  guns,  for  the  enemy  would  have  been  behind  a levee  12 
feet  high. 

We  arrived  at  Donaldson ville  this  morning  at  8 o’clock,  my  officers 
and  men  having  been  treated  in  the  most  courteous  manner  by  the 
gunboat  commanders. 

At  Donaldson  ville  I found  the  river  steamer  Morning  Light  with  200  of 
the  Forty-second  Massachusetts  on  board  for  me  from  General  Grover,at 
Baton  Rouge.  They  arrived  at  Plaquemine  at  7.30;  not  seeing  us,  they 
proceeded  down  the  river  to  this  place  and  reported  to  me.  General 
Grover  requested  me  to  return  the  troops  as  soon  as  possible,  so  I 
ordered  them  to  return  as  soon  as  practicable,  the  Morning  Light 
having  some  repairs  to  make  before  being  able  to  move  up  the  river. 

Colonel  Holcomb,  commanding  at  this  place,  did  not  desire  me  to 
remain,  so  I took  the  first  river  boat  (Sallie  Robinson)  and  returned  to 
Camp  Parapet,  where  we  arrived  this  evening  at  10  o’clock. 

In  conclusion  I would  speak  of  my  orders.  When  1 reported  to  the 
captain  of  the  gunboat,  as  my  orders  were  to  co-operate  with  the  naval 
force,  he  said  he  could  give  me  no  advice  in  the  matter,  for  he  knew 
nothing  of  the  state  of  affairs  on  shore. 

I further  add  as  a postscript,  the  embarkation  was  the  decision  of  a 
consultation  of  all  my  officers,  fully  approved  by  the  commandants  of 
the  gunboats. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  BOGART, 

Major , Gomdg.  Detachment  162 d New  York  Vols. 

Col.  Lew.  Benedict, 

Gomdg.  One  hundred  and  sixty-second  N.  Y.  Vols. 


I would  report  as  a certainty  the  loss  of  the  enemy  to  be  2 killed  on 
the  2d  and  1 on  the  3d  of  January. 

Yours,  respectfully, 


JAMES  H.  BOGART, 

Major , Gomdg.  Detachment  1 62d  New  York  Vols. 


196 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XX ATI. 


[Indorsements.] 


Headquarters  Third  Begiment,  Third  Brigade, 

January  5,  1863. 


Kespectfully  forwarded. 


LEW.  BENEDICT, 

Colonel. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , January  8,  1863. 


Bespectfully  returned  to  General  Sherman. 

This  report,  taken  in  connection  with  the  representations  contained 
in  the  letters  of  General  Grover  and  Colonel  Holcomb,  tiled  herewith, 
is  regarded  by  the  commanding  general  as  unsatisfactory.  General 
Sherman  will  cause  a thorough  investigation  to  be  made  of  the  facts 
and  report  the  results  to  these  headquarters,  returning  these  papers 


with  such  report. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks: 

J BICH’D  B.  IBWIN, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  Division, 
Baton  Rouge , La .,  January  5,  1863. 

Assistant  Adj-utant-General, 

Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans: 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  afternoon  of  the  3d 
instant  I received  from  Major  Bogart,  commanding  battalion  One  hun- 
dred and  sixty-second  New  York  Volunteers,  a communication,  a copy 
of  which  is  herewith  inclosed,  marked  A. 

In  accordance  with  the  request  for  re-enforcements  I immediately 
ordered  three  companies  of  the  Fifty-second  Massachusetts  Volunteers 
(about  200  aggregate),  under  the  senior  captain,  to  proceed  to  Plaque- 
mine  and  report  to  Major  Bogart,  This  re-enforcement  left  this  post 
about  dark,  from  two  to  three  hours  after  the  call  for  re-enforcements. 

It  appears,  however,  that  about  an  hour  before  the  'Morning  Light, 
with  this  detachment,  reached  Plaquemine  Major  Bogart  had  evac- 
uated the  post,  leaving  behind,  I am  informed,  20,000  rounds  of  ball 
cartridges.  I inclose  also,  marked  B,  a copy  of  Major  Bogart’s  report 
of  the  matter  to  me. 

On  the  same  boat  that  took  the  re-enforcements  I sent  a communica- 
tion to  Major  Bogart,  a copy  of  which  I did  not  keep,  owing  to  the 
hurry  in  dispatching  the  boat.  It  was,  however,  to  the  effect  that  from 
reliable  information,  or  what  I considered  so,  there  could  not  be  over 
about  300  of  the  enemy  in  the  vicinity  of  Plaquemine,  La, 

Last  night,  at  about  10  o’clock,  Captain  Lewis,  commanding  gunboat 
Itasca,  returned  to  this  post  from  Donaldsonville,  and  reported  to  his 
commander  and  immediately  to  me  that  the  whole  command  of  infantry 
had  gone  to  Donaldsonville,  and  that  also  about  twenty-four  hours  alter 
the  evacuation  of  Plaquemine  a gunboat  had  returned  to  that  point,  and 
two  boats’  crews  had  gone  ashore  and  brought  away  the  20,000  rounds 
of  ammunition ; a sufficient  proof,  I think,  that  there  was  no  enemy  of 
any  consequence  about  Plaquemine. 

Under  those  circumstances,  though  in  no  way  under  my  authority, 
I considered  it  necessary  for  the  good  of  the  service  and  the  credit  of  the 


Chap.  XXV LI.] 


AFFAIRS  AT  PLAQUEMINE,  LA. 


197 


army  that  the  forces  which  had  evacuated  Plaquemine  should  return 
immediately.  I therefore  at  once  ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel  Storrs, 
of  the  Fifty-second  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  to  proceed  on  the  Itasca 
to  Donaldsonville  and  assume  command  of  the  detachment  of  the  One 
hundred  and  sixty-second  New  York  and  Fifty-second  Massachusetts 
Volunteers,  to  return  to  Plaquemine  and  occupy  that  post  until  further 
orders  from  competent  authority.  I also  ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Storrs,  in  case  re-enforcements  were  received  from  below,  or  in  case  he 
was  satisfied  that  the  re  enforcement  from  the  Fifty-second  Massachu- 
setts Volunteers  was  no  longer  needed,  to  return  with  the  detachment 
of  the  Fifty-second  to  this  post. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  GROVER, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


A. 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Plaquemine , La.,  January  3,  1863. 
General  Commanding  at  Baton  Rouge  : 

Having  been  sent  here  with  three  companies  of  infantry  to  co-operate 
with  the  naval  force,  and  having  landed,  taking  possession  of  the  town, 
Lieutenant  Perkins’  cavalry,  75  strong,  joining  me  here  from  Bayou 
Goula,  I have  therefore  1G1  infantry,  75  cavalry.  From  scouting  par- 
ties sent  out,  the  enemy  is  no  doubt  in  considerable  force  on  Bayou 
Grosse  Tete,  crossing  below  Bayou  Plaquemine  at  Indian  Village. 

Last  evening  we  expected  an  attack,  and  at  1 o’clock  our  pickets  were 
fired  upon  by  the  enemy,  at  least  80  strong.  I immediately  signaled 
Gunboat  No.  8,  which  threw  shell  among  them,  silencing  their  fire.  This 
morning  we  were  again  attacked,  but  through  the  promptness  of  Lieu- 
tenant Perkins’  vedettes  they  were  again  repulsed.  I would  earn- 
estly ask  for  some  re-enforcements.  With  from  200  to  300  more  men  I 
can  assuredly  hold  this  place,  with  gunboats  co-operating. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  BOGART, 

Major  One  hundred  and  sixty-second  New  York  Volunteers. 

B. 

Donaldsonville,  La.,  January  4,  1863. 
Brigadier-General  Grover  : 

I would  respectfully  report  the  evacuation  of  Plaquemine  by  my 
small  forces,  for  the  following  reasons : 

Lieutenant  Perkins’  scout  reported  the  enemy  in  force  at  Indian  Vil- 
lage, at  least  5,000  strong,  with  artillery  and  cavalry.  Their  cavalry 
was  below  at  Dr.  Stone’s  and  Mr.  Gay’s  plantations.  Colonel  Sibley, 
or  rather  General  Sibley,  was  in  command  of  their  forces.  Upon  con- 
sultation with  Lieutenant  Perkins,  upon  whose  authority  I relied  im- 
plicitly, it  was  decided  better  for  me  to  evacuate.  My  orders  were  not 
to  hold  the  town,  only  to  co-operate  with  the  naval  force.  Your  re-en- 
forceinents  did  not  arrive  until  after  dark.  Captain  Perkins  will  report 
in  detail.  I send  my  detailed  report  to  the  headquarters  from  which  I 
received  my  orders. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  BOGART, 

Major  One  hundred  and  sixty-second  New  York  Volunteers . 


. 198 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 
[Inclosure  No.  2.] 


Headquarters  First  Louisiana  Volunteers, 
Donaldsonville , January  5,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Department  of  the  Gulf: 

Sir:  I have  to  report  that  Major  Bogart,  of  the  One  hundred  and 
sixty-second  New  York  Volunteers,  arrived  here  yesterday  morning 
with  a detachment  of  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-second,  which  had 
been  stationed  at  Plaquemine,  he  having  evacuated  the  place  the  even- 
ing previous.  He  left  for  New  Orleans  in  the  afternoon  with  his  com- 
mand. 

A re-enforcement  which  had  been  sent  to  Major  Bogart  from  Baton 
Rouge  on  the  3d  instant  arrived  at  Plaquemine  on  the  afternoon  of  that 
day,  but  finding  no  gunboats  there,  concluded  that  all  was  not  right, 
and  came  on  down  here  and  reported  to  Major  Bogart,  who  ordered  the 
force  of  200  men  to  return  to  Baton  Rouge  by  first  conveyance. 

Captain  Ransom,  of  the  gunboat,  went  up  to  Plaquemine  yesterday 
afternoon  to  recover  25,000  cartridges  which  Major  Bogart  left  behind, 
which  he  succeeded  in  doing  without  any  trouble. 

The  citizens  reported  to  Captain  Ransom  that  the  enemy  were  not 
in  force  on  the  Grosse  Tete  (which  agrees  with  my  information),  and 
that  on  the  evening  of  the  3d,  when  Major  Bogart  supposed  that  he  was 
attacked,  the  enemy  was  not  nearer  than  9 miles. 

I was  upon  the  point  of  sending  the  detachment  from  the  Fifty-second 
Massachusetts  back  to  Plaquemine  when  Lieutenant-Colonel  Storrs, 
from  Baton  Rouge,  came  down  with  orders  from  General  Grover  to  go 
back  and  occupy  the  place. 

Lieutenant  Krause,  of  this  regiment,  has  just  returned  from  a scout  in 
the  country  bordering  on  the  Manchac,  New  River,  and  the  Amite  River. 
He  succeeded  in  breaking  up  a small  camp  of  guerrillas  near  Civic’s 
Landing,  on  the  Amite.  The  country  between  this  place  and  Baton 
Rouge  and  the  Mississippi  and  Amite  Rivers  is  clear  of  guerrillas.  He 
brought  in  15  rebel  soldiers,  some  of  whom  are  on  furlough  and  some 
deserters. 

I will  report  immediately  with  regard  to  the  depredations  said  to 
have  been  committed  by  men  of  Lieutenant  Krause’s  command  at  Dr. 
Pritchard’s,  which  I have  no  doubt  will  be  satisfactory  to  General 
Banks.  Though  the  men  of  this  regiment  are  not  so  careful  about  step- 
ping on  the  toes  of  rebels  as  some  others,  yet  I think  that  it  is  as  free 
from  the  charge  of  plunder  as  any  other  in  the  department.  I believe 
discipline  and  subordination  to  be  the  first  requisite  of  the  soldier,  and 
when  indiscriminate  pillage  and  unauthorized  acts  of  plunder  are  per- 
mitted discipline  cannot  exist. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

R.  E.  HOLCOMB, 

Commanding  First  Louisiana  Volunteers. 


Headquarters  Division, 

Baton  Rouge,  January  8,  1863. 

Assistant  Adjutant-General, 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf,  New  Orleans : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that  I communicated  to  you  some  days 
ago  that  Major  Bogart,  of  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-second  New  York 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


‘RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX. 


199 


Volunteers,  in  command  of  161  men  of  his  regiment,  posted  at  Plaque- 
mine,  left  his  post  without,  as  far  as  I can  learn,  any  authority,  and 
that  upon  its  being  reported  to  me  I,  having  previously  sent  him  the 
desired  re-enforcements,  dispatched  an  officer  (his  senior)  to  take  com- 
mand of  Major  Bogart’s  detachment  and  the  detachment  of  re-euforce- 
ments  and  to  return  with  the  same  to  Plaquemine,  there  to  await  farther 
orders  from  proper  authority.  I have  just  learned  from  the  report  of 
that  officer  that  twelve  hours  previous  to  his  arrival  at  Donaldsonville 
Major  Bogart,  with  his  command  proper,  had  gone  to  New  Orleans. 

1 do  not  know  by  whose  authority  Major  Bogart  was  ordered  to 
Plaquemine,  but  as  far  as  I can  learn  he  seems  to  have  abandoned  his 
post  without  cause  and  in  a disreputable  manner.  I think  it  is  due  to 
the  service  that  the  conduct  of  that  officer  be  inquired  into.  I reported 
to  you  also  that  I had  re-established  the  post  with  a detachment  from 
the  Fifty-second,  which  I have  re-enforced  to  400  strong.  Will  you 
please  give  me  instructions  if  I am  to  keep  up  that  post  or  not  % If  the 
post  is  to  be  kept  up  would  it  not  be  well  to  send  a regiment  from  below 
to  garrison  it ! 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  GROVER, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


JANUARY  1,  1863.— Recapture  of  Galveston,  Tex.,  by  Confederate  forces. 

REPORTS,  ETC/ 


No.  1.— Maj.  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  the 
Gulf. 

No.  2.— Lieut.  Charles  A.  Davis,  Adjutant  Forty-second  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  3.— Mr.  W.  S.  Long,  Engineer  Department,  U.  S.  Army. 

No!  4.- Maj.  Gen.  J.  Bankhead  Magruder,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  District  of  Texas, 
New  Mexico,  and  Arizona,  and  including  operations  October  — , 1862-Fob- 
ruary  26,  1863,  with  congratulatory  orders  and  correspondence  relative  to 
flag  of  truce,  etc. 


No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks,  U.  8.  Army,  commanding  De- 
partment of  the  Gulf. 

' Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans,  La.,  January  3,  1863. 

General  : It  becomes  my  painful  duty  to  transmit  the  accompany- 
ing brief  telegraphic  account  of  an  unfortunate  affair  which  took  place 
at  Galveston  on  the  1st  instant.  The  account  was  received  but  a few 
moments  since.  I detain  the  steamer  to  take  this  dispatch.  The  troops 
at  Galveston  were  three  companies  of  the.  Forty-second  Massachusetts, 
Colonel  Burrell,  and  the  Second  Vermont  Battery,  Captain  Holcomb. 

I trust  that  the  detailed  account,  which  I hope  to  receive  in  time  to 


* For  reports  of  United  States  naval  officers,  see  Annual  Report  of  tho  Secretary  of 
the  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


200 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chat.  XXVII. 

go  by  the  next  steamer,  may  prove  that  the  disaster  has  not  been  as 
serious  as  at  first  reported. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  \ Hdqrs.  of  the  Army , Washington , 2).  C. 

[Inclosure.] 

Southwest  Pass,  La., 

January  3,  1863 — 1.45  p.  m. 

Major-General  Banks  : 

I have  received  the  following  dispatch,  which  I hasten  to  communi- 
cate: 

On  Board  Mary  Boardman, 

January  3,  1863 — 12  noon. 

N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf: 

Galvesto  i was  attacked  by  land  and  water  on  the  morning  of  January  1.  Colonel 
Burrell  and  his  men  were  ail  killed  or  taken  prisoners.  Four  rebel  rams  made  an 
attack  on  the  Harriet  Lane  and  carried  her  by  boarding.  Captain  Wainwright  and 
Lieutenant  Lea  killed  and  all  the  men  killed  or  prisoners.  The  captain  of  the  Owasco 
(Wilson)  was  killed.  Commander  Renshaw  blew  up  the  flag-ship  Westfield  to  pre- 
vent her  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  He  was  killed,  and  also  First 
Lieutenant  Zimmerman.  Two  barks  loaded  with  coal  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
rebels.  We  have  some  70  men  from  the  Westfield  on  board.  They  must  have  some 
arrangements  for  taking  charge  of  them  immediately  on  our  arrival,  as  we  have  only 
our  own  crew. 

WM.  L.  BURT, 

Major  and  Aide-de-Camp,  Staff  of  General  Hamilton. 

C.  HUGGINS. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans  La .,  January  7,  1863. 

Sir  : Upon  the  departure  of  the  last  mail  vessel  I forwarded  a dis- 
patch received  at  the  last  moment  from  Major  Burt,  of  the  staff  of  Gen- 
eral Hamilton,  Governor  of  Texas,  giving  a brief  account  of  the  disaster 
at  Galveston,  Tex.  The  chief  incidents  have  since  been  confirmed. 
The  extent  of  the  loss  on  the  part  of  the  Government  is  as  follows : 

The  capture  of  the  Harriet  Lane,  the  destruction  of  the  Westfield  by 
order  of  her  commander,  who  was  killed  by  the  explosion,  and  two  coal 
transports  lying  at  Galveston.  Three  companies  of  the  Forty-second 
Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Colonel  Burrell  commanding,  which  had 
landed  on  the  wharf  under  tbe  protection  of  the  fleet  two  days  before, 
were  also  captured.  The  balance  of  the  regiment,  with  a battery  of 
artillery  and  a detachment  of  Texas  cavalry,  were  on  the  way  to  Gal- 
veston, but  had  not  landed  when  the  attack  was  made.  They  have  all 
returned  to  the  city  of  New  Orleans.  The  loss  of  the  army  is  limited 
to  the  companies  of  the  Forty-second  Massachusetts,  260  men  in  all. 
A full  report  of  the  affair  from  Major  Burt  is  forwarded  to  the  depart- 
ment. It  is  unofficial,  Major  Burt  not  being  mustered  into  the  service 
of  the  United  States,  and  serving  on  the  staff  of  General  Hamilton  by 
direction  of  Governor  Andrew,  of  Massachusetts,  but  his  statements 
are  all  worthy  of  implicit  credit. 

The  attack  upon  the  fleet  had  unquestionably  been  long  considered 


Chap.  XXVTL] 


RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX. 


201 


and  was  very  skillfully  executed.  The  presence  of  the  small  detach- 
ment of  troops  only  added  to  the  means  of  defense  very  slightly  of 
course  and  to  the  extent  of  the  loss.  The  Cambria  returned  from  Gal- 
veston last  evening  with  the  detachment  of  Texan  troops.  She  was  at 
Galveston  forty-eight  hours  without  positive  knowledge  of  what  had 
transpired.  At  that  time  a pilot  came  out  to  take  her  into  the  harbor, 
but  suspicions  having  been  excited  by  the  movements  of  the  people  on 
shore  as  well  as  those  of  the  pilot  himself  he  was  compelled  to  come 
on  board  the  Cambria,  forced  to  disclose  the  condition  of  affairs,  and 
was  brought  to  this  city. 

The  detachment  of  troops  was  sent  to  Galveston  upon  the  suggestion 
of  Admiral  Farragut,  and  upon  the  statement  of  General  Butler  that 
he  had  contemplated  ordering  a small  force  there  to  assist  in  recruiting 
Texas  refugees.  It  was  supposed  that  the  fleet  made  the  occupation  of 
the  part  of  the  island  adjacent  to  the  gunboats  perfectly  secure.  It 
would  not,  however,  have  been  sent  forward  so  soon  after  my  arrival  had 
it  not  been  for  the  impatience  of  General  Hamilton.  When  it  became 
known  that  our  destination  was  New  Orleans  and  not  Texas,  which  was 
not  until  our  arrival  here,  those  connected  with  him  became  very  vio- 
lent, and  denounced  unsparingly  the  Government  and  all  connected  with 
the  expedition  for  what  was  called  bad  faith  in  its  management. 

General  Hamilton  is  not  a bad  man,  but  he  does  not  manifest  great 
force  of  character,  and  is  surrounded  by  men  who  came  here  on  the 
Government  transports,  unbeknown  to  me,  for  base,  speculative  purposes 
and  nothing  else.  I notified  him  of  the  conduct  of  these  men  and  he 
promised  to  correct  it,  but  has  not  yet  done  so.  He  explains  their 
presence  by  saying  that  in  the  North  he  became  indebted  to  them  for 
pecuniary  assistance.  I sent  him  notice  that  they  would  be  required  to 
leave  the  department  if  their  course  was  approved  by  him. 

It  was  mainly  the  impatience  of  these  people  that  prompted  me  to 
forward  the  detachment  to  Galveston,  but  only  upon  the  concurrence 
of  Admiral  Farragut  and  General  Butler  as  to  its  expediency  and  safety. 
Such  is  a full  statement  of  my  participation  in  this  affair. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commander-in-Chief  TJ.  S.  Army. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  December  — , 1862. 

Col.  Isaac  S.  Burrell, 

Forty-second  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers : 

Colonel  : Your  regiment  having  been  ordered  to  Galveston,  you  are 
hereby  placed  in  command  of  that  post.  You  will  execute  such  orders 
as  you  may  receive  from  these  headquarters.  My  instructions  from  the 
Department  of  War  forbid  me  at  present  to  make  any  extended  mili- 
tary movements  in  Texas.  The  situation  of  the  people  ot  Galveston 
makes  it  expedient  to  send  a small  force  there  for  the  purpose  of  their 
protection,  and  also  to  afford  such  facilities  as  may  be  possible  for 
recruiting  soldiers  for  the  military  service  of  the  United  States.  Every 
assistance  in  your  power  will  be  afforded  for  the  complete  attainment  of 
these  objects. 

General  Hamilton  is  appointed  military  governor  of  the  State  of 


202  * 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

Texas,  and  will  be  recognized  by  you  in  that  capacity,  but  your  orders 
you  will  receive  from  these  headquarters. 

Until  the  port  of  Galveston  is  regularly  opened  by  the  Government 
of  the  United  States  no  trade  can  be  carried  on,  and  no  attempt  for 
that  purpose  will  be  recognized  or  countenanced  by  you. 

I rely  fully  on  your  energy,  vigilance,  and  capacity  for  the  performance 
of  the  important  duties  intrusted  to  you.  Do  not  fail  to  make  frequent 
reports  of  all  that  transpires  within  your  command  and  of  whatever  im- 
portant facts  you  may  learn  from  the  enemy  in  Texas  or  from  its  people. 

It  is  not  probable  that  any  successful  movement  can  be  made  upon 
the  main  land  until  our  force  shall  be  considerably  strengthened,  and 
you  will  take  care  not  to  involve  yourself  in  such  difficulty  as  to  en- 
danger the  safety  of  your  command. 

Other  instructions  will  be  sent  to  you  from  time  to  time,  as  occasion 
may  require  and  opportunity  offer. 

N.  P.  BA.NKS, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

[Tnclosure  No.  2.] 

Major-General  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

My  Dear  General  : At  your  request  I have  furnished  the  follow- 
ing brief  and  informal  statement  of  the  affair  at  Galveston,  Tex.,  Jan- 
uary 1,  1863 : ^ . 

I was  on  board  the  transport -propeller  Mary  A.  Boardman,  lying  at 
anchor  near  the  flag-ship  Westfield,  on  the  morning  of  the  1st  instant. 
The  first  warning  of  an  attack  was  the  appearance  of  four  rebel  gun- 
boats coming  down  the  bay  toward  the  city  at  about  3 a.  m.  At  this 
time  the  moon  was  shining  brightly  and  objects  could  be  seen  at  con- 
siderable distance,  but  soon  after  the  moon  went  down  and  it  became 
hazy  and  very  dark.  Soon  after  the  moon  went  down  a land  attack  upon 
the  city  was  signaled  from  the  Harriet  Lane,  which  lay  at  the  extreme 

upper  part  of  the  city.  _ , 

The  Westfield,  in  endeavoring  to  run  up  to  the  assistance  ot  the  town, 
got  aground  on  Pelican  Island,  near  us,  where  she  lay  useless  through 
the  fight,  and  where  she  was  finally  blown  up  by  Commander  Eenshaw. 
The  gunboat  Clifton  came  to  her  assistance,  but  was  unable  to  get  her 
off,  and  while  she  was  there  the  attack  commenced  upon  the  Harriet 
Lane  and  upon  the  town.  This  was  about  4 o’clock  in  the  morning. 

The  only  land  force  in  Galveston  consisted  of  Companies  D,  G,  and 
I,  of  the  Forty-second  Massachusetts,  under  the  command  of  Colonel 
Burrell.  These  men  were  located  upon  one  of  the  wharves,  and  the 
attack  upon  them  appeared  to  be  with  musketry  and  artillery  in  the 
streets  and  from  the  buildings,  two  pieces  of  artillery  appearing  to  be 
located  in  the  second  story  of  a warehouse,  controlling  the  wharf. 

The  attack  made  at  the  same  time  upon  the  Harriet  Lane  was  by  two 
rebel  gunboats  running  directly  on  and  closing  with  her,  and  by  artil- 
lery from  the  shore  and  musketry  from  the  buildings. 

As  the  Clifton  returned  from  the  Westfield  toward  the  wharf  a bat- 
tery of  two  guns,  which  had  been  placed  on  Fort  Point  during  the  night, 
opened  upon  her.  These  guns  had  been  placed  in  the  same  fortifica- 
tions from  which  the  gunboats  had  driven  the  rebels  when  we  first  took 
possession  of  the  city.  The  fortifications  had  not  been  leveled  by  our 
forces  after  securing  possession  of  them.  .. 

The  firing  was  continuous  in  the  city  and  from  the  gunboats  until 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX. 


203 


daylight,  the  firing  from  the  Harriet  Lane  slacking  first.  At  this 
time  two  rebel  gunboats,  one  partially  burned  and  sunk,  appeared  close 
by  the  Harriet  Lane,  and  two  more,  one  a ram,  covered  with  a roof 
plated  with  bars  of  iron  resembling  railroad  iron,  and  another,  a Missis- 
sippi steamboat,  shielded  by  cotton  to  the  height  of  25  feet  or  more, 
the  top  covered  thickly  with  sharpshooters,  were  lying  directly  opposite 
our  vessel,  heading  toward  the  wharf,  and  one  other  Mississippi  boat, 
some  2 miles  farther  up  the  bay,  was  coming  down. 

It  proved  that  the  Harriet  Lane  had  been  carried  by  boarding,  her 
captain,  Wain wright,  killed,  her  first  lieutenant,  Lea,  mortally  wounded, 
and  all  her  men  and  officers  either  killed  or  taken  prisoners,  some  130 
in  number.  Soon  the  Owasco  and  Clifton,  gunboats,  raised  white  flags, 
and  Captain  Law  started  in  his  boat  from  the  Clifton  to  the  Westfield, 
and  had  an  interview  with  Commander  Eenshaw.  Our  vessel,  the  Mary 
Boardman,  was  then  alongside  the  Westfield,  having  endeavored  to 
haul  her  off.  As  soon  as  Captain  Law  left  for  his  own  vessel  Com- 
mander Eenshaw  sent  an  officer  to  us  saying  that  he  was  going  to  blow 
up  the  Westfield,  and  requesting  us  to  assist  in  taking  off  her  men  and 
whatever  could  be  saved.  I remonstrated  with  this  officer  that  it  was 
unnecessary,  and  that  the  whole  force  could  lie  by  and  protect  the 
Westfield  until  the  tide  turned  (which  was  then  running  out),  when 
she  would  float  and  we  could  save  her,  and  as  she  wras  heavily  armed 
and  of  light  draught  she  was  invaluable.  I also  requested  the  com- 
mander to  come  on  board.  This  remonstrance  was  repeated  to  every 
officer  that  came  to  my  vessel  with  men.  We  received  on  board 
the  men  and  their  baggage,  with  the  property  of  the  ship,  until  our 
decks  would  hold  no  more,  and  the  rest  was  placed  on  the  transport 
Saxon. 

At  about  10  a.  m.,  while  the  commander’s  boat  and  crew  and  second 
cutter  and  crew  were  at  the  Westfield  to  receive  the  last  men  the  com- 
mander, having  poured  turpentine  over  the  forward  magazine  and  just 
over  where  she  was  aground,  set  her  on  fire  with  his  own  hand.  He 
stepped  down  into  his  boat,  in  which  were  First  Lieutenant  Zimmer- 
man, Chief  Engineer  Greene,  and  two  oarsmen.  The  magazine  immedi- 
ately exploded,  tearing  the  bow  of  the  vessel  open  and  blowing  her  to 
pieces  to  the  water’s  edge  and  back  to  the  smoke-stack. 

After  the  explosion  no  living  thing  could  be  seen.  She  did  not  sink, 
being  aground ; and  her  guns  aft,  which  were  double-shotted  and  run  out, 
as  the  flames  should  reach  them,  threatened  us,  at  the  short  distance  we 
were  from  her,  with  destruction,  which  might  have  been  foreseen  when 
she  was  fired. 

Acting  Sailing-Master  Smalley  took  charge  of  us  as  pilot  and  we 
started  for  the  bar.  It  was  evident  that  we  could  not  get  over  with 
what  we  had  on  board,  and  we  threw  overboard  everything  on  deck 
except  what  belonged  to  the  men  of  the  Westfield.  We  went  over  the 
bar,  striking  very  heavily,  followed  by  the  Saxon,  two  small  schooners, 
the  Clifton,  Owasco,  and  Sachem,  gunboats,  leaving  the  Harriet  Lane 
in  the  hands  of  the  rebels,  with  two  harks  loaded  with  coal,  and  one 
small  schooner. 

All  the  men  of  the  Forty-second  Eegiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers 
who  were  on  shore,  except  the  adjutant,  were  killed  or  taken  prisoners; 
he  escaped  in  a small  boat.  No  attempt  was  made  by  the  officers  of  any 
of  the  gunboats  to  communicate  with  the  city,  and  no  effort  to  obtain 
the  wounded  or  to  learn  who  were  killed  or  who  wounded  in  any  way. 
Captain  Law,  who  was  the  senior  officer,  ordered  the  men  on  board  our 
vessels  to  New  Orleans,  Before  starting  I informed  him  that  the  trans- 


204 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,- TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYTL 

port  Cambria,  from  New  Orleans,  would  be  at  Galveston  with  men 
within  forty- eight  hours,  and  to  warn  her  off. 

We  brought  to  New  Orleans  between  70  and  80  men  from  the  West' 
field,  arriving  on  the  morning  of  January  4,  and  a few  hours  later  I 
was  astonished  to  learn  that  we  were  followed  by  all  the  gunboafs  and 
that  Galveston  Harbor  had  been  left  entirely  unprotected. 

The  rebel  land  force,  probably  not  less  than  3,000  men,  was  com- 
manded by  General  Magruder.  The  railroad  and  bridge  from  the  main- 
land to  Galveston,  which  had  never  been  cut  by  us  and  which  was  in 
the  full  control  and  use  of  the  rebels,  furnished  them  an  easy  and  rapid 
means  of  transportation  and  attack,  and  was  undoubtedly  one  of  the 
prime  causes  of  the  disaster. 

EeSpeCtfu115'’  WM.  L.  BURT, 

Major  and  Aide-de-Camp  to  Brigadier-General  Hamilton. 


[Inclosure  No.  3.] 


Headquarters, 

Galveston , Tex.,  December  29, 1862. 

Sir:  In  obedience  to  orders,  upon  arriving  at  this  place  on  the  even- 
ing of  the  24th  instant,  after  consulting  with  the  commander  of  the 
blockading  fleet,  I landed  the  three  companies  of  my  command,  which 
were  with  me  upon  the  transport  Saxon,  on  the  end  of  Kuhn  s v\  hart, 
and  quartered  them  in  the  warehouse  there.  I have  taken  possession 
of  the  city  as  boldly  as  I could  with  the  small  force  at  my  command, 
and  have"  thoroughly  reconnoitered  the  built-upon  portions  of  the  city 
up  to  within  range  of  their  battery  at  Eagle  Grove,  which  is  apparently 
well  built,  mounting  three  guns.  They  have  also  one  gun  at  the  draw, 
which  is  about  midway  of  the  bridge.  Upon  Virginia  Point  they  have 
a strong  battery,  mounted  with  heavy  guns.  From  the  best  information 
obtainable  I judge  their  force  in  this  immediate  vicinity  to  be  about 


2,000  strong.  . _ . n 

During  the  day  we  control  the  city,  but  at  night,  owing  to  our  small 
force  (as  the  balance  of  my  regiment  has  not  yet  arrived),  I am  obliged 
to  draw  in  the  pickets  to  the  wharf  on  which  we  are  quartered.  I 
think  there  are  still  living  upon  the  island  about  3,000  persons,  a large 
proportion  of  whom  are  women  and  children.  A great  many  of  these 
people  are  almost  entirely  destitute  of  the  means  of  subsistence,  as  the 
enemy  will  not  allow  anything  to  be  brought  over  from  the  mam-land, 
thinking  doubtless  to  make  them  disloyal  by  starvation.  The  naval 
officer  in  command  has  contributed  all  he  could  spare  from  his  stores 
and  my  men  have  shared  their  bread  rations  with  them.  I believe  the 
larger  part  of  the  residents  now  here  to  be  loyal  and  really  desire  to 
remain  in  the  city,  aud  that  common  humanity  calls  upon  us  to  render 
them  assistance.  This,  in  my  judgment,  can  best  be  done  by  placing 
the  city  under  martial  law  as  soon  as  my  force  is  large  enough,  and 
forcing  the  rich,  who  are  mainly  the  secessionists,  to  feed  the  poor.  I 
would  most  respectfully  urge  upon  your  consideration  the  necessity  of 
sending  provisions  for  immediate  relief.  These  can  be  sold  to  them  at 
Government  prices,  thus  conferring  a real  charity,  without  subjecting 
them  to  the  mortification  of  being  beggars.  Under  the  existing  circum- 
stances I have  thought  it  best  to  send  one  of  my  staff,  Quartermaster 
Burrell,  and  Mr.  Long,  the  engineer,  who  accompanied  us  here,  to  report 
to  you  in  person.  These  gentlemen  will  explain  in  detail  tne  state  ot 
affairs,  and  the  importance  of  the  knowledge  which  they  can  convey. 


Chap.  XXVTL] 


RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX. 


205 


to  you  has,  in  my  judgment,  authorized  me  in  ordering  the  Saxon  back 
to  New  Orleans,  which  I humbly  trust  will  meet  your  approbation. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

ISAAC  S.  BURRhLLj 

Colonel , Comdg,  Forty-second  Begt.  Massachusetts  Vols. 


[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

On  Board  Steamer  Cambria, 

January  7,  1863. 

Major-General  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

The  steamer  Cambria,  with  two  companies  of  the  First  Texas  Cav- 
alry, horses  of  the  Second  Vermont  Battery,  and  a great  number  of 
men,  women,  and  children  (refugees),  left  New  Orleans  for  Galveston 
December  31,  1862,  at  0 p.  m.  Arrived  outside  the  island  January  2, 
at  7 p.  m.  Strong  wind  and  high  sea  running.  No  sign  of  pilot,  con- 
sequently came  to  anchor. 

Next  morning,  3d  instant,  weather  very  hazy  and  high  sea.  We  com- 
menced beating  about,  in  the  hopes  of  a pilot  coming  to  us,  up  till  12  m. 
No  such  success,  during  which  time  several  of  the  refugees,  being  well 
acquainted  with  the  bar,  were  desirous  of  piloting  us  in.  The  captain 
would  not  listen  to  any  such  suggestions.  They  then  offered  to  take 
one  of  the  life-boats  and  go  for  a pilot,  to  which  he  also  dissented,  but 
upon  the  earnest  solicitations  of  officers  and  refugees,  amounting  almost 
to  a demand,  he  reluctantly  consented,  and  the  boat  left,  manned  by  six 
men,  two  of  whom  were  soldiers  and  four  refugees.  This  was  about  12.30 
p.  m.  The  colonel  sent  a pressing  letter  to  the  officer  in  command, 
stating  that  we  were  in  distress,  the  horses  on  board  suffering  from  the 
roughness  of  the  weather,  and  demanding  immediate  assistance. 

About  7 p.  m.  the  weather  cleared  to  bright  moonlight;  sea  more 
calm.  The  boat  did  not  return,  and  hopes  for  her  safety  were  given 
up,  as  it  was  supposed  she  might  have  swamped  in  crossing  the  bar. 
At  this  time  three  shells  were  plainly  visible  as  having  been  fired  from 
near  the  city,  which  was  the  first  cause  of  uneasiness  on  the  part  of  our 
captain.  On  the  supposed  warning  the  colonel  had  his  men  called 
together  and  put  in  readiness  in  case  of  emergency.  Nothing  further 
transpired,  however,  during  the  night. 

The  next  morning  the  day  broke  clear,  the  sun  shining  bright,  with 
the  city  and  its  sui  roundings  in  full  view.  We  hoisted  pilot-jack  and 
blew  the  whistle  about  8 o’clock,  which  signal  was  answered  by  pilot- 
boat  inside  the  bar,  near  a schooner,  and  a bark  with  American  colors 
flying,  which  proved  to  be  the  bark  Cavallo.  After  the  boat  came 
toward  us  she  tacked,  apparently  running  and  sounding  the  bar.  She 
then  went  toward  the  bark  and  lowered  her  jack,  signifying  that  she 
had  put  the  pilot  on  board.  In  the  mean  time  the  pilot-boat  shot  up 
alongside  and  asked,  “How  much  water  do  you  draw,  captain  1”  To 
which  he  replied,  “Nine  and  a half  to  ten  feet.”  The  answer  then  was, 
“You  can  go  in;  there  is  plenty  of  water  on  the  bar.”  “Are  you  a 
pilot1?”  was  then  demanded.  Reply,  “No,  but  you  can  follow  us  in.” 
Question.  “Where  is  the  pilot  ?”  Answer.  “Onthebark.”  Question. 
“Why  does  he  not  come  out  for  us?”  Answer.  “Because  he  had 
special  orders  to  take  the  bark  out  first.”  In  the  mean  time  we  separated 
some  distance.  Again  the  pilot-boat  shot  up  alongside,  when  the  cap- 
tain ordered  the  pilot  on  board,  when  he  replied,  “There  are  too  many 
men  there  for  me.”  He  then  immediately  hauled  jib-sheet  to  windward, 


206 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

slacked  off  the  main-sheet,  and  put  his  helm  hard  to  port,  with  the  in- 
tention of  getting  clear.  Seeing  this,  the  captain  ordered  the  steamer 
backed,  which  placed  the  steamer  between  the  pilot-boat  and  the  bar. 
The  captain  then  called  out,  u Stand  by  your  guns,  fore  and  aft,  and  be 
ready  to  hre.  Do  not  open  your  port-holes  before  the  colonel  gives  the 
word.”  The  pilot-boat  then  came  to  and  the  pilot  said  he  would  come 
on  board.  The  colonel  asked  him  who  was  in  command.  His  imme- 
diate reply  was,  “ Captain  Wainwright.”  After  several  unimportant 
questions  and  answers  he  was  recognized  and  called  by  name  by  one 
of  the  refugees,  by  which  he  was  apparently  confused  and  lost  his  pres- 
ence of  mind.  Seeing  that  the  captain  looked  upon  him  with  marked 
suspicion,  he  said.  u Gentlemen,  I cannot  lie  any  longer ; Galveston  is  in 
the  hands  of  the  Confederacy.”  The  captain,  hearing  that  the  Harriet 
Lane  was  in  their  hands  and  as  she  was  reported  uninjured,  immedi- 
ately put  the  steamer  to  sea.  The  counterfeit  pilot,  T.  W.  Payne,  was 
of  course  detained  on  board  as  prisoner.  The  pilot-boat  and  crew  were 
permitted  to  depart,  as  the  colonel  thought  by  their  returning  it  would 
give  us  more  time  to  escape. 

About  9 o’clock  on  the  evening  of  tbe  5th  ultimo  we  met  the  United 
States  sloop-of-war  Brooklyn,  and  was  boarded  by  an  officer  from  her, 
to  whom  we  gave  the  foregoing  information.  We  afterward  learned 
that  the  boat  sent  ashore  with  the  6 men  was  detained  and  the  men 
taken  prisoners. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

LEWIS  BACH, 

Acting  Purser  Steamer  Cambria. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Charles  A.  Davis , Adjutant  Forty-second  Massachusetts 

Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Forty-second  Massachusetts  Militia, 

In  Camy  at  Carrollton , La.,  January  10,  1863. 

General:  I have  to  report  that  on  the  21st  of  December,  1862,  Com- 
panies G,  D,  and  I,  of  this  regiment,  under  the  command  of  Col.  I S. 
Burrell,  left  New  Orleans  in  the  steamer  Saxon  for  Galveston  (the  re- 
maining companies  were  to  proceed  thither  as  fast  as  they  arrived  here). 
Colonel  Burrell’s  orders  were  to  land  and  take  post.  He  also  received 
from  the  chief  quartermaster  same  verbal  advice  to  consult  with  the 
commander  of  the  naval  force  there  in  reference  to  the  course  he  would 
pursue  on  arrival.  We  arrived  there  on  the  24th.  Colonel  Burrell  im- 
mediately consulted  with  Commodore  Renshaw,  of  the  gunboat  West- 
field,  in  command,  and  by  his  advice  we  landed  on  Kuhn’s  Wharf  on  the 
morning  of  the  25th.  On  several  subsequent  occasions  the  officers  of 
the  gunboat  assured  us  of  entire  and  perfect  safety  in  our  position 
against  any  attack  of  the  enemy. 

About  3 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  January  1,  1863,  soon  after  the 
moon  had  gone  down,  our  pickets  were  driven  in  by  the  enemy,  who 
were  advancing  with  their  artillery.  We  instantly  formed  in  line  on 
the  wharf  behind  our  barricades,  and  at  the  same  time  we  signalized 
the  gunboats  that  the  enemy  were  upon  us. 

The  enemy  then  opened  fire  on  us  with  his  artillery,  which  was  re- 
sponded to  by  the  gunboats.  Our  quarters  had  been  a wooden  build- 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX. 


207 


ing  on  the  wharf,  which  we  had  barricaded  on  the  inside.  We  had 
also  barricaded  the  wharf  in  two  places.  At  this  building  most  of  the 
enemy’s  shots  were  directed,  and  it  was  there  that  most  of  our  damage 
was  received.  An  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  capture  us  at  one  time  be- 
fore daylight  was  successfully  resisted  by  our  men. 

Soon  after  daylight  we  discovered  four  rebel  gunboats  and  a ram 
making  for  our  fleet.  They  succeeded  in  capturing  the  Harriet  Lane. 
At  8 o’clock  a.  m.  a flag  of  truce  was  raised  by  the  enemy  on  the  Har- 
riet Lane  and  on  shore.  Flags  of  truce  were  then  raised  by  the  several 
gunboats  and  finally  by  Colonel  Burrell  on  the  wharf.  Colonel  Burrell, 
not  having  any  information  as  to  the  reason  of  this  cessation  of  firing, 
then  ordered  me  to  go  on  board  the  gunboats  and  find  out  the  object 
of  the  flags  of  truce,  and  also  to  get  the  gunboats  to  come  up  to  the 
wharf  and  take  our  men  off,  the  enemy  being  too  strong  for  us  to  con- 
tend against  on  shore.  I got  on  board  the  O wasco,  the  Westfield  being 
aground  some  3 miles  farther  off.  Captain  Law,  of  the  Clifton,  had  gone 
on  board  the  Westfield,  and  while  awaiting  his  return,  in  order  to  get  an 
answer  to  my  request,  I saw  from  the  deck  of  the  Owasco  our  men  being 
marched  off  prisoners  by  the  enemy.  This  was  done  while  the  flags  of 
truce  were  still  flying  at  all  points.  On  Captain  Law’s  return  he  in- 
formed me  that  the  gunboats  would  proceed  to  sea  immediately;  so, 
finding  our  men  had  been  captured,  by  advice  of  naval  officers  I re- 
mained on  board  the  gunboat  and  proceeded  to  New  Orleans  and  re- 
ported in  person  to  Major-General  Banks. 

I do  not  think  over  20  of  our  troops  were  wounded  and  I do  not  know 
that  any  were  killed.  In  addition  to  the  three  companies  mentioned, 
with  their  officers,  there  were  taken  prisoners  Col.  I.  S.  Bnrrell,  Surg.  A. 
J.  Cummings,  Chaplain  George  J.  Sanger;  also  Lieut.  B.  S.  Stowell,  of 
Company  E. 

We  had  intrenching  tools  for  500  men,  some  thirty  days’  commissary 
supplies,  with  three  months’  medical  stores,  and  about  25,000  rounds  of 
ammunition,  all  of  which  were  lost,  as  also,  I regret  to  say,  were  both 
of  our  regimental  colors.  The  force  of  the  enemy  on  shore  was  not  less 
than  3,000  troops,  with  some  twenty  pieces  of  artillery,  most  of  them 
being  apparently  12-pounders,  with  some  rifled  guns.  They  had  also 
planted  on  the  eastern  part  of  the  island  three  30-pounder  rifled  Par- 
rott guns. 

According  to  their  own  account  there  were  not  less  than  the  same 
number  of  troops  on  their  various  gunboats.  I know  nothing  of  the 
loss  of  the  enemy,  but  judge  it  must  have  been  large.  The  gunboat 
Westfield,  being  aground,  was  blown  up,  to  prevent  its  falling  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy,  Commander  Renshaw,  with  four  of  his  chief  offi- 
cers and  six  of  his  men,  being  blown  up  in  her. 

I have  to  say  that  everything  possible  was  done  by  our  men  that 
could  be.  They  held  clear  the  wharf  on  which  we  were  situated  until 
the  flags  of  truce  were  raised;  also  drove  the  enemy  from  one  of  his 
guns,  and  by  their  well-directed  fire  prevented  its  being  retaken  again 
during  the  action. 

The  remaining  seven  companies  of  the  regiment  are  now  in  camp  at 
this  place,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  J.  Stedman. 

1 have  the  honor  to  remain,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

CHAS.  A.  DAYIS, 

Adjutant  Forty-second  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  Schouler, 

Adjutant-  General  of  Massachusetts. 


208 


W FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTt 
NO.  3. 

Report  of  Mr.  W.  8.  Long , Engineer  Department , U.  S.  Army. 

Engineer  Office,  January  17,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : r 

Sir:  I submit  herewith  the  report  of  my  assistant,  Mr.  W.  S.  Long, 
who  accompanied  the  Forty-second  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers 
to  Galveston  and  was  present  during  the  engagement  on  the  morning 
of  January  1,  1863.  - 

Accompanying  the  report  is  a map  of  the  city  and  surroundings  and 
a sketch  of  the  barricade  constructed  by  our  troops  on  the  wharf.  * 
This  barricade  undoubtedly  saved  the  lives  of  several  of  our  men. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  C.  HOUSTON, 

Major  and  Aide-de-Camp , Chief  Engineer. 

[Inclosure.] 

New  Orleans,  La.,  January  10,  1863. 

Maj.  D.  C.  Houston, 

Chief  Engineer , Department  of  the  Gulf : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  account  of  the  attack 
on  the  United  States  forces  at  Galveston,  Tex.,  on  the  morning  of  the 
1st  of  January,  1863  : . 

The  troops  sent  from  New  Orleans,  consisting  of  three  companies  (11, 
G and  I)  of  the  Forty-second  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  commanded 
by  Col.  I.  S.  Burrell,  landed  on  Kuhn’s  Wharf  on  the  25th  of  December. 
It  had  been  intended  to  land  on  Pelican  Spit,  where  there  are  United 
States  barracks,  but  Commanders  Renshaw,  Wainwright,  and  Law,  U.  S. 
Navy,  strongly  advised  Colonel  Burrell  to  occupy  the  wharf,  as  the 
best  place,  where  his  men  could  be  under  the  protection  of  the  gunboats. 

Patrols  were  sent  through  the  city  by  day ; pickets  were  posted  at 
the  corners  of  the  main  streets,  and  a lookout  kept  from  the  cupola  of 
Hendley’s  building,  which  commanded  a view  of  the  whole  city  and 
suburbs.  At  night,  however,  the  pickets  were  drawn  in  near  the  head 
of  the  wharf. 

A barricade  was  made  across  the  head  of  the  wharf  and  part  ot  the 
planking  torn  up. 

Four  or  five  refugees,  who  had  been  hiding  in  the  town,  came  to  the 
wharf  and  remained  there  at  night  for  protection,  and  were  of  much 
service  on  account  of  the  information  they  obtained  from  time  to  time 
of  the  enemy’s  movements. 

Parties  of  rebel  cavalry  used  to  come  into  town  at  night.  They  gen- 
erally came  along  the  beach,  where  they  were  concealed  by  the  range  of 
sand  hills  along  the  Gulf  shore,  and  on  reaching  the  suburbs  would 
separate  and  go  through  the  city  in  squads  of  two  or  three.  Before 
daylight  they  would  rendezvous  at  a place  called  Schmidt’s  Garden, 
and  return  to  Eagle  Grove  the  same  way  they  came. 

On  the  30th  December  the  refugees  who  staid  on  the  wharf  reported 
that  there  was  a rumor  in  town  that  an  attack  would  be  made  on  the 
troops  that  night.  In  order  to  be  prepared,  I constructed  a second  bar- 


To  appear  in  Atlas. 


(JHAF.  XXVTJ.] 


RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX. 


209 


ricade  in  tlie  position  shown  by  the  accompanying  sketch  and  the 
planks  torn  up.  This  barricade  was  built  of  planks,  timber,  and  bar- 
rels of  plaster  which  were  found  in  the  warehouse  on  the  wharf.  An 
entrance  was  left  in  the  center,  and  bales  of  cotton  and  bags  of  cotton- 
seed kept  near  by  to  close  it  when  necessary. 

The  pickets  were  driven  in  about  11  o’clock  at  night  by  a party  of 
cavalry,  but  no  attack  was  made  that  night. 

Shortly  after  1 a.  m.  on  the  1st  instant  the  pickets  came  in  and 
reported  that  there  was  artillery  in  the  market  place.  Captain  Sherive 
went  out  to  reconnoiter,  and  confirmed  the  report.  Colonel  Burrell 
posted  his  men  behind  the  barricade,  signaled  to  the  gunboats,  and 
prepared  for  the  attack.  Between  2 and  3 a.  m.  the  enemy  opened  fire 
from  twelve  or  fifteen  pieces  of  field  artillery,  to  which  the  gunboats 
replied. 

The  fire  from  shore  seemed  to  be  directed  principally  upon  the  ware- 
house, where  the  men  slept,  but  as  they  were  all  lying  down  behind  the 
barricade  there  were  but  few  wounded. 

After  an  hour’s  firing  an  attempt  was  made  to  carry  the  wharf  by  an 
infantry  assault,  which  was  repulsed  by  our  men,  and  at  the  same  time 
a gun  was  planted  on  the  end  of  the  brick  wharf  so  as  to  enfilade  the 
barricade,  but  the  gunners  were  driven  from  their  piece  after  the  first 
fire. 

After  the  moon  went  down  (between  4 and  5 o’clock)  the  Harriet 
Lane  was  attacked  by  three  armed  river  boats.  About  500  infantry 
were  on  board  each  boat,  protected  by  cotton  bales,  which  were  piled 
up  on  the  decks.  The  Lane  engaged  the  foremost  of  the  boats,  ran  into 
and  sank  it,  but  her  bowsprit  and  rigging  got  foul  in  some  manner,  and 
before  it  was  cleared  the  other  two  boats  ran  one  on  each  side  of  her, 
and  the  infantry  behind  the  cotton  bales  poured  a terrific  fire  upon  the 
deck  of  the  Lane,  which  in  a very  short  time  almost  annihilated  her 
crew.  The  enemy  then  boarded  and  took  her. 

When  these  three  boats  attacked  the  Lane  two  others  were  seen  to 
the  west  of  Pelican  Island,  threatening  to  come  down  Bolivar  Channel, 
where  the  Westfield  lay.  Commander  Renshaw  attempted  to  get  under 
way,  but  grounded.  The  Clifton  was  signaled  to  and  came  to  the 
assistance  of  the  Westfield,  but  could  not  get  her  off.  By  this  time  the 
rebels  had  got  two  or  three  pieces  of  heavy  artillery  in  position  at  Fort 
Point  and  opened  fire  from  them.  The  Clifton  went  down  toward'  the 
point,  engaged  and  silenced  the  battery,  then  went  up  to  the  town,  and, 
together  with  the  Owasco,  turned  her  guns  upon  the  Lane  and  her 
captors.  After  firing  a short  time  a flag  of  truce  was  raised  on  the 
Lane,  and  a boat  with  some  rebel  officers  put  off  for  the  Clifton.  The 
object  of  this  flag  I did  not  ascertain. 

It  was  now  about  8 o’clock.  Captain  Renshaw  ordered  the  Saxon 
and  Mary  Boardman  to  come  near  the  Westfield  and  take  off  the  crew, 
as  he  intended  to  blow  her  up.  The  crew  was  all  got  off,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  Captain  Renshaw,  Lieutenant  Zimmerman,  two  other  officers, 
and  the  crew  of  the  captain’s  gig,  who  remained  until  the  last  to  fire 
the  vessel.  The  fire  was  applied.  Captain  Renshaw  was  descending 
the  ladder,  and  all  the  rest  were  in  the  boat,  when  (at  8.45)  the  after 
magazine  prematurely  exploded,  and  they  were  all  blown  up  with  the 
vessel. 

The  steamers  then  got  under  way  and  ran  out  under  the  fire  from  the 
battery  at  Fort  Point.  Two  of  the  enemy’s  boats  started  in  pursuit, 
but  did  not  dare  to  cross  the  bar.  The  transports  then  left  for  Hew 
Orleans,  and  the  gunboats  remained  to  blockade  the  harbor. 

14  R R — VOL  XV 


210  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xxvn. 

The  loss  on  shore,  according  to  Adjutant  Davis,  of  the  Forty-second, 
who  escaped,  was  2 killed  and  15  or  20  wounded.  The  remainder  are 
all  prisoners,  as  are  the  survivors  on  board  the  Harriet  Lane. 

The  accompanying  map  shows  the  positions  of  the  vessels  during  the 
engagement,  and  also  the  places  referred  to  in  the  preceding  report, 

T am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  lONu, 
Assistant  Engineer. 

. 


Ho.  4. 

Reports  of  Maj . Gen.  J.  Bankhead  Magruder,  G.  S.  Army , commanding 
District  of  Texas  New  Mexico , and  Arizona , and  including  operations 
October  — , 1862 -February  26,  1863,  with  congratulatory  orders  and 
correspondence  relative  to  flag  of  truce , &c. 


Headquarters, 
Galveston , Tex.,  January  1,  1863. 

General  : This  morning,  the  1st  of  January,  at  3 o’clock,  1 attacked 
the  enemy’s  fleet  and  garrison  at  this  place,  and  captured  the  latter 
and  the  steamer  Harriet  Lane,  two  barks,  and  a schooner  of  the  former. 
The  rest,  some  four  or  five  in  number,  escaped  ignominiously  under 
cover  of  a flag  of  truce.  I have  about  600  prisoners  and  a large  quan- 
tity of  valuable  stores,  arms,  &c.  The  Harriet  Lane  is  very  little  in- 
jured. She  was  carried  by  bqarding  from  two  high-pressure  cotton 
steamers,  manned  by  Texas  cavalry  and  artillery.  The  line  troops  were 
gallantly  commanded  by  Col.  Thomas  Green,  of  Sibley  s brigade,  and 
the  ships  and  artillery  by  Maj.  Leon  Smith,  to  whose  indomitable  en- 
ergy and  heroic  daring  the  country  is  indebted  for  the  successful  execu- 
tion of  a plan  which  I had  conceived  for  the.  destruction  of  the  enemy  s 
fleet.  Colonel  fA  P.]  Bagby,  of  Sibley’s  brigade,  also  commanded  the 
volunteers  from  his  regiment  tor  the  naval  expedition,  in  which  every 
officer  and  every  man  won  for  himself  imperishable  renown. 

I am,  sir,' very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ J.  BANKHEAD  MAGKUDEB, 

Maj.  Gen.,  Comdg.  Dept.,  Diet,  of  'Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


P.  S.__ January  3,  1863.— Commodore  Kenshaw’s  flag-ship,  the  West- 
field,  was  blown  up  bv  him  to  avoid  capture.  Her  armament  is  now, 
however,  being  brought  up  from  the  water  uninjured.  A small  steam 
propeller  was  so  much  injured  while  going  out  under  a flag  ot  truce 
that  she  is  reported  to  have  sunk  on  the  bar.  Thus  the  enemy  only 
saved  three  vessels  out  of  a fleet  of  eight  vessels. 

J# 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  Hew  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Galveston , Tex.,  January  2,  1863. 

Sir  : I forgot  to  mention  in  my  report  that  the  Westfield,  the  flag- 
ship of  Commodore  Renshaw,  was  run  on  shore  during  the  fight  and 


Chap.  XXVII.  j 


RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX. 


211 


blown  up.  The  fleet  consisted  of  the  Harriet  Lane,  the  Westfield,  and 
the  Owasco,  the  Clifton,  the  Sachem,  two  barks,  and  a schooner.  The 
Owasco,  the  Clifton,  and  the  Sachem  escaped  under  a flag  of  truce,  so 
that  the  harbor  of  Galveston  was  entered  under  a flag  of  truce  and  left 
by  the  same  flagrant  violation  of  military  propriety.  We  captured  one 
heavy  rifle  gun,  and  the  guns  of  the  Westfield  will  be  raised  and  it  i> 
hoped  will  soon  be  in  our  use. 

I have  ascertained  upon  further  inquiry  that  the  number  of  prisoners 
who  fell  into  our  hands  was  350,  exclusive  of  officers.  The  ships  of  the 
enemy  which  escaped,  after  anchoring  on  the  outside  of  the  harbor, 
sailed  during  the  night  of  the  1st,  it  is  supposed  for  New  Orleans.  We 
are  preparing  to  give  them  a warm  reception  should  they  return  with 
a larger  fleet.  Our  loss  will  not  exceed  25  'killed  and  50  wounded. 
Captain  Wainwright  and  Lieutenant  Lea,  executive  officer  of  the  Har- 
riet Lane,  were  both  killed,  the  former  by  Maj.  Leon  Smith  in  close 
quarters.  I am  greatly  indebted  to  Brigadier-General  W.  B.  Scurry  and 
Colonel  Debray  for  valuable  services  at  a critical  period  of  the  action, 
and  will  do  justice  to  them  and  other  gallant  officers  in  my  detailed 
report. 


I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper. 


Richmond,  Va.,  January  28, 1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder,  Galveston , Tex. : 

My  Dear  Sir:  I am  much  gratified  at  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
January  6,*  conveying  tome  the  details  of  your  brilliant  exploit  in  the 
capture  of  Galveston  and  the  vessels  in  the  harbor.  The  boldness  of 
the  conception  and  the  daring  and  skill  of  its  execution  were  crowned 
by  results  substantial  as  well  as  splendid.  Your  success  has  been  a 
heavy  blow  to  the  enemy’s  hopes,  and  I trust  will  be  vigorously  and 
effectively  followed  up.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  your  prudence  and  tact 
will  be  as  successful  in  allaying  domestic  discontents  as  your  military 
ability  in  retrieving  our  position  on  the  Texas  coast. 

Your  suggestions  will  receive  the  favorable  consideration  due  to  you. 

The  congratulations  I tender  to  you  and  your  brave  army  are  felt  by 
the  whole  country.  I trust  your  achievement  is  but  the  precursor  of  a 
series  Of  successes  which  may  redound  to  the  glory  and  honor  of  your- 
self and  our  country. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Galveston , February  26,  1863. 

Sir:  On  my  arrival  in  Texas  I found  the  harbors  of  this  coast  in  the 
possession  of  the  enemy,  from  the  Sabine  River  to  Corpus  Christi:  the 
me  ol  the  Rio  Grande  virtually  abandoned,  most  of  the  guns  having 
>een  removed  from  that  frontier  to  San  Antonio,  only  about  300  or  400 
nen  remaining  at  Brownsville.  I resolved  to  regain  the  harbors  if  possi- 
)le  aild  t0  occupy  the  valley  of  the  Rio  Grande  in  force.  The  latter 

* Not  found. 


212 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  fCHAr.  XXVII 


would  be  a very  serious  undertaking,  on  account  of  the  scarcity  of  sup- 
plies in  Mexico  and  the  difficulty  of  transporting  them  across  the 
desert  from  Eastern  Texas.  Having  announced  this  determination  as 
soon  as  I arrived  on  the  Sabine,  Captain  A.  R.  Wier,  of  Cook’s  regiment 
of  artillery,  commanding  a tort  on  that  river,  stepped  forward  and  vol- 
unteered with  his  company  to  man  a steamboat  on  the  Sabine  and  to 
clear  the  Pass.  This  officer  and  this  company  had  the  honor  to  be  the 
first  volunteers  for  the  desperate  enterprise  of  expelling  the  enemy’s 
fleets  from  our  waters. 

I remained  a day  or  two  in  Houston,  and  then  proceeding  to  Virginia 
Point,  on  the  main-land,  opposite  to  Galveston  Island,  I took  with  me 
a party  of  80  men,  supported  by  300  more,  and  passing  through  the 
city  of  Galveston  at  night  I inspected  the  forts  abandoned  by  our 
troops  when  the  city  was  given  up.  I found  the  forts  open  in  the  rear, 
and  taken  in  reverse  by  every  one  of  the  enemy’s  ships  in  the  harbor. 
They  were  therefore  utterly  useless  for  my  purposes.  The  railway 
track  had  been  permitted  to  remain  from  Virginia  Point  to  Galveston, 
and  by  its  means  I purposed  to  transport  to  a position  near  to  the 
enemy’s  fleet  the  heavy  gun  hereinafter  mentioned,  and  by  assembling 
all  the  movable  artillery  that  could  be  collected  together  in  the  neigh- 
borhood I hoped  to  acquire  sufficient  force  to  be  able  to  expel  the 
enemy’s  vessels  from  the  harbor. 

Meeting  here  Capt.  Leon  Smith,  whom  from  my  acquaintance  with  1 
him  in  California  I knew  to  be  of  great  experience  in  steamboat  man- 
agement, I employed  him  in  the  quartermaster’s  department,  placing 
him  as  a volunteer  aide  on  my  staff.  I intrusted  to  his  charge  all  the 
steamers  on  the  Sabine  Eiver  and  in  the  bayous  emptying  into  Galves- 
ton Bay,  and  at  the  same  time  directed  that  those  on  the  Sabine  should 
be  fitted  out  forthwith.  Learning  subsequently  that  the  enemy  had 
landed  at  Galveston  a considerable  force  (strength  unknown),  I directed  1 
Capt.  Leon  Smith,  without  delaying  preparations  on  the  Sabine,  to  fit 
up  as  gunboats  the  steamers  Bayou  City  and  Neptune,  and  to  employ 
two  others  as  tenders,  for  the  purpose  of  supplying  the  larger  vessels 
with  wood.  At  the  same  time  I received  information  that  other  Fed- 
eral troops  were  on  the  way  to  Galveston.  I therefore  directed  that 
the  work  on  the  last-mentioned  steamer  should  be  carried  on  night  and 
day,  and  that  captains  and  crews  should  be  forthwith  provided  for 
them. 

Fearing  that  the  enemy  might  land  troops  at  Galveston  and  fortify 
himself  there,  I determined  to  make  the  first  attack  at  that  point,  with 
the  object  of  destroying  in  detail  his  land  forces  as  fast  as  they  might 
arrive.  Captain  Wier,  who  had  first  volunteered,  was  therefore,  with 
his  company,  ordered  from  the  Sabine  on  board  of  the  Bayou  City. 
Captain  Martin,  commanding  a company  of  cavalry,  having  arrived 
from  New  Iberia,  La.,  volunteered  his  services,  and  was  likewise  assigned 
to  duty  on  board  the  same  steamer.  AVhen  the  boats  designed  for  the 
Galveston  expedition  were  nearly  ready  I called  for  volunteers  from 
Sibley’s  brigade,  then  stationed  in  the  neighborhood,  under  orders  for 
Monroe,  La.  It  is  proper  to  state  that  I had  previously  ascertained 
that  the  services  of  these  troops  at  Galveston  would  not  delay  a moment 
their  departure  for  Louisiana,  they  being  unable  for  want  of  transporta- 
tion to  move  in  that  direction.  This  call  was  for  300  men.  It  was 
promptly  responded  to,  Colonels  Green  and  Bagby  volunteering  to  lead 
the  men  of  their  respective  regiments.  After  these  officers  had  volun- 
teered Col.  .James  Reily,  commanding  the  brigade,  also  ottered  to  lead 
the  troops  from  his  command,  but  his  services  in  that  capacity  were 


Chap.  XXVTT.l 


RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX. 


213 


declined,  as  he  was  then  the  brigade  commander.  About  60  men  of 
Beily’s  regiment  likewise  volunteered,  but  they  did  not  accompany 
the  expedition,  having  been  ordered  back  to  their  regiment  by  Colonel 
Reily  after  having  once  reported  to  Colonel  Green,  who  commanded 
the  land  forces  on  the  steamers.  In  addition  to  these  troops  Lieutenant 
Harby,  late  captain  in  the  revenue  service  of  the  United  States,  with 
a company  of  infantry  acting  as  artillery,  was  ordered  on  board  the 
Neptune.  The  men  destined  for  the  naval  expedition  were  armed  with 
Enfield  rifles,  which  I had  brought  with  me  from  Richmond,  and  with 
double-barrel  shot-guns. 

The  enemy’s  fleet,  then  lying  in  the  waters  of  Galveston,  consisted  of 
the  Harriet  Lane,  carrying  four  heavy  guns  and  two  24-pounder  how- 
itzers, commanded  by  Captain  Wainwright,  U.  S.  Navy;  the  West- 
field,  flag-ship  of  Commodore  Renshaw,  a large  propeller,  mounting 
eight  heavy  guns  ; the  Owasco,  a similar  ship  to  the  Westfield,  mount- 
ing eight  heavy  guns;  the  Clifton,  a steam  propeller, four  heavy  guns; 
the  Sachem,  a steam  propeller,  four  heavy  guns;  two  armed  transports, 
two  large  barks,  and  an  armed  schooner.  The  enemy’s  land  forces 
were  stationed  at  the  end  of  a long  wharf,  and  were  crowded  into  large 
buildings  immediately  under  the  guns  of  the  steamships.  The  ap- 
proaches landward  to  this  position  were  impeded  by  two  lines  of  strong 
barricades,  and  communication  with  the  shore  was  destroyed  by  the 
removal  of  portions  of  the  wharf  in  front  of  the  barricades.  Ifc  thus 
became  necessary  for  our  storming  parties  to  advance  by  wading  through 
the  water,  and  to  enable  them  to  mount  on  the  end  of  the  wharf  fifty 
scaling  ladders  were  constructed.  As  there  were  no  breastworks  or 
other  protection  for  our  artillery  making  the  attack  on  the  enemy’s 
ships  and  land  forces,  my  object  was  to  bring  to  bear  as  heavy  a fire 
of  artillery  as  possible  after  reaching  the  wharves  and  other  points 
selected  for  the  purpose  under  cover  of  the  night.  I knew  that  the 
co-operation  of  the  cotton  boats  with  the  land  forces  would  be  ex- 
tremely difficult  to  attain,  the  distance  the  former  had  to  run  being 
30  miles.  I therefore  had  not  calculated  with  confidence  on  a success 
greater  than  that  of  the  expulsion  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  from  the  harbor. 
If  the  desired  co-operation  should  be  secured  the  result  would  be  im- 
mediately accomplished,  and  would  be  attended  probably  with  the  cap- 
ture or  destruction  of  some  of  the  enemy’s  ships.  If  the  co-operation 
should  fail,  I nevertheless  felt  satisfied  that  by  throwing  up  in  trench - 
ments  at  the  ends  of  the  streets  leading  to  the  water  I could  gradually 
expel  the  fleet  from  the  harbor.  For  this  purpose  intrenching  tools  in 
large  quantities  were  prepared. 

To  attain  the  object  in  view  I had  at  my  disposal  six  siege  pieces, 
the  heaviest  weighing  5,400  pounds.  I also  caused  to  be  constructed 
a railroad  ram,  armed  with  an  8-inch  Dahlgren  and  mounted  on  a rail- 
way flat.  This  flat  and  gun  were  carried  by  railway  to  a point  within 
a few  hundred  yards  of  the  Harriet  Lane.  A large  quantity  of  cotton 
was  transported  in  the  same  way,  with  the  view  of  using  it  in  making 
a breastwork  for  this  gun  should  we  not  succeed  in  our  object  before 
daylight.  In  addition  I had  fourteen  field  pieces,  some  of  them  rifled 
and  some  smooth-bore.  Three  of  the  heaviest  of  the  siege  guns  had  to 
be  transported  9 miles,  the  others  7 miles,  between  sunset  and  12  o’clock, 
under  cover  of  the  darkness  and  over  very  difficult  roads. 

A system  of  rapid  communication  with  our  gunboats  by  telegraph 
and  otherwise  having  been  established,  it  was  arranged  that  the  attack 
should  take  place  at  12  midnight,  the  fire  of  our  land  batteries  consti- 
tuting the  signal  for  the  naval  attack.  Nevertheless  I informed  Com- 


214  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII, 

rnodore  Smith,  lti  command  of  the  naval  expedition,  that  I would  attack 
the  enemy’s  fleet  whether  gunboats  made  their  appearance  or  not. 
The  key  of  the  whole  position  was  Fort  Point,  at  the  mouth  of  the 
harbor,  2 miles  below  the  mouth  of  the  town  [?].  This  fort  was  entirely 
open  in  the  rear,  thus  affording  no  protection  for  our  artillery  against 
the  enemy’s  vessels  inside  of  the  harbor.  The  attack  from  this  point 
was  intrusted  to  Captain  [S.  T.]  Fontaine,  of  Cook’s  regiment  artillery, 
supported  by  six  companies  of  Pyron’s  regiment  dismounted  dragoons, 
under  command  of  the  gallant  Colonel  Pyron.  Wilson’s  battery  of  six 
pieces  was  to  attack  the  enemy  from  the  center  wharf ; the  railroad 
ram  was  sent  to  the  upper  wharf.  The  remainder  of  the  artillery  was 
manned  from  Cook’s  regiment  and  posted  in  eligible  positions.  Colonel 
[J.  J.]  Cook  himself  was  intrusted  with  the  command  of  the  storming 
party  of  about  500  men,  composed  of  details  from  Pyron’s  and  Elmore’s 
regiments  and  Griffin’s  battalion,  and  furnished  with  ladders  to  scale  the 
wharf  on  which  the  enemy’s  land  forces  were  barricaded.  Brig.  Gen. 
W.  R.  Scurry  was  placed  in  command  of  Pyron’s  regiment  and  of  the 
remainder  of  Sibley’s  brigade,  and  Elmore’s  men,  commanded  by  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel [L.  A.]  Abercrombie,  the  latter  acting  as  a support  for 
the  whole.  Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Manly,  of  Cook’s  regiment,  was  ordered  to 
Yirginia  Point  to  defend  that  work,  which  was  our  base  of  operations, 
and  which  was  connected  with  Galveston  Island  by  a railroad  bridge  2 
miles  in  length,  open  to  the  attack  of  the  enemy. 

Leading  the  center  assault  in  person,  I approached  within  two 
squares  of  the  wharves,  at  which  point  I directed  the  horses  of  the 
held  pieces  to  be  removed  from  them  and  placed  behind  some  brick 
buildings  for  shelter  from  the  anticipated  discharges  of  grape  and  can- 
ister. After  allowing  the  lapse  of  what  turned  out  to  be  ample  time  for 
Captain  Fontaine  to  reach  and  occupy  his  more  distant  position  the  guns 
were  placed  along  a line  of  about  2J  miles,  principally  within  the  limits  of 
the  city.  It  having  been  agreed  that  the  fire  of  the  center  gun  should 
furnish  signal  for  a general  attack,  I proceeded  to  carry  out  this  por- 
tion of  the  plan  by  discharging  the  piece  myself.  The  signal  was 
promptly  responded  to  by  an  almost  simultaneous  and  very  effective 
discharge  along  the  whole  line.  The  moon  had  by  that  time  gone 
down,  but  still  the  light  of  the  stars  enabled  us  to  see  the  Federal 
ships.  The  enemy  did  not  hesitate  long  in  replying  to  our  attack.  He 
soon  opened  on  us  from  his  fleet  with  a tremendous  discharge  of  shell, 
which  was  followed  with  grape  and  canister.  Our  men,  however, 
worked  steadily  at  their  guns  under  cover  of  the  darkness.  Colonel 
Cook  now  advanced  with  his  storming  party  to  the  assault ; his  men, 
wading  through  the  water  and  bearing  with  them  their  scaling  lad- 
ders, endeavored  to  reach  the  end  of  the  wharf  on  which  the  enemy 
were  stationed.  Colonel  Cook  was  supported  by  Griffin’s  battalion 
and  by  sharpshooters  deployed  on  the  right  and  left,  in  order  to  dis- 
tract the  enemy’s  attention.  A severe  conflict  took  place  at  this  point, 
our  men  being  exposed  to  a fire  of  grape  and  canister  and  shell  from 
the  ships  as  well  as  of  musketry  from  the  land  forces.  * The  water  was 
deep,  the  wharf  proving  higher  than  was  anticipated,  and  the  scaling- 
ladders,  as  was  reported  to  me  by  Colonel  Cook,  were  found  to  be  too 
short  to  enable  the  men  to  accomplish  their  object.  After  an  obstinate 
contest  the  infantry  were  directed  to  cover  themselves  and  fire  from 
the  buildings  nearest  this  wharf,  which  was  accordingly  done. 

The  enemy’s  fire  was  deadly.  The  ships  being  not  more  than  300 
yards  from  our  batteries  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  maintain  the 
positions  we  had  assumed,  and  some  of  the  artillery-men  were  driven 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX. 


215 


from  their  pieces.  As  daylight,  which  was  now  approaching,  would 
expose  these  men  still  more  to  the  enemy’s  fire,  and  as  our  gunboats 
had  not  vet  made  their  appearance,  I ordered  the  artillery  to  be  with 
drawn  to  positions  which  afforded  more  protection,  but  from  which  the 
fire  could  be  continued  on  the  adversary  with  greater  advantage  to  us. 
Knowing  Captain  Fontaine  to  be  in  a position  the  most  exposed  of  all 
I at  the  same  time  dispatched  a staff  officer  with  instructions  to  have 
his  pieces  likewise  withdrawn.  This  order  reaching  Captain  Fontaine’s 
men  before  it  was  received  by  their  captain,  and  the  concentrated  fire 
from  the  enemy’s  ships,  but  a few  hundred  yards  distant,  having  in- 
creased in  intensity,  they  were  compelled  to  leave  their  pieces.  They 
were,  however,  soon  formed  by  Captain  Fontaine  in  a position  of  greater 
security. 

The  delicate  duty  of  withdra  wing  the  pieces  in  the  city  from  the  close 
vicinity  of  the  enemy  was  intrusted  to  Brigadier-General  Scurry,  who 
performed  it  with  skill  and  gallantry.  Preparations  were  then  ordered 
for  the  immediate  fortification  and  permanent  occupation  ol  the  city. 
But  at  this  moment,  our  fire  still  continuing,  our  gunboats  came  dash- 
ing down  the  harbor  and  engaged  the  Harriet  Lane,  which  was  the 
nearest  of  the  enemy’s  ships,  in  the  most  gallant  style,  running  into 
her,  one  on  each  side,  and  pouring  on  her  deck  a deadly  fire  of  rifles 
and  shot-guns.  The  gallant  Captain  Wainwright  fought  his  ship  ad- 
mirably. He  succeeding  in  disabling  the  Neptune  and  attempted  to 
run  down  the  Bayou  City,  but  he  was  met  by  an  antagonist  of  even 
superior  skill,  coolness,  and  heroism.  Leon  Smith,  ably  seconded  by 
Capt.  [Henry  S.l  Lubbock,  the  immediate  commander  of  the  Bayou  City, 
and  by  her  pilot,  Captain  McCormick,  adroitly  evaded  the  deadly  stroke, 
although  as  the  vessels  passed  each  other  he  lost  his  larboard  wheel- 
house  in  the  shock.  Again  the  Bayou  City,  while  receiving  several 
broadsides  almost  at  the  cannon’s  mouth,  poured  into  the  Harriet  Lane 
a destructive  fire  of  small-arms.  Turning  once  more  she  drove  her 
prow  into  the  iron  wheel  of  the  Harriet  Lane,  thus  locking  the  two 
vessels  together.  Followed  by  the  officers  and  men  of  the  heroic  vol- 
unteer corps,  Commodore  Leon  Smith  leaped  to  the  deck  of  the  hostile 
ship,  and  after  a moment  of  feeble  resistance  she  was  ours.  The  sur- 
viving officers  of  the  Harriet  Lane  presented  their  swords  to  Commo- 
dore Leon  Smith  on  the  quarter-deck  of  the  captured  vessel.  After 
the  surrender  the  Owasco  passed  alongside  pouring  into  the  Harriet 
Lane  a broadside  at  close  quarters,  but  she  was  soon  forced  to  back  out 
bv  the  effect  of  our  musketry. 

Commodore  Smith  then  sent  a flag  to  Commodore  Renshaw,  whose 
ship  had  in  the  meantime  been  run  aground,  demanding  the  surrender 
of  the  whole  fleet,  and  giving  three  hours’  time  to  consider.  These 
propositions  were  accepted  by  the  commanding  officer,  and  all  the 
enemy’s  vessels  were  immediately  brought  to  anchor,  with  white  flags 
flying.  Most  of  this  time  was  occupied  in  attempting  to  get  the  Har- 
riet Lane  to  the  wharf  in  order  to  remove  the  wounded  to  a place  of 
safety.  The  ships  and  boats  Vere  so  much  damaged  that  this  was 
found  to  be  almost  impossible  with  the  means  at  hand.  Proceeding 
myself  to  the  wharf  I met  one  of  my  most  distinguished  and  scientific 
staff  officers,  Map  A.  M.  Lea,  who  informed  me  that  on  board  the  Har 
riet  Lane  he  had  found  his  son,  the  second  in  command,  mortally 
wounded.  He  represented  to  me  that  there  were  other  officers  badly 
wounded,  and  urged  me  to  delay,  if  possible,  their  removal.  It  now 
being  within  an  hour  of  the  expiration  of  the  period  of  truce  I sent 
another  flag  to  Commodore  Kenshaw,  whose  ship  was  among  the  most 


216  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTI. 

distant,  claiming  all  his  vessels  immediately  under  our  guns  as  prizes, 
and  giving  him  further  time  to  consider  the  demand  for  the  surrender 
of  the  whole  fleet.  This  message  was  borne  by  Colonel  Green  and 
Captain  Lubbock.  While  these  gentlemen  were  on  their  way  in  a boat 
to  fulfill  their  mission  Commodore  Renshaw  blew  up  his  ship  and  was 
himself  accidently  blown  up  with  it.  They  boarded  the  ship  of  the 
next  in  command,  who  dropped  down  the  bay,  still  having  them  on 
board,  and  carried  them  some  distance  toward  the  bar,  while  still  flying 
the  wliite  flag  at  the  mast-head. 

In  the  mean  time  General  Scurry  sent  to  know  if  he  should  fire  at 
the  ships  immediately  in  his  front  at  the  expiration  of  the  period  of 
truce.  To  this  I replied  in  the  negative,  as  another  demand  under  a 
flag  of  truce  from  me  had  been  sent  to  the  commodore.  When  the  first 
period  of  truce  expired  the  enemy’s  ships  under  our  guns,  regardless 
of  the  white  flags  still  flying  at  their  mast-heads,  gradually  crept  off*. 
As  soon  as  this  was  seen  I sent  a swift  express  on  horseback  to  General 
Scurry,  directing  him  to  open  fire  on  them.  This  was  done  with  so 
much  effect  that  one  of  them  was  reported  to  have  sunk  near  the  bar 
and  the  Owasco  was  seriously  damaged. 

I forward  a correspondence  on  this  subject  between  Commodore  Bell 
and  myself.  In  this  correspondence  Commodore  Bell  states  that  the 
truce  was  violated  by  the  firing  of  cannon  and  small-arms  by  our  men 
on  shore,  as  he  had  been  informed.  This  is  an  error ; not  a gun  or 
small-arm  was  discharged-  during  the  stipulated  period  or  until  the 
enemy’s  vessels  were  discovered  to  be  creeping  off  out  of  the  harbor. 
Commodore  Leon  Smith  fired  a heavy  stern  gun  at  the  retiring  ships 
with  effect  from  the  Harriet  Lane.  Jumping  on  board  the  steamer 
Carr,  he  proceeded  to  Bolivar  Channel  and  captured  and  brought  in  in 
the  immediate  presence  of  the  enemy’s  armed  vessels  the  two  barks 
and  schooner  before  spoken  of.  As  soon  as  it  was  light  enough  to  see 
the  land  force  surrendered  to  General  Scurry. 

We  thus  captured  one  fine  steamship,  two  barks,  and  one  schooner. 
We  ran  ashore  the  flag-ship  of  the  commodore,  drove  off*  two  war 
steamers,  and  sunk  another,  as  reported,  all  of  the  U.  S.  Navy,  and  the 
armed  transports,  and  took  300  or  400  prisoners.  The  number  of  guns 
captured  was  fifteen,  and,  being  found  on  Pelican  Spit,  a large  quantity 
of  stores,  coal,  and  other  material  also  was  taken.  The  Neptune  sank ; 
her  officers  and  crew,  with  the  exception  of  those  killed  in  battle,  were 
saved,  as  were  also  her  guns.  The  loss  on  our  side  was  26  killed  and 
117  wounded.  Among  the  former  was  the  gallant  Captain  Wier,  the 
first  volunteer  for  the  expedition.  The  alacrity  with  which  officers 
and  men,  all  of  them  totally  unacquainted  with  this  novel  kind  of  serv- 
ice, some  of  whom  had  never  seen  a ship  before,  volunteered  for  an 
enterprise  so  extraordinarily  and  apparently  desperate  in  its  character 
and  the  bold  and  dashing  manner  in  which  the  plan  was  executed,  are 
certainly  deserving  of  the  highest  praise. 

Although  it  may  appear  invidious  to  make  distinctions,  I nevertheless 
regard  it  as  a duty  to  say  that  too  much  credit  cannot  be  bestowed  on 
Commodore  Leon  Smith,  whose  professional  ability,  energy,  and  perse- 
verance amidst  many  discouraging  influences  were  so  conspicuously 
displayed  in  the  preparation  for  the  attack,  while  in  its  execution  his 
heroism  was  sublime.  In  the  latter  he  was  most  ably  and  gallantly 
seconded  by  Colonel  Green,  commanding  the  land  forces  serving  on 
board  of  our  fleet ; by  Captain  Lubbock,  commanding  the  Bayou  City; 
by  her  pilot,  Captain  McCormick;  Captain  Wier,  commanding  the  artil- 
lery; Captain  Martin,  commanding  dismounted  dragoons,  and  by  the 


Chav.  XXV  HM 


RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX. 


217 


officers  it  lid  men  on  board  of  that  boat.  Though  in  the  case  of  the  Nep 
tune  the  result  was  not  so  favorable,  her  attack  on  the  Harriet  Lane  was 
equally  bold  and  dashing  and  had  its  weight  in  the  capture.  Colonel 
Bagby,  commanding  the  land  troops  on  board  the  Neptune;  Captain 
Sangster;  her  pilots,  Captains  Swift  and  McGovern;  Captain  Harby, 
and  the  officers  and  crew  of  the  ship,  likewise  deserve,  as  they  have  re- 
ceived, my  thanks  for  their  participation  in  this  brilliant  battle.  The 
engineers,  among  whom  Captain  Seymour,  of  the  Bayou  City,  and  Cap- 
tain Conner,  of  the  Neptune,  were  distinguished  by  remarkable  cool- 
ness, skill,  and  devotion  in  the  discharge  of  their  important  duties. 

In  the  land  attack  especially  commendations  are  due  to  Brig.  Gen. 
W.  R.  Scurry,  Col.  X.  B.  Debray,  Major  Yon  Harten,  Cook’s  regiment 
of  artillery;  Captain  Fontaine,  Cook’s  regiment;  Maj.  J.  Kellersberg,  of 
the  Engineer  Corps;  also  to  Colonels  Cook,  Pyron,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Abercrombie,  commanding  Elmore’s  men;  Major  Griffin,  Major  Wilson, 
of  the  artillery;  Captain  Mason,  Captain  McMahan,  and  to  the  accom- 
plished and  devoted  Lieutenant  Sherman,  who  fell  at  his  piece  mortally 
wounded,  and  to  Privates  Brown  and  Shoppman,  of  Daly’s  company  of 
cavalry,  the  latter  of  whom  kept  up  the  fire  of  one  piece  almost  without 
assistance  under  the  enemy’s  grape  and  canister. 

The  officers  of  my  staff  exhibited  on  this,  as  on  previous  occasions, 
conspicuous  ability  and  gallantry.  When  some  of  the  men  were  com- 
pelled to  leave  their  pieces  at  one  of  the  wharves  nearest  the  enemy  Major 
Dickinson,  assistant  adjutant-general,  calling  for  volunteers,  dashed 
down  the  street  in  order  to  withdraw  the  pieces.  Whilst  in  the  act  of 
consummating  this  design  he  was  badly  wounded  by  a fragment  of  a 
shell  striking  him  in  the  left  eye,  which  unfortunately  has  lost  its  sight. 
Capt.  E.  P.  Turner,  assistant  adjutant-general,  likewise  behaved  with 
conspicuous  gallantry.  Lieuts.  George  A.  Magruder  and  H.  M.  Stan- 
ard,  my  aides-de-camp,  executed  my  orders  with  remarkable  gallantry, 
promptness,  and  intelligence.  These  two  officers  have  thus  been  dis- 
tinguished in  the  battles  of  Bethel,  Yorktown,  Savage  Station,  and  Mal- 
vern Hill.  It  is  only  just  that  I should  commend  them  to  the  special 
consideration  of  the  Government.  Lieutenant  Magruder  volunteered 
for  the  service,  and  brought  off  in  the  most  gallant  manner  some  pieces 
which  the  men  had  been  compelled  to  retire  from.  Lieutenant  Stanard 
behaved  with  equal  gallantry  in  the  execution  of  orders,  exposing  him- 
self to  the  enemy’s  fire.  Lieutenant-Colonel  McNeill,  of  Sibley’s  brigade, 
adjutant  and  inspector  general,  rendered  distinguished  service  in  carry- 
ing out  my  orders,  as  also  did  Lieutenant  Carrington,  of  the  same  regi 
ment,  acting  on  my  staff.  Mr.  Dennis  Brashear,  who  has  been  in  every 
battle  in  which  I have  been  engaged,  except  that  of  Bethel,  and  served 
with  great  gallantry  everywhere  without  pay  or  reward  of  any  kind  for 
more  than  a year,  rendered  important  and  most  gallant  services  on  this 
occasion.  I am  also  under  obligations  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Nichols, 
volunteer  aide,  whose  ability  and  local  knowledge  were  of  great  service 
in  arranging  the  details  of  the  attack.  I likewise  thankfully  acknowl- 
edge the  services  of  Judge  P.  W.  Gray  and  the  Hon.  J.  A.  Wilcox,  mem- 
bers of  Congress  from  Texas,  who,  as  volunteer  aides,  accompanied  me 
to  the  front  when  the  battle  opened  and  remained  with,  me  during  the 
continuance.  The  assistance  of  General  [Thomas  B.J  Howard,  ot*  the 
Militia,  and  his  adjutant-general,  Major  Tucker,  residents  of  Galveston, 
was  of  great  value,  as  was  also  that  of  Mr.  E.  W.  Cave,  volunteer 
aide,  from  Houston.  Hon.  M.  M.  Potter,  of  Galveston,  was  likewise 
conspicuous  during  the  engagement  for  his  activity  and  devotion. 

I take  this  occasion  to  recommend  to  the  special  consideration  of  the 


218 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  8.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  (Chap.  XXVII. 

President  the  conduct  of  Governor  J.  R.  Buy  lor,  of  Arizona,  who, 
though  not  in  command  of  any  troops  nor  attached  to  any  stall,  was 
conspicuous  for  his  gallant  conduct  as  a private,  serving  the  guns 
during  the  hottest  of  the  fire,  and  with  his  coat  off  working  to  place 
them  in  position  during 'the  night.  . . 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Manly  sustained  the  operations  from  Virginia 
Point  with  great  ability  and  activity.  Captain  [W.  J.]  Pendleton,  acting 
aide-de-camp,  who  accompanied  the  troops,  proved  himself  to  be  an 
officer  of  very  remarkable  ability,  energy,  and  devotion.  Captain  Stoy, 
assistant  quartermaster,  is  also  deserving  of  high  commendation.  Map 
J.  B.  Eustis,  acting  ordnance  officer  on  my  staff,  assisted  by  Lieut.  M. 
Hughes,  of  the  artillery,  performed  admirably  his  difficult  and  important 
duties  in  the  preparation  for  the  attack.  The  formerly  my  order  tc- 
mained  in  charge  of  his  depot  at  Virginia  Point,  while  the  latter  dis- 
charged gallantly  his  duties  on  the  field.  I likewise  take  pleasure  m 
recognizing  the  efficient  and  gallant  services  of  Major  [O.  M.]  Watkins, 
in  charge  of  conscript  business,  on  my  staff;  of  Colonel  [C.  G.j  hor- 
shey,  of  the  Engineer  Corps;  of  Capt.  H.  Pendleton,  assistant  quarter- 
master, who  accompanied  me  to  the  front;  and  of  Major  [E.  B.J  Pen- 
dleton, chief  commissary,  on  my  staff;  who  discharged  his  important 
duties  with  gallant  ability. 

Lieutenants  Stringfellow,  Jones,  and  Hill,  of  the  artillery,  behaved 
with  remarkable  gallantry  during  the  engagement,  each  of  them  volun- 
teering to  take  charge  of  guns  and  personally  directing  the  fire  after 
the  officers  originally  in  charge  of  them  had  been  wounded. 

It  would  be  improper  to  close  this  report  without  directing  the  par- 
ticular attention  of  the  Government  to  invaluable  services  rendered  by 
Major  B.  Bloomfield,  quartermaster,  of  my  staff,  and  by  Captain  [E.  C.] 
Wharton,  assistant  quartermaster  at  Houston.  These  officers,  by  then- 
intelligence,  energy,  and  activity  proved  themselves  fully  adequate  to 
all  the  demands  made  upon  them  in  the  preparation  of  the  means  ap- 
propriate to  their  department,  and  contributed  materially  to  the  suc- 
cessful result  of  the  expedition.  Nor  should  I here  omit  to  mention 
Captain  [W.  S.l  Good,  in  command  of  ordnance.  I commend  him 
especially  to  the  Chief  of  Ordnance  and  to  the  consideration  of  His 
Excellency  the  President.  . 

Besides  the  names  mentioned  above  I would  call  attention  to  the 
names  of  the  officers  and  men  reported  by  their  respective  commanding 
officers  to  have  distinguished  themselves  by  gallant  and  meritorious 
services.  As  it  would  have  been  imprudent  to  give  full  warning  to  the 
inhabitants  of  Galveston  of  my  intention  to  attack  the  Federal  fleet, 
lest  information  of  the  design  might  reach  the  enemy,  as  soon  as  the 
head  of  our  column  entered  the  suburbs  of  the  town  I directed  the  am- 
bulances, in  charge  of  one  of  my  staff  officers,  to  proceed  to  the  Convent 
of  Ursuline  Nuns  near  that  point,  and  place  the  conveyances  at  their 
disposal  for  their  immediate  removal  to  the  bouses  provided  for  them. 
I also  in  like  manner  informed  the  foreign  consuls  and  the  mayor  oi  the 
contemplated  attack,  and  gave  them  time  to  move  their  families  and 
the  citizens  most  exposed  to  a place  of  safety.  The  noble  women  ot 
the  convent,  while  recognizing  the  courtesy  extended  to  them,  expressed 
a preference  to  remain  and  nurse  the  wounded,  offering  their  building 
as  a hospital.  Many  of  the  inhabitants  left  the  houses  most  exposed 
to  the  enemy’s  fire,  and  I am  happy  to  state  that  although  many  edifices 
were  much  injured  and  the  town  riddled  by  balls  no  casualty  occurred 
among  the  citizens.  The  wounded  of  the  enemy  were  conducted  to  the 
same  hospital,  and  the  same  attentions  were  bestowed  on  them  as  it 


Chai>.  XXVII. J RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX.  219 

they  had  been  our  own  men.  Captain  Wainwright  and  Lieutenant  Lea, 
of  the  Federal  Navy,  were  buried  with  masonic  and  military  honors  in 
the  same  grave 5 Major  Lea,  of  the  Confederate  Army,  father  of  Lieu- 
tenant Lea,  performing  the  funeral  services. 

Having  buried  the  dead,  taken  care  of  the  wounded,  and  secured  the 
captured  property,  my  exertions  were  directed  to  getting  the  Harriet 
Lane  to  sea.  The  enemy’s  ships  fled  to  New  Orleans,  to  which  place 
one  of  their  steam  transports  was  dispatched  during  the  action.  I 
knew  that  a large  naval  force  might  be  expected  to  return  in  a few 
days.  I therefore  ordered  the  employment  at  high  wages  of  all  the 
available  mechanics  to  repair  the  Harriet  Lane,  her  main  shaft  having 
been  dislocated  and  her  iron  wheel  greatly  disabled,  so  that  the  engine 
could  not  work.  The  United  States  flags  were  ordered  to  remain  flying- 
on  the  custom-house  and  at  the  mast-heads  of  the  ships,  so  as  to  attract 
into  the  harbor  any  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  which  might  be  bound  for 
the  port  of  Galveston.  A line  of  iron  buoys  which  we  had  established 
for  the  guidance  of  his  ships  in  the  harbor  were  displaced  and  so  ar- 
ranged as  to  insure  their  getting  aground. 

On  the  3d  of  January,  I being  then  on  board  of  the  Harriet  Lane, 
a yawl-boat,  containing  several  men,  in  command  of  a person  named 
Thomas  Smith,  recently  a citizen  of  Galveston,  and  who  had  deserted 
from  our  army,  was  reported  alongside.  He  informed  me  that  he  was 
sent  from  the  United  States  transport  steamship  Cambria,  then  off  the 
bar,  for  a pilot,  and  that  they  had  no  idea  of  the  occupation  of  the  city 
by  us.  I forthwith  ordered  a pilot  boat,  under  command  of  Captain 
Johnson,  to  bring  in  this  ship,  but  through  a most  extraordinary  com- 
bination of  circumstances  the  vessel  which  contained  E.  J.  Davis  and 
many  other  apostate  Texans,  besides  several  hundred  troops,  and 
2,500  saddles  for  the  use  of  native  sympathizers,  succeeded  in  mak- 
ing her  escape.  The  man  Smith,  who  had,  it  is  said,  several  times  set- 
fire  to  the  city  of  Galveston  before  he  deserted,  had  been  known  as 
Nicaragua  Smith,  and  was  dreaded  by  every  one.  He  returned  to  Gal- 
veston in  order  to  act  as  Federal  provost-marshal.  His  arrival  produced 
much  excitement,  during  which  some  one  without  orders  sent  a sail 
boat  to  Pelican  Spit,  now  occupied  by  our  troops,  to  direct  the  com 
manding  officer  there  not  to  fire  on  our  pilot  boat,  although  she  was 
under  Yankee  colors.  The  sail- boat  thus  sent  was  at  once  supposed  to 
be  destined  for  the  Yankee  transport.  The  pilot  boat  gave  chase  to 
her,  and  the  guns  from  the  shore  opened  on  her  within  hearing  of  the 
ship. 

Night  coming  on,  I thought  it  surer,  as  the  alarm  might  be  taken,  to 
capture  her  at  sea  before  morning,  but  the  Harriet  Lane  could  not  move, 
and  our  cotton  gunboats  could  not  live  on  the  rough  sea  on  the  bar. 
Therefore  one  of  the  barks,  the  Royal  Yacht,  a schooner  of  ours,  the 
pilot  boat,  and  the  Leader,  a schooner  loaded  with  cotton,  which  I had 
ordered  to  be  sent  to  a foreign  port,  with  a proclamation  of  the  raising 
of  the  blockade  at  Galveston,  were  directed  to  be  prepared  and  armed 
with  light  artillery.  This  was  done  by  2 o’clock  the  same  night,  our 
little  fleet  being  manned  by  volunteers,  under  the  command  of  Captain 
Mason,  of  Cook’s  regiment  of  artillery. 

Unfortunately  the  wind  lulled  and  none  but  the  pilot-boat  could 
reach  the  enemy’s  ship.  The  pilot-boat  went  out  under  the  command 
of  a gallant  sailor,  Captain  Payne,  of  Galveston.  The  enemy’s  ship 
proved  to  be  a splendid  iron  steamer,  built  in  the  Clyde.  I had  ascer- 
tained from  her  men  taken  ashore  that  she  had  only  two  guns,  and 
they  were  packed  on  deck  under  a large  quantity  of  hay,  and  I antici- 


220 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N. 


MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTI. 


paled  an  easy  conquest  and  one  of  great  political  importance,  as  Ibis 
ship  contained  almost  all  the  Texans  out  of  the  State  who  had  proved 
recreant  to  their  duty  to  the  Confederacy  and  to  Texas.  The  pilot-boat 
was  allowed  to  get  close  to  the  ship,  when  the  boat  was  hailed  and 
the  pilot  ordered  to  come  on  board.  Captain  Payne  answered  that  he 
thought  there  were  rather  too  many  men  to  trust  himself  to;  where- 
upon he  was  directed  to  come  on  board  or  he  would  be  fired  into.  He 
went  on  board  as  ordered,  and  soon  after  the  steamer  sailed  in  all 
haste  seaward,  leaving  the  pilot-boat  and  hands  to  return  to  us. 

I am  thus  particular  in  this  narration,  as  the  friends  of  Captain  Payne 
fear  that  he  may  meet  with  foul  play  from  the  enemy.  I shall  ascertain, 
through  Commodore  Pell,  his  fate,  and  act  accordingly.  Smith,  the 
deserter,  was  tried  regularly  the  next  day  before  a general  court-mar- 
tial, and  being  convicted  of  deserting  to  the  enemy,  was  publicly  shot 
in  Galveston  in  accordance  with  his  sentence.  The  proceedings,  which 
were  formal  in  all  respects,  legal  and  regular,  are  forwarded. 

At  the  time  of  these  occurrences  I received  through  Colonel  [ V\ . G.J 
Webb  reliable  information  of  an  insurrection  among  the  Germans  in 
Colorado,  Fayette,  and  Austin  Counties,  800  being  reported  in  arms  to 
resist  the  conscript  law  and  the  State  draft.  I immediately  ordered  the 
Arizona  brigade,  with  a section  of  artillery,  to  the  disaffected  region, 
declared  martial  law  in  these  three  counties,  and  had  the  ringleaders 
arrested  and  lodged  in  jail.  The  rest  yielded,  and  tranquillity  and 
obedience  to  the  laws  are  now  prevalent. 

Major  Webb  contributed  much  by  his  personal  activity  and  influence 
to  produce  these  results,  and  I earnestly  recommend  him  to  the  Presi- 
dent for  the  appointment  of  assistant  adjutant-general,  with  the  rank  ot 
lieutenant-colonel,  to  be  stationed  in  the  disaffected  regions,  and  to 
take  charge  of  the  business  growing  out  of  these  affairs  and  those  ot 
the  militia.  He  was  an  officer  of  the  old  Army,  and  colonel  under  Gen- 
eral Taylor  in  the  Mexican  war. 

The  German  ringleaders  above  mentioned  have  been  turned  over  to 
the  civil  authorities  for  trial. 

I have  the  honor  to  announce  that  the  whole  coast  and  islands  are 
now  in  our  possession  and  that  the  Rio  Grande  is  strongly  occupied. 

I am,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. 


General  Orders,  | Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

No.  37.  f Houston , Tex .,  March  3, 1863. 

The  following  letter  of  thanks  from  Lieutenant-General  Holmes,  com- 
manding Trans-Mississipiii  Department,  is  published  to  the  officers  and 
men  of  this  command  : 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  Department, 

Little  Bock,  February  7,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder, 

Commanding  District  of  Texas,  <$-c.  : 

General  : Your  letter,  announcing  the  capture  of  a portion  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  hy 
the  forces  under  your  command,  was  received  yesterday,  and  I am  directed  by  the 
lieutenant-general  commanding  to  congratulate  you  on  the  successful  issue  ot  the 
expedition  against  Galveston,  and  to  return  his  thanks  to  yourself  and  the  officers 


Chap.  XXVTL] 


RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX. 


221 


and  men  of  your  command  for  the  great  gallantry  displayed  on  the  occasion  and  the 
zeal  and  energy  evinced  by  you,  and  which  has  reflected  so  much  credit  on  the  De- 
partment of  the  Trans-Mississippi.  ..  . , 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ ANDERS0N 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Abiz., 

^0t  50^  j & lan  Antonio , March  30,  1863. 

The  following  resolution  of  thanks  to  the  major-general  commanding 
and  thoge  under  his  command,  passed  by  both  Houses  of  the  Texas  Leg- 
islature, is  published  for  the  information  of  the  Army  of  Texas  : 

JOINT  RESOLUTION  of  thanks  to  General  J.  B.  Magruder  and  others. 

Resolution  1.  Be  it  resolved  by  the  Legislature  of  the  State  of  lexas,  that  the  thanks 
of  the  Legislature  are  hereby  tendered  to  General  J . B.  Magruder  and  the  officers  and 
men  under  his  command  for  the  brilliant  victory  which  they  gamed  over  the  Feder- 
alists at  Galveston  on  the  1st  of  .January  last,  To  Maj.  O.  M Watkins  and  the  officers 
and  men  under  his  command  for  their  gallant  conduct  at  Sabine  Pass  and  the  recap- 
ture of  that  fort  and  capturing  the  blockading  vessels  of  the  enemy ; and  to  Map 
Daniel  Shea  and  the  officers  and  men  under  his  command  for  their  brave  defense 
of  the  town  of  Lavaca  ; and  to  Major  Hobby  and  the  officers  and  soldiers  under  his 
command  for  the  repulse  of  the  enemy's  attack  on  Corpus  Christi,  the  commencement 
of  our  success  on  the  Texas  coast;  and  to  Captains  Ireland  and  Ware  and  the  offi- 
cers and  soldiers  under  their  command  for  their  exploit  m the  capture  of  Captain 
Kittredoeand  his  men  near  Corpus  Christi  ; and  to  Captains  Ireland  and  Willke  and 
the  officers  and  soldiers  under  their  command  for  their  good  conduct, m defeating  the 
enemy's  attempt  to  capture  one  of  our  vessels  aiffi  in  capturing  his  barges  in  the  Bay 
of  Corpus  Christi ; and  to  Capts.  Santos  Benavides  and  Refugio  Benavides  and  the 
officers  and  men  under  their  command  for  their  vigilance,  energy,  and  gallantry  m pur- 
suing and  chastising  the  banditti  infesting  the  Rio  Grande  frontier. 

Resolution  2.  That  the  Governor  be  requested  to  transmit  a copy  of  these  resolu- 
tions to  General  J.  B.  Magruder  and  the  other  officers  mentioned,  with  the  request 
that  they  make  them  known  to  the  officers  and  men  under  their  command. 

Approved  March  6,  1863. 

The  State  of  Texas, 

Department  of  State : 

I R J Townes,  Secretary  of  State  of  the  State  of  Texas,  do  hereby  certify  the 
above 'to  be  a true  and  correct  copy  of  the  original  joint  resolution  as  approved  by 
the  Governor,  now  on  file  in  this  department.  „ , 

In  testimony  whereof  I have  hereunto  signed  my  name  and  caused  the  seal  of  the 
State  Department  to  be  affixed,  at  Austin,  this  12th  March,  1863. 

fawAT  "1  -t*.  J.  lUWJNi^bj 

L ' J Secretary  of  State. 


These  resolutions  will  on  the  day  of  their  reception  be  read  at  the 
head  of  every  regiment,  battalion,  and  unattached  company  in  the  dis- 
trict. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Magruder : 
y STEPHEN  D.  YANCEY, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


United  States  Steam  Sloop  Brooklyn, 

Off  Galveston , Tex.,  Janiiary  9,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forces , Galveston , Tex. : 

Str  : J have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  ot  your  note  oi  this 


222 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIT. 


date,  borne  by  Major  Eustis,  of  your  staff,  and  Oapt.  P.  MeGreal,  of  the 
Confederate  Army,  referring  to  an  alleged  violation  of  a flag  of  truce  in 
the  harbor  of  Galveston  by  the  late  Captain  Eenshaw,  and  asking  u if 
the  white  flag  is  hereafter  to  be  recognized  and  respected  as  a flag  of 
truce.” 

Having  never  violated  a flag  of  truce  myself,  I shall  require  it  (the 
white  flag),  when  flying  in  some  conspicuous  place,  to  be  respected  by 
all  persons  under  my  command  so  long  as  it  is  respected  and  observed 
on  the  other  side. 

I am  not  acquainted  with  the  infraction  attributed  to  Captain  Een- 
shaw in  the  first  part  of  your  note,  but  will  communicate  the  subject- 
matter  to  the  proper  authorities. 

I will  state  in  conclusion  that  I have  heard  from  several  respectable 
sources  that  firing  of  field  guns  and  small-arms  was  kept  up  without 
intermission  by  the  Confederates  from  shore  batteries  in  the  town  and 
on  the  Point  during  the  whole  time  that  the  white  flag  was  flying  on 
board  the  Harriet  Lane,  after  her  capture,  and  on  board  the  United 
States  vessels,  from  which  it  is  apparent  that  the  white  flag  was  disre- 
garded by  those  under  your  command,  although  you  were  the  first  to  dis- 
play it. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  H.  BELL, 

Commodore , Commanding  Forces  off  Galveston , Tex. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Galveston , January  13,  1863. 

Commodore  H.  H.  Bell,  U.  3.  Navy : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  note  of 

in  answer  to  the  communication  I had  the  honor  to  forward  to 

you  by  Major  [J.  B.]  Eustis,  of  my  staff. 

I would  state  that  you  are  entirely  misinformed  as  to  any  violation  ot 
the  white  flag  during  the  late  engagement  by  the  firing  either  of  field 
guns  or  small-arms,  and  that  1 have  made  a report  of  the  facts  to  the 
Government  at  Eichmond  touching  the  violation  of  the  flag  of  truce  by 
Commodore  Eenshaw  and  the  officers  commanding  Federal  vessels  on 
the  morning  of  the  1st  instant. 

I send  Lieut.  George  A.  Magruder,  of  my  staff,  and  Lieut.  W.  E.  Fos- 
ter as  bearers  of  this  communication  under  a flag  of  truce. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGEUDEE, 

Major - General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Bub-District  of  Texas, 

Galveston , January  22,  1863. 

Commodore  H.  H.  Bell, 

Commanding  U.  3.  Naval  Forces  off  Galveston : 

Sir  : In  the  absence  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder,  who  is  not  expected 
to  return  before  this  evening,  I have,  in  obedience  to  his  instructions, 
opened  the  two  communications  which  you  did  him  the  honor  to  address 
to  him  yesterday,  the  21st  instant,  and  I informed  him  of  their  contents 
by  telegraph. 


Chap.  XXVII. ] RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX.  223 

Major-General  Magruder  instructed  me  to  say  to  you  that  he  will 
answer  your  communication  this  evening,  to  be  forwarded  by  flag  of 
truce  to-morrow  morning. 

At  the  same  time  allow  me,  sir,  in  vindication  of  the  honor  of  our  arms, 
as  well  as  the  honor  of  Col.  J.  J.  Cook,  C.  S.  Army,  who  was  the  bearer 
of  the  flag  of  truce  alleged  to  have  committed  the  breach  against  the 
rules  governing  belligerents  in  their  communications,  to  make  to  you  a 
plain  statement  of  facts,  which  I trust  will  exonerate  us  in  your  mind 
from  any  charge  of  perfidy  in  our  intercourse  with  you. 

The  buoy  seen  on  the  Gulf  beach  was  washed  off  several  days  ago 
during  the  last  gale.  1 was  informed  that  on  the  20th  instant,  whilst 
Colonel  Cook  was  on  board  the  steamship  Brooklyn,  at  about  3 o’clock 
p.  in.,  a launch  of  one  of  our  vessels  in  the  harbor  did  tow  in  another 
buoy.  This  was  done  without  any  instructions  from  or  knowledge  of 
Major-General  Magruder  or  any  other  officer  in  command  here.  I have 
been  unable  as  yet  to  communicate  with  the  officer  who  knowingly  or 
unknowingly  has  rendered  himself  guilty  of  the  breach  complained  of 
and  exact  a statement  from  him  during  the  day.  Colonel  Cook  was 
prevented  by  calm  and  adverse  tide  from  entering  the  harbor  before 
daylight.  Meanwhile  I am  instructed  by  Major  General  Magruder  to 
say  that  he  will  be  glad  to  have  the  buoy  removed  by  us  placed  in  its 
former  position  under  the  inspection  of  an  officer  sent  by  you  or  to 
afford  you  any  other  facilities  in  his  power  for  entering. 

As  to  your  complaint  of  a breach  of  truce  in  connection  with  the 
Forty- second  Massachusetts,  I would  respectfully  state  that  the  land 
troops  were  not  embraced  in  the  terms  of  truce  on  the  1st  instant,  either 
directly  or  indirectly.  As  soon  as  daylight  came  they  could  have  been 
destroyed  by  our  guns  amd  musketry  in  five  minutes.  To  avert  a mis- 
understanding on  this  subject  with  you,  which  Major-General  Magruder 
would  much  regret,  he  will  send  a full  statement  by  to  morrow  morning. 

This  communication  will  be  handed  to  you  by  Lieut.  L.  J.  Storey,  Con- 
federate States  Cavalry,  and  Lieutenant  Riley,  Confederate  States 
Artillery,  together  with  a communication  to  you  by  the  French  consular 
agent  at  this  port.  These  officers  are  instructed  to  await  your  answer. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBRAY. 


United  States  Steam  Sloop  Brooklyn, 

Off  Galveston , January  22,  1803. 

X.  B.  Debray, 

Colonel  of  Cavalry , C.  8.  Army , d?c.,  Galveston , Tex. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  dispatch  of 
this  date,  in  reply  to  mine  of  yesterday  touching  the  buoys,  addressed  to 
Major-General  Magruder,  and  whom  you  inform  me  is  temporarily 
absent. 

I beg  to  express  to  you  my  appreciation  of  your  prompt  and  volun- 
tary offer  to  replace  the  buoy,  which  you  state  was  removed  by  one  of 
your  launches. 

As  you  have  led  me  to  expect  a letter  from  Major-General  Magruder 
to-morrow  on  this  and  other  subjects,  you  will  please  excuse  me  from 
going  further  into  this  subject. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  H.  BELL, 

Commodore , Commanding  If.  8.  Forces  off  Galveston. 


224 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chaf.  XXVII. 

Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , January  23,  1863. 

Commodore  H.  H.  Bell, 

Commanding  Squadron  off  Galveston  : 

Sir  : In  reply  to  your  communication  of  the  21st  of  January,  in  which 
you  allege  a violation  of  the  truce  on  our  part  by  the  truce-boat  contain- 
ing  Colonel  Cook,  of  Confederate  States  Artillery,  and  on  a previous  oc- 
casion, viz,  on  the  1st  instant,  by  us,  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  you 
are  entirely  misinformed  in  both  instances.  On  the  first  the  guns  were 
planted  by  us  at  Fort  Point  before  a single  shot  was  fired  by  us,  and 
were  not  withdrawn  either  during  the  battle  or  during  the  period  of 
truce.  The  truce-boat  containing  Colonel  Cook,  I am  informed  by  that 
officer,  could  not  possibly  re-enter  the  harbor  for  want  of  wind  or  a 
favorable  tide,  and  did  not  interfere  with  any  buoys  whatever. 

The  buoys  were  washed  adrift,  I am  informed,  by  a previous  storm, 
and  one  of  them  was  towed  in  by  a boat  containing  a single  man,  with- 
out my  knowlege  or  that  of  the  officer  in  command  at  Galveston. 

This  boat  was  attached  to  one  of  our  rams  lying  in  Bolivar  Channel. 
The  officer  in  command  of  the  ram  could  have  had  no  improper  object, 
as  the  position  of  the  buoys  had  all  been  changed  by  my  orders  when 
there  was  no  blockading  fleet  off  Galveston,  with  a view  of  misleading 

such  fleet  on  its  return.  . . *» 

You  say  that  you  are  informed  #that  the  Forty-second  Regiment  ot 
Massachusetts  Volunteers  was  firecl  upon  and  captured  during  the  ex-^ 
istence  of  the  three  hours7  truce.  The  facts  are  that  the  first  flag  of 
truce  seen  from  the  shore  was  over  the  wharf  on  which  was  quartered 
that  regiment.  As  soon  as  it  was  observed  all  firing  in  that  direction 

C6SiS6(l 

During  theconference  between  Brigadier- General  Scurry,  C.  S.  Army, 
and  Colonel  Burrell,  of  the  Forty-second  Regiment  Massachusetts  Vol- 
unteers, it  was  announced  that  the  officers  in  command  of  the  Con- 
federate boats  had  granted  a three  hours7  truce  to  the  vessels  of  the 
U S Navy,  in  which  the  Federal  land  forces  were  not  included.  Colonel 
Burrell  asked  of  General  Scurry  the  same  terms  as  were  granted  to  the- 
vessels,  which  were  refused,  when  Colonel  Burrell  surrendered  the  whole 
force  under  his  command  unconditionally. 

The  only  violation  of  the  flag  of  truce  committed  on  the  morning  ot 
the  1st  of  January  was  committed  by  the  vessels  of  the  United  States, 
three  of  which  fled  from  the  harbor  of  Galveston  with  the  white  flag 
flving  at  their  mast-head,  in  my  sight,  in  the  same  perfidious  manner 
that  they  had  entered  it,  with  the  white  flag  flying.  I will  state  fur- 
ther that  General  Scurry  sent  to  me  whilst  I was  upon  the  wharf  near 
the  Harriet  Lane  to  know  if  he  should  fire  at  your  vessels  immediately 
under  our  guns  at  the  termination  of  the  flag  of  truce.  I answered  him 
not  to  do  so,  as  I had  just  sent  another  flag  of  truce  to  Commodore 
Renshaw,  demanding  the  surrender  of  the  whole  fleet,  and  giving  him 
plenty  of  time  to  make  up  his  mind  as  to  my  proposition.  Your  ships 
were  not  therefore  fired  upon  at  the  expiration  of  the  period,  and  m this 
way  got  off  with  their  white  flag  flying  when  they  could  not  have  done 

so  in  any  other  way.  , , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 

From  a conversation,  since  writing  the  above,  with  officers  ot  Forty- 
second  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers  I find  that.  1 am  supported 


Chap.  XXVIL]  RECAPTURE  OF  GALVESTON,  TEX.  225 

in  my  statements  in  regard  to  the  violation  alleged  of  the  flag  of  truce 
by  their  recollections  of  the  occurrence. 

Oapt.  Henry  Lubbock,  the  commander  of  our  gunboats,  who  arranged 
with  the  surviving  officers  in  command  of  the  Federal  vessels  the  terms 
of  the  truce,  stated  on  his  return  from  the  Federal  flag-ship  to  Brig- 
adier-General Scufry,  in  the  presence  of  the  commanding  officer  of  the 
Forty-second  Begiment  of  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  that  the  land 
troops  were  not  embraced  in  these  terms,  directly  or  indirectly,  he  hav- 
ing been  sent  by  Capt.  Leon  Smith,  commanding ,our  fleet  of  gunboats, 
to  demand  the  surrender  of  the  rest  of  the  Federal  fleet  and  to  give  the 
Federal  commander  three  hours7  time  to  accept  or  decline  his  demand, 
during  which  time  the  firing  was  to  cease  between  the  ships.  I knew 
nothing  of  the  arrangements,  nor  did  any  officer  ashore,  and  when  Cap- 
tain Lubbock,  on  his  return,  touched  at  Kuhn’s  Wharf,  where  the  Forty  - 
second  Massachusetts  Begiment  was  stationed,  he  gave  this  informa- 
tion to  General  Scurry  in  the  presence  of  the  commanding  officer  of  the 
Forty-second  Begiment  of  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  and  the  latter 
surrendered  unconditionally,  after  his  request  to  be  allowed  the  same 
time  given  the  ships  was  refused.  Had  the  Federal  commander  of  the 
land  force  been  in  superior  force  to  myself  and  engagedin  battle  ashore 
he  would  certainly  have  prosecuted  his  advantage  to  the  utmost,  re- 
gardless of  the  truce  between  two  fleets,  which  he  had  not  authorized. 
If  necessary,  I think  it  can  be  fully  established  also  that  the  Federal 
troops  ashore  were  ready  to  surrender  the  moment  daylight  should  give 
them  an  opportunity,  and  would  have  done  it  even  before  daylight  had 
it  been  possible.  ' 

I have  also  to  state  that  I am  informed  by  Brigadier- General  Scurry, 
who  was  in  that  portion  of  the  battle,  that  the  white  flag  displayed 
from  Kuhn’s  Wharf  was  respected  the  moment  it  was  seen  by  him." 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGBUDEB, 

Major- General , Commanding . 


January  25,  [1863]— 5.30  p.  m. 

Ma;j.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder: 

Colonel  Cook,  just  returned  from  the  Brooklyn  ; kindly  received. 
Commodore  Bell  answers  my  communication,  laying  little  stress  on  the 
buoy  affair.  He  told  Colonel  Cook  he  was  sure  two  buoys  had  been 
removed  by  us.  Cook  said  the  matter  was  being  investigated ; that,  the 
rams  being  continually  moving  about,  it  could  not  be  ascertained  yet 
which  did  the  deed.  He  goes  to-morrow  again  to  carry  to  the  Brooklyn 
the  property  of  Commodore  Wainwright,  when  Commodore  Bell  will 
answer  your  communication,  which  answer  I will  open,  informing  you 
of  the  contents,  unless  otherwise  directed. 

The  Hatteras  met  a steam  vessel;  spoke  to  her;  she  answered  she 
was  Her  Majesty’s  ship  Spit  Fire;  the  Hatteras  sent  a boat’s  crew  and 
officer  to  her;  the  vessels  approached  each  other,  when  the  would-be 
Spit  Fire  sent  her  several  broadsides  in  succession  and  sunk  her.  The 
officer  and  boat’s  jerew  escaped  in  the  night  and  went  to  tell  the  tale  to 
the  Brooklyn.  Commodore  Bell  went  to  the  scene  of  action  on  the  next 
day  and  found  the  wreck,  her  topmasts  out  of  the  water.  Cook  said  he 
knew  all  about  it,  and  that  it  was  the  “ 290.”  Commodore  Bell  has  no 
news  from  the  Sabine  since  the  capture  of  the  vessels.  He  is  very 
indignant  at  the  conduct  of  the  commander  of  the  Morning  Light.  He 

15  r r — vol  xv 


226 


w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chap.  XXVIT. 


knew,  however,  we  could  not  get  her  inside,  for  she  drew  15  feet  of 
water.  He  supposes  she  has  been  destroyed,  for  he  saw  some  spars 
floating.  The  British  officer  said  to  Mr.  Lynn  that  Farragut  intends  to 
chastise  Galveston  exemplarily.  They  say  Banks  is  disgusted  with 
New  Orleans  and  wishes  to  leave;  the  negroes  are  too  troublesome. 

Commodore  Bell  wishes  to  know  your  determination  concerning  the 
captured  officers  and  seamen,  as  you  suggested  in  a previous  communi- 
cation your  willingness  to  send  them  on  board  under  parole,  I must 
state  that  Colonel  Cook  saw  in  a paper  on  board  a proclamation  from 
Lincoln,  restricting  to  our  soldiers  the  provisions  ot  the  cartel;  it  so, 
we  ought  also  to  keep  their  officers.  .1  think  it  would  be  dangerous  to 
send  the  seamen  out;  they  have  mixed  too  much  with  the  people,  and 
may  be  well  informed  as  to  the  condition  of  our  defenses. 

Commodore  Bell  is  thankful  for  the  files  of  newspapers,  and  sends 
you  New  York  Herald  of  the  6th  January  and  Picayune  of  18th  of  Jan- 
uary, which  I will  forward  by  to-morrow’s  cars. 

X.  B.  DEBEAY. 

The  following  document  is  not  to  be  considered  or  used  as  official  in 
any  way,  but  as  strictly  personal.  g_ 

Colonel , Forty-second  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

Statement  in  relation  to  the  surrender  of  a portion  of  the  Forty -second 
Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers , at  Galveston , Tex .,  on  the  morning 
of  January  1,  A.  I).  1863,  to  the  Confederate  forces  under  command  of 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder , with  the  circumstances  attending  the  sur- 
render. 

After  the  steamer  Harriet  Lane  had  raised  the  white  flag  in  token  of 
surrender  the  white  flag  was  also  raised  by  the  Forty-second  Regiment 
by  order  of  the  colonel  commanding;  but  the  fire  continuing  for  ten  or 
fifteen  minutes  from  the  wharf  and  the  brick  building  above  Kuhn’s 
Wharf,  where  the  said  Forty-second  Regiment  was  stationed,  when 
Brigadier-General  Scurry  came  down  to  Kuhn’s  Wharf  and  demanded 
the  unconditional  surrender  of  the  troops  on  the  wharf  the  firing  ceased 
and  was  not  resumed  so  far  as  the  wharf  is  concerned. 

The  surrender  was  made  immediately  and  the  battle  terminated,  so 
far  as  said  Forty-secoud  Regiment  was  concerned.  Between  the  time 
the  white  flag  was  raised  on  the  wharf  and  the  cessation  of  the  firing 
only  one  man  was  wounded  and  none  killed. 

This  statement  is  made  in  justice  to  Brigadier-General  Scurry,  who, 
by  his  gentlemanly  conduct  and  uniform  kindness  to  officers  and  pri- 
vates, is  entitled  to  the  grateful  remembrance  of  the  whole  command. 
We  believe  that  the  firing  after  the  white  flag  was  raised  was  unknown 
to  him  and  against  his  will  or  orders. 

The  flag  of  truce  was  not  raised  on  the  wharf  by  the  Forty-second 
Regiment  until  every  vessel  in  the  harbor  had  raised  one. 

When  the  demand  for  {surrender  was  made  by  Brigadier- General 
Scurry  the  colonel  of  the  Forty- second  Regiment  asked  to  be  allowed 
the  same  time  given  to  the  fleet  for  consideration  (three  hours),  but  his 

request  was  refused.  tit  u 

Having  carefully  examined  the  above  statement  1 believe  it  to  be 
true  in  every  point,  and  accordingly  I have  affixed  my  signature 
tbprpto 

ISAAC  S.  BURRELL, 

Colonel , Forty -second  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 


Chaf.  XXVII,  J 


INDIANS  IN  NEW  MEXICO. 


227 


Houston,  Tex.,  January  23,  1863. 

This  statement,  made  by  Colonel  Burrell,  commanding  the  detach- 
ment of  the  Forty-secon$  Massachusetts  Regiment  Volunteers,  cap- 
tured at  Galveston  on  1st  instant,  it  will  be  seen  agrees  in  every  impor- 
tant particular  with  the  statement  furnished  by  me  in  my  communication 
to  Commodore  Bell.  Our  naval  officers  distinctly  state  that  the  white 
flag  hoisted  on  board  the  ship  did  not  apply  to  the  land  force.  Cap- 
tain Lubbock,  the  commander  of  one  of  our  gunboats,  who  arranged 
with  the  senior  officer  in  command  of  the  Federal  fleet  the  terms  of  the 
truce,  stated  on  his  return  from  the  Federal  flag-ship  to  Brigadier- 
General  Scurry,  in  the  presence  of  Colonel  Burrell,  that  the  land  troops 
were  not  embraced  in  these  terms,  directly  or  indirectly,  he  having  been 
sent  by  Capt.  Leon  Smith,  commanding  our  fleet  of  gunboats,  to  de- 
mand the  surrender  of  the  rest  of  the  Federal  fleet  and  to  give  the 
Federal  commander  three  hours7  time  to  accept  or  decline  his  demand, 
during  which  time  the  fire  was  to  cease  between  the  ships.  I knew 
nothing  of  the  arrangements,  nor  did  any  officer  ashore,  and  when 
Captain  Lubbock,  on  his  return,  touched  at  Kuhn’s  Wharf,  where  the 
Forty-second  Massachusetts  Regiment  was  stationed,  hd  gave  the  above 
information  to  Brigadier- General  Scurry  in  the  presence  of  Colonel  Bur- 
rell, and  the  latter  surrendered  unconditionally,  after  his  request  to  be 
allowed  the  same  time  given  the  ships  was  refused.  Had  the  Federal 
commander  of  the  land  forces  been  in  superior  force  to  myself  and  en- 
gaged in  battle  ashore  he  would  certainly  have  prosecuted  his  advan- 
tage to  the  utmost,  regardless  of  a truce  between  two  fleets,  which  he 
had  not  authorized.  If  necessary,  I think  it  can  be  fully  established 
also  that  the  Federal  troops  ashore  were  ready  to  surrender  the  mo- 
ment daylight  gave  them  an  opportunity  of  doing  so,  and  would  have 
done  it  even  before  daylight  had  it  been  possible. 

I have  also  to  state  that  1 am  informed  by  Brigadier-General  Scurry, 
who  was  in  that  portion  of  the  battle,  that  the  white  flag  displayed  from 
Kuhn’s  Wharf  was  respected  the  moment  it  was  seen. 


JANUARY  4-MAY  8,  1863. — Operations  against  Indians  in  New  Mexico. 

SUMMARY  OF  THE  TRinsTCIIP AL  EVENTS. 

Jan.  29,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Pinos  Altos  Mines. 

March  27,  1863. — Skirmish  on  the  Rio  Bonito. 

April  25,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Apache  Pass. 

May  7,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Cajoude  Arivaypo. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

. No.  3.  i Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  February  24,  1864. 

The  following  notices  of  combats  with  hostile  Indians  in  New  Mexico 
and  synopsis  of  Indian  depredations,  as  well  as  operations  generally 
against  them  during  the  year  1863,  are  published  for  the  information 
of.  all  concerned.  Perhaps  not  over  one  scout  in  four  which  was  made 
against  the  Indians  during  that  period  was  at  all  successful ; but  no 
notice  is  made  except  of  scouts  which  had  results  for  or  against  us. 
This  fact  is  stated  to  convey  a better  idea  of  the  labor  of  the  troops  : 

January  4. — Colonel  Carson,  commanding  Fort  Stanton,  reports  ar- 
rival of  2 Mescalero  Indians,  who  stated  that  in  six  days  100  Mescalero 


228 


W.  FLA,,  8.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

Indians  would  deliver  themselves  up  at  Fort  Stanton ; that  this  num- 
ber comprised  all  the  Mescaleros  not  already  at  Bosque  Bedondo. 

January  9. — Captain  Updegraff,  commanding  Fort  Sumner,  reports 
that  2 men  of  the  picket  stationed  at  Bosfue  Grande  left  the  picket 
contrary  to  orders  to  hunt,  and  that  one  of  them,  Private  Samuel 
Strunk,  Company  M,  First  New  Mexico  Volunteers,  was  killed  by  In- 
dians ; that  the  number  of  Indians  then  at  Bosque  Bedondo  was  248. 

January  17. — Colonel  Carson  reports  the  arrival  at  Fort  Stanton  of 
100  Mescaleros,  mentioned  in  his  communication  of  the  4th  instant, 
under  the  following-named  chiefs:  Ojo  Blanco,  Janero  Viejo,  Janero 
Pablo,  Janero  Francisco,  Jose  La  Paz,  Mancos  Son,  Schat-hi. 

January  17.— Capt.  E.  I).  Shirland,  First  Cavalry,  California  Voluu 
teers,  brought  Mangus  Colorado,  an  Apache  chief,  into  Fort  McLaue 
a prisoner.  On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  in  attempting  to  escape, 
Mangus  was  killed  by  the  guard.  January  20  Captain  Shirland  came 
upon  an  Indian  rancheria,  surprised  and  defeated  the  Indians,  killing 
9 and  wounding  many  more,  and  capturing  from  them  34  head  of  stock, 
a portion  of  which  were  Government  mules.  The  rancheria  and  all 
that  pertained  to  it  was  destroyed. 

January  19.— Capt.  William  McCleave,  First  Cavalry,  California  Vol- 
unteers, reports  that  in  obedience  to  orders  he  started  from  Fort  McLane 
and  proceeded  to  the  Pinos  Altos  Mines ; arriving  at  the  latter  place,  a 
party  of  Mangus  Colorado’s  band  of  Apaches  approached ; the  men 
were  ordered  to  attack  them,  which  was  done ; 11  Indians  were  killed 
and  1 wounded ; the  latter  proved  to  be  the  wife  of  the  chief,  Mangus 
Colorado.  Three  horses  were  captured,  but  being  in  poor  condition,  the 
people  at  the  mines  were  permitted  to  keep  them.  Eleven  Indians 
killed,  1 wounded,  and  3 horses  captured. 

January  29. — On  the  29th  January  the  Indians  attacked  two  hunting 
parties  of  Company  A,  Fifth  Infantry,  California  Volunteers,  at  Pinos 
Altos  Mines  ; killed  Private  [William]  Hussey  and  wounded  Sergeant 
[T.  B.]  Sitton.  The  Indians  were  driven  off  with  a loss  of  20  killed  and 
15* wounded.  Sergeant  Sitton  behaved  gallantly  in  this  affair. 

February  16.— L.  M.  Vaca  reports  that  4,000  sheep  were  stolen  from 
the  neighborhood  of  Limitar  by  Navajoes,  and  reports  that  the  Nava- 
ioes  stole  2,000  sheep,  which  he  recaptured  at  the  Sierras  Oscuras  (Black 
Hills),  killing  3 and  wounding  several  Indians,  and  capturing  all  their 

saddles,  provisions,  &c.  T 

February  25. — Jose  L.  Perea  reports  that  a band  of  40  INavajoes 
attacked  and  drove  off  6,000  sheep  25  miles  south  of  Pope’s  Artesian 
Well. 

March  4.— L.  M.  Vaca  reports  that  since  February  26  310  head  of 
horses  and  cattle  have  been  stolen  by  Indians  from  the  neighborhood 
of  Limitar. 

March  5.— Major  [Arthur]  Morrison  reports  departure  ot  Indians  men- 
tioned in  Colonel  Carson’s  communication  of  January  17,  1862,  from 
Fort  Stanton  to  Bosque  Bedondo;  also  the  departure  of  15  additional 
Indians,  who  had  given  themselves  up. 

March  12. — Indians  captured  near  Sabinal  2,300  head  of  sheep ; were 
followed  by  Mexicans,  who  recaptured  them  on  the  Jornada  on  the 
night  of  the  12th  or  13th. 

March—.  —A  band  of  40  Indians  pursued  two  expressmen  going  from 
Fort  Stanton  to  Fort  Union.  These  Indians  had  a large  herd  of  sheep. 
Captain  [F.  P.l  Abreii,  commanding  Fort  Stanton,  sent  Lieutenant 
I David]  McAllister  and  30  men,  with  ten  days’  rations,  to  the  Sierras 
Oscuras  to  intercept  them.  The  expedition  failed  to  recover  the  stock. 


(/HA r.  XXVH.] 


INDIANS  IN  NEW  MEXICO. 


229 


March  22.— On  the  afternoon  of  March  22  the  Gila  Apaches  made  a 
descent  upon  the  public  herd  which  was  grazing  near  Fort  West  and 
succeeded  in  running  off  some  60  head  of  horses ; Indians  numbered 
— . At  8 o’clock  p.  m.  the  gallant  Maj.  William  McCleave,  First  Cav- 
alry California  Volunteers,  started  in  pursuit  with  a command  consist- 
ing of  Lieutenants  French  and  Latimer,  First  Cavalry,  California  Vol- 
unteers, 40  men  of  Company  A,  25  men  of  Company  B,  and  14  men  of 
Company  C,  First  Cavalry,  California  Volunteers.  Major  McCleave 
followed  trail  of  Indians  in  a westerly  course  about  70  miles  and  down 
the  Gila  5 miles,  then  across  a divide  to  Rio  Negro,  where  he  arrived  at 
9 a.  m.  on  the  26th,  and  then  moved  up  the  stream  a short  distance. 
Signs  *at  this  point  indicated  the  close  proximity  of  Indians  and  a ran- 
cheria.  During  twilight  command  moved  up  the  stream  2 miles  and 
made  camp.  Thirty  men  were  mounted  on  only  serviceable  animals 
left,  under  Lieutenant  Latimer,  and  30  dismounted,  under  Major  Mc- 
Cleave, started  in  search  of  rancheria,  leaving  remainder  of  command 
with  Lieutenant  French  in  charge  of  broken-down  animals,  pack  animals, 
provisions,  &c.  Leaving  the  camp  at  8 o’clock  p.  m.  the  command  as- 
cended a mountain  on  west  side  of  stream  and  traveled  about  12  miles 
without  meeting  with  any  success;  here  command  rested  from  1 o’clock 
of  the  27th  until  dawn  of  day,  it  raining  all  the  time.  When  light 
enough  to  see  Major  McCleave  discovered  from  an  elevated  position 
trees,  which  indicated  presence  of  water,  and  a horse  grazing  in  neigh 
borhood  also  indicated  that  the  rancheria  was  near  by.  Lieutenant 
Latimer  was  ordered  ahead  with  his  command ; discovered  rancheria 
and  gallantly  charged  upon  it.  Part  of  the  dismounted  men  immedi- 
ately commenced  gathering  in  and  guarding  the  horses  to  prevent  the 
escape  of  the  Indians,  while  the  others  were  skirmishing  and  fighting 
on  the  bluffs.  The  fight  lasted  for  twenty  minutes,  and  resulted  in  the 
complete  routing  of  the  Indians,  the  capture  of  all  our  own  horses  that 
could  be  found  and  many  Indian  horses,  the  killing  of  25  Indians,  and 
the  complete  destruction  of  the  rancheria,  provisions,  and  all  they  pos- 
sessed. Private  [James]  Hall,  of  Company  B,  First  Cavalry,  California 
Volunteers,  was  wounded  in  this  fight.  The  command  then  returned  to 
camp,  and  soon  after  noon  started  on  return  trip  by  a route  supposed 
more  direct  than  the  one  by  which  the  Indians  were  followed  from  the 
fort.  This  route  led  up  a canon  from  sides  of  which  the  Indians  attacked 
rear  guard  of  command,  wounding  Lieutenant  French,  killing  2 horses 
and  wounding  1.  As  soon  as  the  attack  was  made  the  soldiers  ascended 
the  perpendicular  walls  of  the  canon  by  climbing  one  over  the  other. 
This  was  done  amidst  showers  of  arrows.  As  soon  as  they  reached  the 
top  the  Indians  lied  in  every  direction.  The  superiority  of  the  Cali- 
fornians over  the  Apaches  at  their  own  style  of  fighting  was  shown  in 
the  case  of  Corporal  [Charles  E.]  Ellis,  of  Company  A,  who  crawled 
unseen  to  a rock  behind  which  was  an  Indian,  and  giving  a short  cough 
the  Indian  raised  his  head  to  discover  its  cause  when  a bullet  from  Ellis’ 
rifle  dashed  through  his  brain.  The  Indians  lost  in  this  attack  3 killed. 
On  the  30th,  provisions  giving  out,  a sergeant  and  5 men  were  sent  to 
the  fort  for  a supply.  Until  their  return  the  party  subsisted  on  horse 
flesh.  On  the  4th  of  April  the  command  reached  fort.  On  5th  Private 
Hall  died  from  wounds  received  in  the  fight.  Indian  loss,  28  killed ; 
troops,  I. 

March  24. — Major  Morrison,  with  Captain  [A.  H.]  Pfeiffer’s  company. 
New  Mexico  Volunteers,  cn  route  from  Fort  Stanton  to  Fort  McRae,  at  San 
Nicolas  Spring  came  upon  a wounded  Mexican,  who  stated  he  belonged 
to  a train  belonging  to  Martin  Lujan,  of  Socorro,  Tex.;  that  the  train 


230 


W.  >'LA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chai>.  XXVII. 

had  been  attacked  b.v  Indians  and  nearly  all  the  party  killed,  he  being 
wounded  in  three  places  and  left  for  dead.  Major  Mormon,  with  Lieu- 
tenant fL.  A.  1 Bargie  and  18  men  of  the  company,  went  in  pursuit,  came 
to  the  salt  marshes  at  daybreak  of  the  25th,  found  10  wagons  stripped 
of  everything  portable,  and  within  a circuit  of  3 miles  i dead  bodies 
of  Mexicans,  which  they  buried.  They  then  followed  the  trail  of  the  In- 
dians toward  the  Sacramento  Mountains ; then  toward  the  Sierra  Blanca 
until  noon,  when  they  met  a party  of  Mexicans  from  Tularosa  m pursuit 
of  the  same  Indians;  they  had  been  informed  of  the  massacre  by  another 
wounded  Mexican,  who  had  escaped.  The  Indians  had  at  this  time 
twenty  hours’  start,  and  were  hidden  in  the  recesses  of  the  Sierra 
Blanca.  Major  Morrison  returned  to  San  Nicolas  Spring,  arming 
there  on  the  evening  of  the  25th,  having  traveled  150  miles.  Lieuten- 
ant Bargie’s  conduct  is  spoken  of  as  deserving  of  praise.  Estimated 
number  of  Indians  45  in  all,  20  of  whom  were  warriors.  Arrows  indi- 
cate they  were  Apaches.  Seven  Mexicans  killed  and  70  head  of  cattle 

at°April  25,-Oapt.  Benjamin  E.  Harrover,  Fifth  Infantry,  California 
Volunteers,  reports  that  he  attacked  at  Apache  Pass  a band  of  Apache 
Indians,  numbering  about  200;  30  of  them  mounted  and  several  of  them 
armed  with  guns.  At  the  first  fire  the  Indians  fed  back,  but  kept  up 
the  fight  for  nearly  two  hours.  In  this  affair  Private  [M.  B.]  Wilcox, 
of  Company  E,  Fifth  Infantry,  California  Volunteers,  was  wounded. 
Indian  loss,  3 killed;  — wounded;  troops,  1 private  wounded. 

May  — Maj.  Joseph  Smith,  commanding  Tort  Stanton,  reports  that 
a party  of  Indians  made  a descent  on  the  farmers  of  Buidoso  and _ killed 
a man  named  Harding,  robbed  his  house,  and  drove  off  10  or  12  head 

May  1. — Cesario  Duran,  a citizen,  reports  that  a party  under  his 
command  had  a hard  fight  with  the  Apaches  m the  San  Andres  Moiint- 
ains,  and  succeeded  in  killing  and  wounding  many  Indians ; the  party 
lost  2 men  killed.  The  party  recovered  several  animals  and  captured 
7 horses 

May  8— Lieut.  Col.  J.  F.  Chaves,  First  New  Mexico  Volunteers, 
reports  that  an  Indian  named  Gordo  was  seized  and  turned  ovei  to 
Lieut.  B.  Stevens  on  the  morning  of  11th  instant..  The  Indian  unboum 
himself  and  attempted  to  escape ; the  sentinel  m charge  shot  and  killed 

him. 

* ****** 

The  zeal  and  energy  shown  by  the  officers  and  soldiers,  and  the 
fortitude  with  which  they  have  encountered  hunger,  thirst,  latigue,  anil 
exposure  in  their  pursuit  of  hostile  Indians  within  this  department 
during  the  past  year  are  deserving  of  the  highest  admiration,  Isot 
less  is  this  due  to  those  parties  who  were  so  unfortunate  as  not  to  over- 
take the  Indians  than  to  those  who  came  up  with  them.  All  toiled 
and  suffered  alike.  The  gallantry  which  every  one  has  shown  when 
there  was  an  opportunity  to  close  with  the  enemy  proves  that  that 
virtue  among  the  troops  in  New  Mexico  is  common  to  all. 

The  alacrity  with  which  citizens  of  New  Mexico  have  taken  the  field 
to  pursue  and  encounter  the  Indians  is  worthy  of  all  praise.  Many 
them  have  been  conspicuous  for  their  courage,  and  all  have  shown 
settled  determination  to  assist  the  military  m their  efforts  to  rid  the 
countrv  of  the  fierce  and  brutal  robbers  and  murderers  who  toi  nearly 
two  centuries  have  brought  poverty  to  its  inhabitants  and  mourning 
and  desolation  to  nearly  every  hearth  throughout  the  territory. 


Chat.  XXVII.] 


LOSS  OF  SPARKLING  SEA. 


231 


The  department  commander  congratulates  the  troops  and  the  people 
on  the  auspicious  opening  of  the  year  1864.  For  one  hundred  and 
eighty  years  the  Navajoe  Indians  have  ravaged  New  Mexico,  but  it  is 
confidently  expected  that  the  year  1864  will  witness  the  end  of  hostili 
ties  with  that  tribe  j then  New  Mexico  will  take  a stride  toward  that 
great  prosperity  which  has  lain  within  her  grasp,  but  which  hitherto 
she  has  not  been  permitted  to  enjoy! 

By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Carle  ton  : 

BEN.  C.  CUTLEB, 
Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


JANUARY  9,  1863. — Loss  of  the  United  States  transport  Sparkling  Sea. 

Report  of  Capt . John  A.  Grow , Twenty -fifth  Battery  New  Yorlc  Light 

Artillery . 

New  Orleans,  February  6,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  for  your  consideration  the  following 
report : 

On  the  16th  day  of  December,  1862,  in  accordance  with  an  order 
issued  by  GenerarBanks  at  the  city  of  New  York,  myself,  second  lieu 
tenant,  and  68  meu  of  my  command  embarked  on  board  the  transport- 
ship  Sparkling  Sea,  under  order  to  sail  for  Fortress  Monroe  to  take  on 
board  106  horses  and  then  to  put  to  sea  under  sealed  orders,  which  were 
to  be  opened  after  twenty-four  hours’  continuous  sail  from  that  place. 
That  on  the  said  day,  in  the  afternoon  thereof,  the  said  ship  set  sail  for 
her  aforesaid  destination,  which  she  reached  on  the  morning  of  the  19th 
day  of  the  said  month  of  December ; that  through  a disposition  on  the 
part  of  the  master  of  the  said  vessel  to  prolong  his  stay  at  that  place 
he  could  not  be  induced  to  take  on  the  horses  so  assigned  to  the  vessel 
.until  the  25th  and  26th  days  of  December,  and  on  the  morning  of  the 
27th  day  of  the  said  month  the  vessel  put  to  sea,  and  on  the  morning 
of  the  28th  the  captain  of  the  said  vessel  opened  his  sealed  orders, 
which  directed  him  to  u proceed  to  Ship  Island,  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.” 

On  the  morning  of  the  9th  of  January,  1863,  at  5.30  o’clock  in  the 
morning,  in  open  daylight,  the  said  vessel  ran  upon  the  Florida  Beef 
about  10  miles  northerly  of  the  Carysfor.t  light  house,  and  on  or  about 
the  18th  the  said  vessel  became  a total  wreck. 

On  the  evening  of  the  9th  of  January  last  the  gunboat  Sagamore 
came  to  us  and  took  off  myself  and  60  men  of  my  command,  and  on  the 
10th  day  of  that  monfh  landed  us  at  Key  West.  I left  8 men,  with 
my  second  lieutenant,  in  charge  of  the  horses,  forage,  commissary  and 
quartermaster’s  stores  until  I could  return  with  assistance  to  save  the 
property,  there  being  a prospect  of  continued  fair  weather. 

On  reaching  Key  West  I reported  immediately  to  the  quartermaster 
of  that  post,  and  lie  immediately  chartered  the  steamer  Swan,  and  on 
the  morning  of  the  11th  we  proceeded  toward  the  wreck,  but  through 
the  mismanagement  of  the  captain  of  the  said  steamer  we  never  left  the 
channel  until  after  12  o’clock  at  noon  of  that  day,  and  at  night  the  said 
steamer  came  to  anchor,  refusing  to  proceed  farther  that  night.  On 
the  14th  day  thereafter,  at  10  o’clock  a.  m.,  the  said  steamer  proceeded  to 
within  about  5 miles  of  the  wreck,  when  she  refused  to  proceed  farther, 
although  ordered  to  do  so  by  the  quartermaster  aforesaid,  who  had 
come  on  the  steamer  with  us. 


232 


W,  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


On  application  to  the  captain  of  the  steamer  for  a small  boat  to  go 
to  the  wreck  he  refused  to  allow  us  to  take  it  or  man  one  for  us.  The 
wind  was  blowing  very  strong  at  the  time,  and  the  reason  alleged  for 
not  proceeding  farther  was  that  it  was  not  safe. 

On  the  13th  day  we  met  a small  wrecking  vessel  bound  down  for  Key 
West,  containing  the  second  lieutenant  and  8 men  aforesaid,  who  had 
abandoned  the  wreck  and  reported  the  horses  still  alive,  but  that  the 
vessel  was  hourly  expected  to  go  to  pieces. 

On  finding  that  any  effort  to  prevail  on  the  steamer  to  proceed  to  the 
wreck  [was  in  vain]  we  turned  back  to  Key  West.  I had  taken  on  board 
the  steamer  65  of  my  men  to  assist  at  the  wreck  when  we  started  out, 
and  drew  two  days’  rations  to  last  us  till  we  reached  our  own  stores. 
On  the  morning  of  the  15th  I found  that  the  vessel  was  short  of  water 
and  nearly  out  of  provisions,  as  I had  been  compelled  after  the  exhaus- 
tion of  our  own  rations  to  draw  on  the  steamer’s  provisions,  and  that 
the  steamer  could  not  reach  Key  West  under  three  days.  Seeing  a 
steamer  at  anchor  some  distance  I signaled  her,  and  on  coming  alongside 
proved  to  be  the  gunboat  Sagamore,  Lieutenant  English  commanding, 
and  on  a representation  of  our  condition  to  him  he  took  us  off  and  again 
1 added  us  at  Key  West,  and  the  men  went  into  quarters  at  Fort  Taylor. 

After  taking  on  horses  at  Fortress  Monroe  and  before  running  on  the 
reef  we  lost  23  horses ; with  the  exception  of  3 they  all  died  of  pneu- 
monia, which  I believe  to  be  occasioned  by  the  bad  ventilation  of  the 
ship.  The  ship  was  not  properly  loaded  for  carrying  horses;  being  so 
high  out  of  the  water  she  rolled  badly,  and  seriously  chafed  and  bruised 
the  horses.  The  tools  for  the  stables,  cleaning  horses,  and  watering 
them  the  captain  denied  having,  but  on  the  wreck  of  the  vessel  I found 
that  they  were  well  provided. 

After  we  left  Fortress  Monroe  we  were  in  a heavy  storm,  which  lasted 
about  three  days.  The  horses  suffered  extremely  for  wa  nt  of  ventila- 
tion, and  after  some  considerable  inquiry  I found  that  the  vessel  had 
one  wind  sail,  which  was  new,  and  the  captain  disliked  to  put  it  up,  but 
did  do  so,  which  very  much  improved  the  condition  of  the  horses. 

The  wreck  of  the  vessel  could  have  been  easily  prevented  by  the 
most  ordinary  caution  on  the  part  of  the  watch  and  lookout.  About  4 
o’clock  a.  m.  of  the  said  ninth  day  the  second  mate  of  the  ship  came 
into  the  after  cabin  and  announced  to  the  captain  that  there  was  a re- 
volving light  over  the  starboard  bow.  The  captain  immediately  went 
on  deck  and  quickly  returned,  and  he  and  the  first  mate  examined  the 
chart  to  determine  what  light  it  could  be,  and  finally  concluded  it  to  be 
the  Double-Headed  Shot-Key  light,  and  the  second  mate  remarked  he 
would  go  on  deck  and  change  the  course  of  the  vessel  for  that  light,  and 
went  out  of  the  cabin.  At  5 o’clock  a.  m.  I got*up  and  dressed  myself 
and  went  on  deck  at  precisely  5.30  a.  in.,  and  as  I got  my  head 
above  the  after  cabin  hatch  I heard  the  cry  of  u Breakers!”  and  then 
the  second  mate  had  just  sprung  to  the  wheel  and  was  putting  the  ves- 
sel about,  but  it  was  too  late,  for  the  current  set  the  vessel  onto  the 
reef.  There  was  no  storm  and  no  high  wind.  The  beacon  and  break- 
ers had  been  in  full  sight  for  twenty  minutes  to  some  of  my  men  who 
were  forward,  but  did  not  know  what  they  were. 

The  crew  of  the  vessel  were  almost  without  exception  strongly  in 
favor  of  secession  and  were  bold  in  their  expressions  of  rebel  sympathy. 
The  second  mate,  who  was  on  watch  that  morning,  had  expressed  him- 
self in  favor  of  the  rebel  Government  and  hoped  it  would  succeed.  The 
man  on  the  lookout  was  a secessionist  and  a “ North  Carolinian”  by 
birth ; he  was  either  not  performing  his  duty  or  he  willfully  allowed  the 


Chai-  XXVII. J 


OPERATIONS  ON  BAYOU  TBCHE.  * 


233 


vessel  to  run  on  the  reef.  Those  of  m.y  men  who  were  on  deck  that 
morning  say  that  they  called  the  attention  of  some  one  of  the  crew  to 
the  beacon  and  to  the  strau  ge  appearance  of  the  water.  When  I reached 
the  deck  the  beacon  and  breakers  were  very  distinct. 

I had  lost  confidence  in  the  second  mate  just  before  passing  the 
Hole  in  the  Wall,  for  had  it  not  been  for  the  opportune  discovery  of 
the  first  mate  he  would  have  allowed  us  to  run  into  Little  Abaco  with- 
out ever  notifying  him  of  it,  for  one  minute  farther  east  would  have 
wrecked  the  vessel.  The  moment  the  vessel  struck  the  reef  the  crew 
expressed  their  delight  and  immediately  thereafter  refused  to  perform 

duty.  . . _ 

In  about  two  hours  after  the  vessel  struck  the  captain  had  mane  a 
contract  with  a wrecker  to  strip  the  vessel.  If  an  anchor  had  been 
dropped  when  we  first  struck,  the  vessel  would  have  been  kept  in  a posi- 
tion when  she  could  have  been  drawn  off  by  some  steamer,  but  up  to 
the  time  of  my  leaving  at  night  of  that  day  no  anchor  had  been  put  out 
to  hold  the  vessel. 

If  steamer  Swan  had  performed  her  part  of  the  contract  specified  m 
her  charter  every  horse  could  have  been  saved,  with  everything  on  board. 

After  the  vessel  was  abandoned  the  wreckers  took  off  12  horses, 
about  70  sacks  of  oats,  and  a number  of  bags  of  bran,  all  of  my 
quartermaster  stores,  and  a small  quantity  Of  the  commissary  stores; 
and  on  their  arrival  at  Key  West  were  libeled  for  the  salvage  of  the 
wreckers  in  the  United  States  district  court  of  Southern  Florida,  where 
the  matter  is  now  pending.  The  quartermaster  of  the  post  refused  to 
bid  in  the  property,  especially  my  quartermaster  stores,  and  they  were 
sold  at  a great  sacrifice.  The  aggregate  of  the  property  saved  and  the 
amount  for  which  they  sold  can  all  be  ascertained  of  the  clerk  of  the 
said  district  court. 

On  the  30th  day  of  January  I procured  passage  for  myself,  lieutenant, 
and  men  on  the  quartermaster  s steamer  McClellan  to  New  Orleans, 
where  I reported  on  the  4th  day  of  February,  1863. 

With  much  esteem,  I am,  captain,  yours,  &c., 

JOHN  A.  GROW, 

Captain,  Commanding  Twenty- fifth,  Battery , New  York . 

Capt.  Richard  Arnold,  Chief  of  Arty.,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf. 


JANUARY  14,  1863.— Engagement  on  Bayou  Teche,  La.,  and  destruction 
of  Confederate  gunboat  Cotton. 

REPORTS.  * 

No.  1.— Maj.  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Bank?,  U.  8.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  the 
Gulf. 

No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  Godfrey  Weitzel,  U.  8.  Army,  commanding  expedition. 

No.  1.  - 

Report  of  Maj . Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks , U.  8.  Army , commanding 
Department  of  the  Gulf. 

New  Orleans,  La.,  January  16,  1863. 
General:  1 have  the  pleasure  to  inclose  to  you  the  copy  of  a tele 
gram  received  last  night  from  Brig.  Gen.  Godfrey  Weitzel,  containing 


* See  also  Appendix,  p.  1089. 


234 


W.  FLA  , S.  ALA  , S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

' 

the  gratifying  intelligence  of  the  complete  success  of  the  expedition 
alluded  to  in  my  dispatch  of  yesterday,  including  the  destruction  of  the 
rebel  gunboat  Cotton.  That  gallant  and  energetic  officer  is  again  en- 
titled to  the  thanks  of  the  general  commanding  this  department  for  the 
skillful  manner  in  which  he  has  performed  the  task  confided  to  him. 
Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- Genera  l , Com  man  ding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief. 

[Inclosure.] 

Berwick  Bay — 6 p.  m. 

(Received,  New  Orleans,  January  15,  1863 — 9 p.  m.) 
General  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

I have  just  returned.  We  have  accomplished  the  object  of  our  expe- 
dition. The  Confederate  States  gunboat  Cotton  is  one  of  the  things 
that  were.  We  lost  4 killed  and  14  wounded.  My  men  behaved  mag- 
nificently. I am  recrossing  the  bay. 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General,  U.  8.  Volunteers.  - 

. 

' 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Godfrey  Weitzel , TJ.  8.  Army,  commanding  expedition. 

Headquarters  Reserve  Brigade, 

Camp  Stevens,  La.,  January  18,  1863. 
Colonel:  Having  during  the  whole  of  week  before  last  heard  re- 
ports from  different  sources  that  the  enemy  was  meditating  an  attack 
on  my  forces  at  Berwick  Bay,  and  that  he  was  increasing  the  armament 
of  the  rebel  gunboat  J.  A.  Cotton,  both  in  caliber  and  number,  and 
knowing  that  this  gunboat  would  be  a very  large  element  in  the  attack, 
I considered  it  my  duty,  in  co-operation  with  our  gunboat  fleet  in  Ber- 
wick Bay,  under  Lieut.  Commander  T.  McK.  Buchanan,  to  make  an  ex- 
pedition to  capture,  destroy,  or  cause  to  be  destroyed,  this  gunboat. 

I concentrated  all  my  troops  for  the  expedition,  consisting  of  the 
Twenty-first  Indiana,  Major  Hays;  Sixth  Michigan,  Colonel  Clark; 
Eighth  Vermont,  Colonel  Thomas;  Twelfth  Connecticut,  Major  Peck; 
Seventy-fifth  New  York,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Babcock;  One  hundred 
and  sixtieth  New  York,  Colonel  Dwight;  Twenty-third  Connecticut, 
Colonel  Holmes;  four  pieces  of  Battery  A,  First  Artillery,  and  two 
pieces  of  Fourth  Massachusetts  Battery,  under  command  of  Capt.  E.  C. 
Bainbridge,  Fifth  Artillery ; First  Maine  Battery,  Lieutenant  Bradbury ; 
Sixth  Massachusetts  Battery,  Captain  Carruth;  Company  B,  Louisiana 
Cavalry,  Captain  Barrett,  and  Company  B,  Eighth  New  Hampshire, 
Lieutenant  Camp,  acting  as  provost  guard  at  Brashear  City, 

On  Tuesday  morning  at  3 o’clock  the  gunboats  commenced  crossing 
the  artillery  and  cavalry  and  completed  it  at  10.30  o’clock,  and  then 
took  on  board  all  the  infantry.  The  whole  force  was  disembarked  and 
formed  in  line  of  battle  at  Pattersonville.  Lieutenant-Commander  Buch- 
anan then  made  a reconnaissance,  and  upon  his  return  I advanced  my 


Chap.  XXVII  ] .OPERATIONS  ON  BAYOU  TECHE. 


235 


whole  force  to  Lynch’s  Point,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night  under  cover 
of  the  gunboats. 

Next  morning  I threw  the  Eighth  Vermont  on  the  east  bank  ot  Bayou 
Teche  to  clear  that  bank  of  riflemen  and  other  land  forces  that  might 
be  there,  and  advanced  my  line  on  the  west  bank  to  attack  the  Cotton, 
which  was  in  sight.  Before  starting  I directed  the  colonel  of  the  Eighth 
Vermont  to  call  for  60  volunteers  to  move  right  up  to  the  Cotton  on  the 
east  bank  and  shoot  down  her  gunners.  I directed  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Babcock,  of  the  Seventy-fifth  New  York,  to  call  for  the  same  number 
of  volunteers  to  do  the  same  on  the  west  bank. 

Soon  after  starting  the  gunboats,  which  were  ahead,  engaged  the 
Cotton,  my  line  steadily  advancing.  As  soon  as  the  Seventy-fifth  New 
York  was  within  supporting  distance  of  the  Cotton  a portion  of  her 
regular  line  of  skirmishers  and  the  volunteers  attacked  her,  shot  down 
every  one  in  sight,  and  completely  silenced  her.  At  the  same  time 
Captain  Bainbridge  was  enfilading  her  from  the  main  road,  and  Car- 
ruth  and  Bradbury* en  echelon  on  plantation  roads  running  parallel  to 
the  main  road,  were  firing  at  her  broadside.  The  Eighth  V ermont  came 
up  on  the  east  bank  as  quickly  as  possible,  drove  the  enemy  from  his 
rifle  pits,  and  the  cavalry  which  was . supporting  these  riflemen,  and 
took*  41  prisoners,  including  a lieutenant.  The  three  pieces  of  the 
enemy’s  artillery,  with  its  infantry  and  cavalry  support  on  the  west 
bank,  were  driven  back  by  the  skirmishers  of  the  Seventy -fifth  New 
York  and  my  light  batteries.  At  the  same  time  the  gunboats  were 
firing  at  the  Cotton  as  fast  as  possible.  The  Cotton  stood  this  terrible 
fire  bravely  for  some  time,  then  commenced  retreating  slowly.  After 
o'ettiug  out  of  range  she  came  back  but  was  again  repulsed,  and  after 
that  there  was  only  slight  skirmishing  between  the  laud  forces  for  the 
rest  of  the  day. 

Next  morning  before  daybreak,  and  before  we  could  commence  re- 
moving the  obstructions  in  the  bayou,  the  Cotton  was  reported  on  fire. 
She  had  been  swung  across  the  bayou  and  burned,  so  that  her  hull 
might  serve  as  a further  obstruction.  The  object  of  the  expedition  hav  - 
ing thus  been  accomplished  I immediately  ordered  the  return,  and 
arrived  here  on  Friday  night  with  my  whole  command. 

We  captured  about  50  prisoners  (including  1 lieutenant)  and  several 
horses.  We  lost  1 lieutenant  and  5 privates  killed  and  2 non-com- 
missioned officers  and  25  privates  wounded, 

The  gunboat  fleet,  commanded  by  the  brave,  lamented  Buchanan,  con- 
sisted of  the  gunboat  Calhoun,  Lieutenant  Buchanan  commanding  (and 
since  his  death  bv  Acting  Master  M.  Jordan);  the  gunboat  Estrella, 
Lieut.  Commander  A.  P.  Cooke ; the  gunboat  Kinsman,  Acting  Volun- 
teer Lieut.  George  Wiggins,  and  the  gunboat  Diana,  Acting  Master  E. 
S.  Goodwin.  All  of  these  gallant  officers  and  the  brave  officers  and 
men  under  them  did  their  duty  bravely  and  well.  They  Grossed  and 
recrossed  my  whole  command  over  Berwick  Bay  without  a single  acci- 
dent and  covered  my  advance  atid  march  on  the  return  in  the  most 

handsome  manner.  . 

My  personal  staff,  Captain  Hubbard,  assistant  adjutant-general;  Lieuts. 
P.  D.  Allen  and  Graves,  aides-de-camp ; Lieutenant- Colonel  Lull,  Eighth 
New  Hampshire,  and  Captain  Cowan,  Company  B,  Massachusetts  Cav- 
alry, acting  aides ; Dr.  M.  D.  Benedict,  chief  surgeon ; Major  Carpen- 
ter, Seventy-fifth  New  York,  chief  quartermaster ; Lieut.  Fred.  E. 
Smith,  Eighth  Vermont,  chief  commissary,  and  Lieutenant  Wrotnoski, 
Topographical  Engineer,  distinguished  themselves,  as  on  my  previous 
expedition,  by  their  coolness  and  bravery  and  the  prompt  and  efficient 
manner  in  which  they  conveyed  and  carried  out  my  orders. 


236  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX;,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xxvii. 

Captain  Barrett,  with  his  cavalry  as  advance  guard  and  rear  guard, 
acted  splendidly  and  bravely.  He  mentions  for  particular  bravery  in 
tiie  several  skirmishes  they  had  with  the  enemy’s  cavalry  Lieutenant 
Thayer,  First  Sergt.  Thomas  Maher,  Sergeant  Hennessy ; Corporals 
Adams,  Brennan,  Boyle ; Privates  Long,  Barry,  Wallace,  and  Walsh 
(killed).  This  company  killed,  wounded,  and  took  prisoners  about  15 
of  the  enemy  and  the  same  number  of  horses,  arms,  and  equipments. 
He  lost  1 man  and  several  horses,  but  no  arms  or  equipments. 

The  battery  under  command  of  Capt.  E.  0.  Bainbridge,  Fifth  Artil- 
lery, consisting  of  four  pieces  of  Company  A,  First  Artillery  (Lieutenant 
Humphrey  commanding  one.  section),  and  one  section  of  the  Fourth 
Massachusetts  Battery  (Lieutenant  Briggs  commanding),  was  in  the 
advance  going  and  in  the  rear  returning. 

The  Sixth  Massachusetts,  Captain  Carruth,  and  the  First  Maine,  Lieu- 
tenant Bradbury,  with  all  their  officers  and  men,  distinguished  them- 
selves by  the  manner  in  which  they  came  into  position  under  the  fire  of 
the  heavy  guns  of  the  Cotton  the  manner  in  which  they  riddled  her 
and  silenced  the  enemy’s  battery  on  shore  which  was  supporting  the 
Cotton. 

The  Eighth  Y errnont,  Colonel  Thomas,  for  the  first  time  in  action  as 
a regiment,  reflected  the  highest  credit  upon  itself  by  the  splendid  man- 
ner in  which  they  cleared  the  enemy’s  rifle  pits  on  the  east  bank  and 
afterward  pursued  them.  This  regiment  took  41  prisoners,  3 wounded, 
and  killed  4 of  the  enemy. 

Colonel  Thomas  mentions  Captain  Dutton  and  Lieutenant  McFarland 
and  the  men  under  their  command  for  distinguished  conduct.  He  also 
mentions  Capt.  L.  M.  Grout,  acting  major,  and  Adjt.  J.  L.  Barstow  as 
having  rendered  him  very  efficient  aid.  This  regiment  lost  none,  because 
it  flanked  and  surprised  the  enemy  completely. 

The  Seventy-fifth  New  York,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Babcock,  also  for  the 
first  time  in  action  as  a regiment,  formed  the  right  of  the  line  on  the 
west  bank.  To  this  regiment  fell  the  lot  of  moving  right  on  to  the  Cot- 
ton. The  regiment,  its  line  of  skirmishers  (a  portion  of  which  attacked 
the  Cotton  in  rear),  and  the  60  volunteers  behaved  in  the  most  praise- 
worthy, the  bravest,  and  most  magnificent  manner.  The  whole  of  them 
covered  themselves  with  glory.  They  silenced  the  Cotton  completely, 
and  with  the  artillery  drove  off  the  enemy’s  battery  on  shore,  killing  and 
wounding  a very  large  number  on  board  of  the  boat  and  on  shore.  Cap- 
tain Fitch  and  Lieutenant  Whiteside  (killed),  commanding  the  volun- 
teers; Captain  Savery  and  Lieutenant  Thurber,  commanding  the  skir- 
mishers; Lieutenants  Miles  and  Fitch,  with  the  pickets,  are  mentioned 
on  all  sides  for  distinguished  coolness,  judgment,  and  bravery.  This 
regiment  lost  1 lieutenant  and  3 privates  killed  and  2 non-commissioned 
officers  and  18  privates  wounded.  Its  small  loss  under  the  heavy  fire 
of  the  enemy  is  due  to  the  rapidity,  order,  and  determination  with  which 
it  advanced. 

The  One  hundred  and  sixtieth  New  York,  Colonel  Dwight,  was  in  the 
center,  and,  although  not  engaged  with  the  enemy,  behaved  well  under 
the  enemy’s  artillery  Are.  It  lost  1 private  killed  and  4 wounded. 

The  Twelfth  Connecticut,  Major  Peck,  formed  the  left,  the  Twenty- 
first  Indiana,  Major  Hays,  and  Sixth  Michigan,  Colonel  Clark,  formed 
the  reserve.  The  reputation  of  these  three  regiments  is  so  well  estab- 
lished that  nothing  need  be  said.  The  position  I assigned  them  shows 
the  estimation  in  which  I held  them,  and  had  it  become  necessary  to 
make  an  attack  upon  the  main  body  of  the  enemy’s  land  forces  to  secure 


237 


Chap.  XXVH.]  SABINE  PASS,  TEX. 

the  object  of  my  expedition  they  had  a most  important  part  of  the  pro- 
gramme assigned  them. 

The  Twenty-third  Connecticut,  Colonel  Holmes,  held  Brashear  City 
during  the  advance  of  the  expedition. 

Company  B,  Eighth  New  Hampshire,  Lieutenant  Camp,  as  provost 
guard,  did  their  duty  as  well  as  possible. 

The  four  signal  officers,  Lieutenants  Vance,  Eaton,  Butterfield,  and 
Dana,  and  the  men  under  them,  again  distinguished  themselves  by  then- 
energy,  coolness,  and  bravery. 

A portion  of  these  troops  on  this  expedition  was  transported  160  miles 
by  rail,  and  nearly  all  about  70.  This  was  accomplished  rapidly  and 
without  the  least  accident  to  man,  horse,  or  piece  of  artillery.  This  re- 
flects the  highest  credit  upon  the  energy  and  ability  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Colburn,  Twelfth  Connecticut,  superintend  ant  of  the  Opelousas 
Railroad,  and  his  subordinates. 

My  total  loss  was  1 lieutenant  and  5 privates  killed,  and  2 non-com- 
missioned officers  and  25  privates  wounded.  The  enemy’s  loss  on  shore 
and  on  the  boat  was  fully  treble  my  own. 

Lieutenant  Whiteside,  of  the  Seventy-fifth  New  York,  bravely  led  his 
volunteers ; went  up  to  the  banks  opposite  the  Cotton  and  ordered  them 
to  haul  down  her  flag.  He  was  immediately  fatally  shot,  but  before 
dying  ordered  his  men  to  keep  on  and  take  the  ship. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WEITZEL, 

j Brigadier- General,  U.  8.  Volunteers. 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Adjutant- General,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  New  Orleans,  La. 


JANUARY  21,  1863.— Attack  on  Blockading  Squadron  at  Sabine  Pass,  Tex. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen,  John  B.  Magruder,  G.  S.  Army , with  congratulatory 

orders.* 

Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston,  Tex.,  January  24,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Sabine  Pass  has  been  cleared 
of  the  enemy;  two  gunboats,  which  I fitted  up  on  the  Sabine,  having 
captured  the  enemy’s  blockading  squadron,  consisting  of  a 12-gun  ship 
of  war  and  a schooner  man-of-war  of  two  guns,  commanded  by  officers 
of  the  U.  S.  Navy.  Our  boats  pursued  the  enemy  30  miles  at  sea,  dur- 
ing which  time  a running  fight  was  kept  up.  Finally,  getting  them 
under  fire  of  our  Enfield  rifles,  they  surrendered,  and  never  turned  back 
to  the  Pass. 

This  expedition  was  under  command  of  Maj.  O.  M.  Watkins,  of  my 
staff,  and  was  fitted  out  under  my  orders,  principally  by  the  gallant 
Leon  Smith,  now  in  command  of  the  Harriet  Lane  and  the  rest  of  the 
war  vessels  in  Galveston  Harbor. 

Major  Watkins  reports  that  he  captured  thirteen  heavy  guns,  129 
prisoners,  and  $100,000  worth  of  stores. 

* See  also  Magrnder’s  report  of  the  recapture  of  Galveston,  &■<;.,  p.  211 ; an«l  for  re- 
ports of  U.  S.  naval  officers  see  Annual  Report  of  tlie  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  Decern 
ber  7,  1861. 


238 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


The  commander  of  the  Federal  squadron  reports  that  the  severe  naval 
engagement  seen  from  Galveston  Island  a few  nights  ago  was  between 
the  290  and  the  United  States  war  steamer  Hatteras,  and  that  the 
latter  was  sunk.  Many  fragments  of  the  steamer  floated  ashore  on 
Galveston  Island.  Our  steamers  in  the  late  engagement  were  com- 
manded by  Captains  Fowler  and  Johnson,  sea-captains  of  Texas,  and 
manned  principally  by  volunteers  from  Pyron’s  regiment  of  cavalry, 
Cook’s  regiment  of  artillery,  and  Spaight’s  battalion  of  infantry. 

As  soon  as  I ascertain  the  names  of  the  gallant  commanders  of  the 
detachments  and  the  particulars  of  the  fight  I will  communicate  the 
same  for  the  information  of  His  Excellency  the  President.  The  devotion 
of  all  cannot  be  too  highly  commended.  I beg  leave  to  ask  the  Presi- 
dent that  Maj.  O.  M.  Watkins,  assistant  adjutant-general,  G.  S.  Army, 
sent  to  Texas  to  command  a conscript  camp  of  instruction,  be  made 
lieutenant-colonel  in  the  assistant  adjutant  general’s  department,  with 
orders  to  report  to  me.  , . 

The  expedition  to  the  Bio  Grande  has,  after  many  difficulties,  prob- 
ably reached  that  river  by  this  time.  The  heavy  guns  stored  at  San 
Antonio  are  on  their  way  for  its  defense.  A competent  corps  of  engi- 
neers, under  the  command  of  Maj.  A,  M.  Lea,  accompanies  the  expe- 
dition. Major  Lea  rendered  efficient  service  on  my  staff  at  Galveston, 
and  found  his  son,  Lieutenant  Lea,  of  the  Federal  Navy,  wounded  and 
dying  on  board  the  Harriet  Lane.  He  is  a graduate  of  West  Point,  ot 
great  merit,  and  well  known  to  His  Excellency  the  President,  to  whom 
I beg  leave  to  recommend  him  for  the  appointment  of  colonel  in  the  0. 
S.  Army  for  engineer  duty  with  me. 

I will  add  that  I hope  soon  to  have  a squadron  of  four  gunboats  on 
the  Eio  Grande  for  further  protection.  The  interior  is  tranquil. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGEUDEE, 

Major - General , Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper,  Richmond , Va. 


General  Oilers,  ) Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

No.  45.  j Houston , Tex.,  March  11,  1863. 

The  commanding  general,  having  been  prevented  by  various  circum- 
stances from  acknowledging  the  services  of  the  brave  Major  Watkins 
and  the  gallant  officers  and  men  under  his  command  in  the  recent  vic- 
tory at  Sabine  Pass,  takes  this  occasion  to  return  them  his  public  and 
official  thanks  for  the  accomplishment  of  a purpose  of  great  importance 
to  us  and  their  participation  in  an  exploit  almost  unparalleled  in  the 
annals  of  warfare.  After  driving  the  enemy’s  blockading  squadron 
from  our  immediate  waters  these  devoted  and  heroic  men,  in  their  frail 
boats,  pursued  him  some  30  miles  to  sea,  and  after  a fight  of  nearly  two 
hours,  on  an  element  on  which  he  considered  himself  invincible,  cap- 
tured' a ship  of  war  of  nine  guns  and  an  armed  schooner  of  two  guns 
of  the  U.  S.  Navy,  forcing  their  commanding  officers  to  surrender  at 
discretion. 

The  perseverance,  industry,  and  firmness  of  the  commanding  officer, 
Maj.  Oscar  M.  Watkine,  of  the  Provisional  Army,  were  only  equaled  by 
his  intrepidity,  admirable  coolness,  and  skill  in  battle.  Entirely  unac- 
customed to  the  sea,  his  devotion  overcame  all  obstacles.  He  was  ably 
and  heroically  seconded  by  Captains  Fowler  and  Johnson,  respective 
commanders  of  the  steamers  Bell  and  Uncle  Ben  ; by  Captains  Odium, 


Chap.  XXVII. f SKIRMISH  AT  INDIAN  VILLAGE,  LA.  239 

O’Bryan,  Nolan,  and  Aycock,  and  Lieutenants  Dowling  and  Aikens,of 
the  land  forces,  and  by  the  engineers,  pilots,  troops,  and  crews  of  the 
expedition. 

The  commanding  general  takes  pleasure  in  announcing  to  the  offi- 
cers and*  men  of  Texas,  land  and  naval,  that  their  heroic  example  has 
been  followed  successfully  throughout  the  Confederacy.  The  echo  of 
their  cannon  at  Galveston  and  Sabine  had  not  died  away  ere  they  were 
taken  up  at  Charleston  and  reverberated  in  glory  along  the  Mississippi. 

His  Excellency  the  President  has  addressed  a letter  of  congratula- 
tion and  thanks  to  the  commanding  general  and  gallant  men  of  Texas 
engaged  in  these  noble  enterprises.  Congress  has  unanimously  passed 
a vote  of  thanks  in  acknowledgment  of  their  services.  The  whole 
country  has  been  electrified  by  the  daring  and  skill  of  Texans,  while 
the  hearts  of'  their  comrades  battling  in  the  north  for  their  homes  and 
altars  have  been  made  to  beat  with  pride  and  joy  by  the  news  of  battles 
fought  and  victories  won  on  the  beloved  soil  of  their  glorious  State. 
To  the  true  soldier  there  can  be  no  greater  reward. 

Much  has  been  done,  but  much  remains  to  be  done.  Our  mortal  toe 
is  again  gathering  his  strength  for  another  and  still  another  blow  ; but 
the  commanding  general  of  the  Army  of  Texas  is  confident  that  his 
troops  will  return  these  blows,  and  will  astonish  still  more  their  enemies 
and  the  world  by  such  evidences  of  skill  and  audacity  as  shall  make 
“Texan”  a better  word  than  u Spartan.” 

With  this  assurance  he  leaves  for  a short  time  this  immediate  scene 
of  his  labors  to  secure  other  points  and  prepare  other  fields  of  glory, 
confident  that  the  officers  and  men  of  his  command  will  use  all  the 
means  in  their  power  to  perfect  themselves  in  such  a knowledge  and 
practice  of  their  profession  as  will  insure  the  fulfillment  of  the  highest 
expectations  of  their  friends  and  country. 

By  command  of  Map  Gen.  J.  Bankhead  Magruder: 

STEPHEN  D.  YANCEY, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JANUARY  28,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Indian  Village,  La. 

Report  of  Col.  Richard  E.  Holcomb , First  Louisiana  Infantry  ( Union). 

Headquarters  First  Louisiana  Volunteers, 
Bonaldsonville , La .,  January  29,  1863. 
Sir  : 1 received  a dispatch  from  Lieutenant  Perkins,  commanding 
cavalry  at  Plaquemine,  stating  that  he  had  a skirmish  with  the  enemy 
at  Indian  Village  yesterday  morning,  and  drove  the  enemy  from  his 
- fortifications  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Grosse  Tete. 

The  force  with  Lieutenant  Perkins  consisted  of  his  cavalry  company,  a 
r part  of  Captain  Williamson’s  cavalry  company  (Second  Louisiana),  and 
a boat’s  crew  from  one  of  the  gunboats  with  a howitzer.  They  marched 
down  to  Indian  Village  without  meeting  with  the  enemy;  but  when 
near  that  place  the  enemy  opened  fire  upon  them  from  his  rifle  pits  and 
temporary  fortifications  he  had  thrown  up.  He  was  not  able  to  dis- 
lodge them  at  first,  but  crossing  over  the  bayou  in  two  boats  sent  from 
Plaquemine  they  succeeded  in  dislodging  the  enemy.  Tt  was  the  en- 
emy’s picket  guard,  with  a reserve,  which  came  up  and*  took  part  in  the 
light,  which  he  attacked.  The  main  body  of  General  Sibley’s  force  he 


140 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xxvn. 


reports  some  20  miles  up  the  Grosse  Tete.  He  thinks  the  forces  under 
Generals  Sibley  and  Hubert  number  about  3,000,  though  it  was  reported 
to  him  as  high  as  5,000. 

There  was  no  indication  of  a raid  in  this  direction.  He  says  he  found 
lhat  no  work  had  been  done  recently  in  repairing  the  road  from  Indian 
Village  to  Bayou  Goula,  nor  was  there  any  indications  of  the  enemy 
having  been  on  this  side  of  Grand  Biver  or  Bayou  Plaquemine. 

I intended  to  go  up  to  Bayou  Goula  to-morrow  and  reconnoiter  the 
country  where  he  has  been  operating,  but  his  visit  to  that  sectiou  has 
rendered  it  useless  for  me  to  go. 

I think  there  is  danger  of  the  couriers  carrying  dispatches  between 
Manning’s  Landing  and  Baton  Bouge  being  captured.  A man  came  in 
to-day  from  the  Galveston  settlement,  on  the  Amite  Biver,  and  reports 
that  40  rebels  crossed  the  Amite  Biver  and  came  up  to  the  Bayou  Man- 
chac,  and  he  thought  they  intended  to  capture  our  pickets.  The  rebel 
cavalry  at  Port  Hudson  come  around  Baton  Bouge,  and  may  make  a 
dash  in  upon  the  telegraph  line  or  the  men  carrying  dispatches  at  any 
time.  Would  it  not  be  well  to  have  a company  of  men  stationed  at 
some  point  between  here  and  Baton  Bouge  ? 

We  are  busy  mounting  the  guns  in  the  fortifications.  Shall  have 
them  mounted  by  Saturday.  The  force  of  wagons  which  have  been  at 
work  on  the  fort,  with  the  exception  of  100,  will  be  through  in  a few 
days.  They  are  an  extra  lot  of  men  for  fortification  purposes,  and 
should  be  kept  together  for  that  purpose. 

Respectfully,  yours,  J;  E HOLCOMB, 

Commanding  U.  8.  Forces , Donaldsonville , La. 

Col.  Bichard  B.  Irwin, 

Asst  Adjt . Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf , Few  Orleans , La. 


FEBRUARY  12-28,  1863.— Operations  on  Bayou  Plaquemine  and  the 

Atchafalaya  River,  La. 

Reports  of  Map  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks , U.  8.  Army , commanding  Be 

partment  of  the  Gulf. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , Xu.,  February  12,  1863. 

General  : Upon  the  inclosed  map  * I have  marked  the  military  opera- 
tions upon  which  the  forces  under  my  command  are  engaged.  The  chiet 
movement  is  by  the  Bayou  Plaquemine  and  the  Atchafalaya  to  the  Bed 
Biver  and  the  Mississippi.  The  principal,  apart  from  the  natural,  diffi- 
culties of  navigation,  which  are  considerable,  and  the  partisan  rangers 
or  guerrillas  which  infest  the  country,  is  a fortification  at  Butte-a-la- 
Bose,  at  the  junction  of  the  Atchafalaya  and  the  Cow  Bayou,  near  the 
terminus  of  the  road  from  Saint  Martinville.  This  work  is  of  consider- 
able strength,  and  is  intended  to  defend  the  country  above,  including 
the  capital  of  the  State  and  the  Bed  Biver,  from  incursions  by  the  leche 
Bayou  (river),  the  Grand  Lake,  or  the  Atchafalaya.  This  post  reduced, 
the  way  to  the  Bed  Biver  is  believed  to  be  substantially  clear. 

This  enterprise  is  intrusted  to  General  Emory,  who  has  already  com- 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


BAYOU  PLAQUEMINE,  ETC. 


241 


menced  tlie  movement.  There  are  many  difficulties  to  overcome,  but  I 
believe  it  will  be  successful.  It  will  enable  us,  if  successful,  to  cut  off 
supplies  by  the  Red  River  and  to  communicate  with  the  forces  below 
Vicksburg.  About  3,000  men  will  be  engaged  in  this  service,  the  full 
strength  that  can  be  conveyed  on  our  transports  with  two  gunboats  and 
several  armed  launches.  At  the  same  time  General  Weitzel  is  moving 
on  the  Bayou  Teche  to  intercept  the  rebel  force  at  Franklin  and  capture, 
if  possible,  the  rebel  steamers  which  are  at  that  point.  About  4,000  men 
are  engaged  in  this  expedition.  Its  success  is  nearly  certain.  The  first 
object  accomplished,  the  dispersion  of  the  force  at  Franklin,  the  expe- 
dition may  join  General  Emory  at  Butte-Ala-Rose,  by  the  Martinville 
road,  or  move  upon  Iberia,  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  salt-works 
in  that  locality. 

Both  of  these  expeditions  are  necessarily  by  water  transportation  ex- 
clusively. West  of  the  Mississippi  the  country  is  subject  to  inundations 
at  this  season,  and  movement  by  land  is  impossible.  The  limitation  of 
transports  reduces  the  force  employed  much  below  what  it  should  be.  I 
have  stopped  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  for  all  steamers  engaged 
in  local  trade,  and  yet,  with  the  Government  and  private  vessels  together, 
I am  able  to  force  into  this  service  but  five  steamers  for  Emory’s  and  but 
two  for  Weitzel’s  troops.  If  it  were  possible  to  send  into  this  country 
the  full  force  required  I should  regard  the  capture  of  Opelousas  and  the 
occupation  of  the  Red  River  at  its  junction  with  the  Mississippi  as  cer- 
tain. I hope  still  it  may  be  so. 

In  conjunction  with  these  movements  the  forces  at  Baton  Rouge  will 
move  to  the  rear  of  Port  Hudson,  with  a view  to  cut  off  supplies  by  the 
way  of  Clinton.  If  their  supplies  by  Red  River  and  the  position  west 
of  the  Mississippi  be  cut  off  they  must  come  out  of  their  intrenchments 
to  fight  us.  for  which  we  are  ready.  Their  works  are  too  strong  for  a 
direct  attack  by  men  who  have  never  fired  a gun.  Such  an  attempt 
would  result  as  at  Fredericksburg  and  Vicksburg.  The  works  have 
been  in  construction  since  August,  and  are  as  strong  as  at  Vicksburg. 
If  nothing  better  can  be  done,  we  will  assault  them.  Admiral  Farragut 
will  attack  the  works  on  the  river,  and  will  probably  run  the  batteries 
with  one  or  more  vessels,  placing  us  in  communication  with  forces  above. 

We  have  a report  to-day  from  Baton  Rouge  that  one  of  our  gunboats 
had  run  below  Vicksburg  as  far  as  Red  River,  capturing  three  of  the 
enemy’s  supply  vessels. 

The  health  of  my  command  is  good.  The  troops  suffer  chiefly  from 
the  process  of  acclimation.  They  are  in  good  spirits  and  daily  improv- 
ing iu  drill  and  discipline. 

Generals  Andrews  and  Dwight  arrived  yesterday  with  the  balance 
of  the  troops,  and  are  already  assigned  to  their  respective  commands. 

The  naval  force  and  water  transportation  here  is  lamentably  deficient; 
this  should  be  supplied  without  delay.  We  require  constant  communi- 
cation with  Pensacola,  Ship  Island,  Galveston,  and  the  Rio  Grande 
by  blockading  ships  or  transports.  * The  naval  force  is  very  weak  for 
this  service  and  should  be  strengthened  at  once.  The  number  of  ves- 
sels that  can  be  employed  in  transport  service  is  very  small — wholly 
insufficient  when  the  demands  of  the  river  are  considered,  in  addition 
to  those  of  the  coast,  and  embarrasses  all  our  movements. 

Much  solicitude  has  been  felt  in  regard  to  the  safety  of  Ship  Island. 
It  is  reported  to  us  from  Mobile  that  several  iron  clads  are  ready  to  go 
out  and  that  an  attack  may  be  expected.  There  are  but  two  naval 
vessels  there,  both  sailing  ships.  The  place  cannot  be  defended,  except 

R5  b R— yoL  xv 


242 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


as  a naval  post.  I have  done  what  I could  to  mount  the  guns,  and  hope 
it  may  be  safe.  There  is  one  colored  regiment  stationed  there. 

The  Confederate  Government  seems  to  have  changed  its  policy  in  re- 
gard to  cotton,  and  is  now  willing  to  have  it  shipped  to  this  port.  Per- 
mits are  said  to  have  been  given  by  General  Pemberton  to  ship  cotton  on 
the  Mississippi.  Such  statements  are  made  to  me  by  those  interested 
in  the  shipment.  If  so,  it  is  because  the  cotton  has  been  sold  to  for- 
eigners for  gold,  and  they  take  this  method  to  get  it  out.  Believing 
this  to  be  the  object,  I have  given  no  encouragement  to  them  and  have 
declined  to  receive  cotton  under  any  special  conditions  as  to  its  dispo- 
sition when  within  our  lines.  I have  as  far  as  possible  stopped  sup- 
plies beyond  our  lines,  whether  for  loyal  or  disloyal  people.  I am  en- 
tirely satisfied  that  this  is  wise.  Trade  in  the  city  is  daily  improving, 
and  the  people  are  quiet  and  apparently  cheerful.  One  week,  with  the 
navigation  of  the  river  secured,  would  make  an  entire  revolution  in  this 
State.  I trust  confidently  that  this  may  be  accomplished. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commander-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  February  16,  1863. 

Sir:  Since  my  dispatch  of  the  12th  instant,  sent  by  the  Cromwell, 
the  general  plan  of  operations  therein  indicated  has  been  followed  out, 
slowly  indeed,  but  with  as  much  rapidity  as  the  natural  obstacles  have 
permitted. 

The  First  and  Second  Brigades  of  Emory’s  division,  under  the  com- 
mand of  that  officer,  with  Duryea’s  regular  battery,  are  concentrated 
at  Indian  Village,  on  the  Bayou  Plaquemine.  Weitzelis  ready  to  move 
in  conjunction. 

A reconnaissance,  made  from  Berwick  Bay  by  the  gunboat  Diana, 
develops  the  fact  that  all  the  routes  from  Indian  Village  to  Lake  Chicot 
are  blocked  by  drift  for  a distance  of  5 miles.  The  gunboats  could  not 
pass  the  first  accumulation.  Grand  River  is  reported  choked. 

I have  just  sent  for  General  Emory  to  return  here  for  a full  confer- 
ence on  this  aspect  of  affairs,  and  hope  by  the  time  he  arrives  to  have 
more  definite  and  more  favorable  news  from  the  Diana.  General  Emory 
is  of  opinion  that  there  may  be  another  route  free  from  drift,  and  will 
endeavor  to  discover  it.  I am  hopeful  that  this  will  turn  out  to  be 
the  case. 

There  was  a rumor  last  week  among  the  local  secessionists  that  the 
enemy  were  preparing  to  evacuate  Port  Hudson,  but  General  Grover, 
who  commands  the  forces  at  Baton  Rouge,  informs  me  that  he  has 
nothing  to  indicate  such  an  intention.  I have  suggested  to  him  the 
expediency  of  reconnoitering  their  position  in  considerable  force  to 
develop  their  intentions,  and  am  confident  that  he  will  be  watchful, 
vigilant,  and  prepared  to  seize  any  advantage  the  enemy’s  movements 
may  offer.  • 

If  the  attempt  to  cut  the  enemy’s  communications  and  sources  oi 
supply  with  the  Vest  succeeds — as  I believe  it  will,  unless  the  natural 
difficulties  named  turn  out  to  be  insurmountable — we  shall  move  from 
Baton  Rouge  on  his  rear  at  Port  Hudson,  and,  cutting  his  communica- 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


BAYOU  PLAQUEMINE,  ETC. 


243 


tions  with  the  east,  compel  him  either  to  surrender  or  give  us  battle  on 
our  own  grounds.  For  such  an  enterprise  we  can  concentrate  easily 
15  000  men,  and  by  straining  every  nerve  and  letting  go  for  the  time 
all  other  and  minor  considerations  25,000.  Of  the  issue  of  such  a con- 
test I cannot  permit  myself  to  doubt. 

Our  news  from  Vicksburg  leaves  me  somewhat  uncertain  as  to  the 
present  operations  of  our  forces  at  that  point,  especially  in  regard  to 
the  cut-off.  At  last  accounts,  through  the  Jackson  papers,  we  had  built 
coffer-dams  at  the  ends  of  the  canal  and  were  engaged  in  further  exca- 
vations. 

We  have  a report  in  general  terms  of  an  important  capture  at  the 
mouth  of  Eed  Biver. 

If  the  canal  succeeds  I suggest  that  one  of  its  first  uses  be  to  fur- 
nish us  with  light-draught  river  transports,  drawing  from  4 to  6 feet  of 
water,  with  good  engines.  Boats  that  can  move  in  either  direction  and 
with  double  and  disconnecting  engines  will  do  the  most  service  in  these 
narrow  and  crooked  bayous — too  narrow  for  most  vessels  to  turn  and 
too  crooked  for  some  of  them  to  move  in.  We  also  need  several  light- 
draught  iron- clads. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

v N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  Washington , JD.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  February  21,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith,  for  your  information, 
copies  of  dispatches  dated  from  the  13th  to  19th  instant  inclusive,  in 
regard  to  the  attempt  to  open  communication  between  Indian  Village 
and  Lake  Chicot  and  the  connecting  operations. 

Referring  for  a more  detailed  statement  of  our  future  operations  to 
my  other  dispatches,  forwarded  by  the  same  Steamer,  I need  only  say 
here  that  the  attempt  was  prosecuted  on  the  part  of  Brigadier-General 
Emory  with  zeal  and  energy  and  co-operated  in  by  Brigadier-General 
Weitzel  in  the  same  spirit,  and  was  only  abandoned  when  conclusively 
shown,  by  exhaustive  reconnaissances  and  actual  trial,  to  be  utterly 
impracticable,  and  that,  nothing  discouraged  by  the  failure  of  this  en- 
terprise, we  shall  push  the  same  operations  with  vigor  by  the  other 
route,  via  Berwick  Bay  and  Grand  Lake. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding . 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  Washington , 1).  C. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  First  Division, 

Camp  Stevens , Xu.,  February  13,  1863. 
General  : In  accordance  with  your  instructions  of  yesterday  I pro- 
ceeded to  Brashear  City  last  night.  I found  the  Diana  gone,  under 


244  w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTT. 


vour  order,  and  at  once  ordered  the  Kinsman,  with  Lieutenant  Loring 
on  board,  to  overhaul  the  Diana,  and  both  to  make  the  reconnaissance 
together.  I have  full  and,  I think,  perfectly  accurate  information  of  the 
landing  at  Indian  Bend.  A steamer  drawing  6 feet  can  get  no  closer 
than  3 miles  from  the  shore.  The  Kinsman,  drawing  4 feet,  can  get 
within  a mile.  The  flats  that  we  can  collect  can  get  within  about  100 
to  200  yards  from  the  shore.  The  bottom  of  the  lake  at  the  point  is 
sandy  and  hard— whether  hard  enough  to  bear  my  light  artillery  I could 
not  ascertain.  There  is  a levee,  which  could  serve  the  purpose  of  an 
intrencliment,  about  three-fourths  of  a mile  long,  just  below  the  road 
along  the  lake  shore.  The  road  from  the  lake  to  Bayou  Teche  is  good 
and  about  three-fourths  of  a mile  long.  Where  the  road  strikes  the 
bavou  is  a ferry.  This  ferry  is  a small  flat,  pulled  from  one  side  to  the 
other  by  a rope.  A mile  above  the  ferry  is  a bridge,  the  nearest  oue  to 
the  road.  The  distance  from  the  road  to  the  position  which  the  enemy 
now  occupies  below  Centreville  is  20  miles  by  road. 

I ’am  collecting  all  the  flats  I can  find.  Whether  I can  get  a suffi- 
cient number  is  a question.  Whether,  after  I get  them,  I can  trans- 
port my  force  in  them  depends  upon  the  weather.  The  landing  will 
be  very  slow  for  everything  but  infantry,  as  this  can  jump  overboard. 
The  crossing  of  the  Teche,  if  the  enemy  is  vigilant,  can  be  made  a still 
slower  operation  by  the  destruction  of  the  ferry  and  bridge  or  the  lat- 
ter alone.  , . . , 

The  gunboats  which  attack  in  front  must  have  a force  on  shore  to 
clear  out  the  rifle  pits  and  to  assist  in  removing  the  two  very  serious 
obstructions  in  the  channel  of  the  Teche,  or  they  cannot  get  within  the 
range  of  the  enemy  at  all.  Infantry  alone  on  the  boats  will  not  accom- 
plish this.  If  I give  from  my  brigade  a force  equal  to  the  task  l will 
have  too  small  a force  to  attack  the  enemy  in  rear. 

All  the  information  I get  of  the  enemy’s  movements  is,  that,  in  ex- 
pectation of  an  attack  from  a large  force,  he  is  concentrating  all  his 
troops  at  Camp  Bisland,  which  is  the  intrenched  position  below  Centre- 
ville. I have  ordered  an  expedition  to-night  to  capture,  if  possible, 
some  of  the  enemy’s  pickets,  and  through  them,  if  possible,  to  get  infor- 


mation. _ , , 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ 

G.  WEITZLL, 

Brig.  Gen.,  TJ.  S.  Vote .,  Commanding  Fourth  Brigade . 


Maj.  Gen.  C.  C.  Augur, 

Commanding  Division. 


' [Inclosure  No.  2.] 

By  telegraph  from  La  Fourche , La.,  to  Maj.  Gen.  C.  C.  Augur. 

A communication  from  Colonel  Holcomb,  commanding  at  Donaldson- 
ville,  has  just  been  received.  It  contains  the  following : 

A refugee  wlio  came  in  from  Attakapas  tliis  morning  reports  that  the  enemy  is  con- 
Rerintino-  everybody,  old  and  young:  that  they  have  quite  a force  on  the  Teohe,  but 
thatther^T^great  dissatisfaction  among  the  troops^  At  Butte-Ma-Rose  there  are 
some  400,  with  four  pieces  of  artillery.  Nothing  at  Camp  Pratt. 

This  agrees  with  information  at  Berwick  Bay,  and  indicates  a con- 
centration  on  the  Teche.  G WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General,  &e. 


Chap.  XXVTL]  BAYOU  PLAQUEMINE,  ETC.  245 

[Inclosure  No.  3.} 

By  telegraph  from  La  Fourche,  La .,  to  Maj.  Gen.  C.  C.  Augur. 

The  information  is  that  the  old  force  is  there  with  a new  battery  of 
four  field  pieces.  The  old  force  is  the  Twenty- eighth  and  Thirty-third 
Orescent  and  Eighteenth  Eegiment  of  Louisiana  Infantry;  Sernmes’  and 
the  Pelican  batteries,  six  guns  each;  the  Second  Louisiana  Cavalry  and 
Waller’s  battalion  of  Texas  Cavalry.  Total  force  about  2,500  men  and 
eighteen  pieces  of  artillery.  The  Diana  had  left  yesterday  morning  on 
your  order.  I sent  Lieutenant  Loring  on  the  Kinsman  to  overtake  her 
and  to  assist  her  in  the  reconnaissance. 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General,  JJ.  8.  Volunteers. 

[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

By  telegraph  from  Baton  Rouge , La .,  to  Lieutenant- Colonel  Irwin,  Assist- 
ant Adjutant- General. 

Sir:  I am  reliably  informed  that  there  are  two  boats  fitting  up  at 
Port  Hudson  to  assist  the  Prank  Webb,  a rebel  gunboat,  in  making  an 
attack  upon  the  Conestoga,  and  any  other  boats  we  may  have  about 
the  mouth  of  the  Red  River.  It  is  believed  that  it  will  require  some 
time  to  make  their  preparations  for  such  an  expedition.  The  boats 
referred  to  as  fitting  up  are  the  Louisville,  a first-class  river  steamer, 
and  the  D.  Bentley,  an  old  boat  of  not  much  account. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  GROVER, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

[Inclosure  No.  5.] 

By  telegraph  from  La  Fourche , La.,  to  Major-General  Augur. 

Sir:  The  following  dispatch  has  been  received: 

Brashear  City,  La.,  February  13,  1863—10  p.  m. 

Brigadier-General  Weitzel  : 

The  Kinsman  has  returned,  having  communicated  with  the  Diana.  The  Diana 
captured  one  of  Fuller’s  negroes,  who  says  there  are  three  guns  in  Butte-a-la-Rose, 
commanded  by  Burbank,  late  of  the  Cotton,  and  manned  by  the  Cotton’s  crew,  sup- 
ported by  four  or  five  companies  of  infantry.  Captain  Wiggins  says  all  the  points  on 
■ the  lake  are  strongly  picketed,  and  at  Indian  Bend  there  are  three  24-pounders  in 
position.  I propose  starting  a, t 8 o’clock  in  the  morning  to  examine  Indian  Bend. 
Captain  Wiggins’  information  is  from  contrabands  near  Indian  Bend,  who  left  there 
yesterday. 

A.  P.  COOKE, 
Lieutenant , Commanding. 


[Inelosure  No.  6.] 

Plaquemine,  La.,  February  17,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Emory,  U.  S.  A.: 

Sir:  In  obedience  to  your  orders  I proceeded  on  the  morning  of  the 
16th  instant,  with  the  Hartford’s  launch,  armed  with  one  heavy  12- 
pounder  boat  howitzer,  and  the  iron-clad  gunboat  Barataria,  down 
Bayou  Plaquemine,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  practicability 


246 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTL 


of  transporting  troops  through  Bayou  Sorrel  and  Lake  Chicot.  About 
12  miles  below  Indian  Village,  in  Bayou  Sorrel,  I found  a raft  of  drift- 
wood  one-fourth  of  a mile  in  length.  A short  distance  below  this  I 
found  another  raft  of  drift-wood  1J  miles  in  length,  and  learned  through 
well-disposed  citizens  of  several  miles  of  other  drift-wood,  and  that  the 
portion  of  Lake  Chicot  called  the  bay  is  filled  up  with  the  accumulated 
drift  of  two  seasons.  I therefore  report  to  you  that  it  is  not,  in  my 
opinion,  practicable  to  transport  troops  through  Lake  Chicot  and  Bayou 
Sorrel.  I would  also  most  respectfully  state  that  in  my  opinion  the 
transportation  of  troops  through  the  Upper  Grand  Biver  is  for  similar  | 
reasons  impracticable.  In  my  opinion  the  only  way  of  rendering  this 
bayou  navigable  for  transports  is  by  removing  the  drift-wood,  which  3 
work  should  commence  in  that  part  of  Lake  Chicot  called  the  bay. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

17  ta  rrxr  ('  xat  A 


’ JOHN  C.  WATSON, 

Lieut.,  U.  8.  Navy,  Comdg.  Naval  part  of  the  Expedition. 


[Inclosure  Xo.  7.] 


Plaquemine,  La.,  February  17,  1863. 


Captain  Ives,  . . 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Third  Division: 

Sir:  Prom  what  I saw  of  the  drift-wood  in  Bayou  Sorrel,  as  well  as^ 
from  what  I learned  of  the  same  from  sailors,  soldiers,  and  citizens  of 
our  reconnoitering  party,  I am  of  the  opinion  that  said  bayou  is  not 
navigable  for  more  than  12  miles  below  Indian  Village.  In  my  judg- 
ment the  only  way  in  which  said  bayou  can  be  rendered  navigable  is  by 
removing  the  drift-wood,  which  work  should  be  and  can  only  be^done 
by  commencing  in  that  part  of  Lake  Chicot  called  the  bay.  The  Lpper 
Grand  River  is  also  not  navigable,  owing  to  drift-wood. 


I am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 


By  telegraph  from  Berwick  Bay,  La.,  to  Major-General  Augur. 

Captain  Goodwin,  of  the  Diana,  requests  me  to  telegraph  that  all  the 
routes  from  Lake  Chicot  to  Indian  Village  are  blocked  by  drift  toi  o 
miles,  which  the  pilots  and  inhabitants  say  will  cut  off  all  communica- 
tion between  those  places. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully, 

FRANK  W.  LORING, 
Aide-de-Gamp  to  General  Emory. 


[Inclosure  Xo.  9.] 


By  telegraph  from  La  Four  che,  La .,  to  Major-General  Augur. 
The  following  dispatch  has  been  received : 


Brashear  City,  La.,  February  14,  1863. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  BAYOU  PLAQUEMINE,  ETC.  247 


Indian  Bend  there  may  be  a possibility  of  pushing  through  to  meet  General  Emory, 
after  which  I beg  leave  to  reconnoiter  Butte-&-la-Rose. 

Respectfully, 

FRANK  W.  LORING, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


The  above  dispatch  is  respectfully  submitted.  What  shall  I reply  ? 
I am,  sir,  very  respectfully, 


G.  WEITZEL, 
Brigadier- General,  &c. 


[Inclosure  No.  10.1 


By  telegraph  from  La  Fourche , La.,  to  Maj.  Gen.  C.  G.  Augur. 


The  following  dispatch  has  just  been  received: 


Brashear  City,  La.,  February  14,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Weitzel: 

The  route  to  Indian  Village  is  blocked  by  drift,  which  will  prevent  any  movement 
on  General  Emory  from  that  place.  I have  returned  to  telegraph  this  and  await  fur- 
ther orders  from  you.  Captain  Goodwin  has  information  that  the  force  at  ButteA- 
la-Rose  did  not  exceed  600  men  and  three  heavy  guns  last  Sunday.  May  I recon- 
noiter? 

Very  respectfully, 

FRANK  W.  LORING, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


What  orders  shall  I give  ? 


G.  WEITZEL, 
Brigadier-  General,  &c. 


[Inclosure  No.  11.] 


By  telegraph  from  La  Fourche,  La.,  to  Major-General  Augur. 


Your  dispatch  has  been  received.  It  will  be  done. 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier -General,  U.  8.  Volunteers. 

[Inclosure  No.  12.] 


By  telegraph  from  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  to  Lieutenant- Colonel  Lrwin,  Assist- 
ant A djutant-  Genera  l. 

Sir:  Your  dispatch  of  the  14th  is  received.  ITp  to  this  date  we  learn 
nothing  from  Port  Hudson  indicating  an  intention  to  evacuate.  Will 
keep  a sharp  look  in  that  direction. 

C.  GROVER, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding  Baton  Rouge. 


[Inclosure  No.  13.] 

By  telegraph  from  Plaquemine  to  Colonel  Holcomb,  Bonaldsonville. 

Headquarters  Third  Division, 
Plaquemine,  La.,  February  15.  1863 — 5 p.  m. 
Send  the  following  to  General  Banks,  in  New  Orleans,  and  return  me 
the  answer  with  all  possible  dispatch : 

Major-General  Banks: 

I have  received  this  moment  the  following  dispatch  from  General  Weitzel : 

“Your  aide  has  returned  to  Brashear  City  on  the  Diana.  He  telegraphs  the  route 


248 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chav.  XXVII. 


to  Indian  Village  is  blocked  by  drift,  which  will  prevent  any  movement  on  yonr  part 


from  Indian  Village. 


“G.  WEIT2EL, 

“ Brigadier-General." 


The  Grand  River  is  also  choked,  as  is  known  at  headquarters.  Neither 
the  information  nor  the  means  of  transportation  of  this  expedition  are 
as  you  suppose.  A conference  with  you  is  in  my  judgment  essential. 
Shall  I return  for  the  purpose  or  will  you  please  to  instruct  me  what 
to  do  ? We  have  information  that  one  of  our  gunboats  has  made  an  im- 
portant capture  at  the  mouth  of  Red  River. 

W.  H.  EMORY, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding  Plaquemine. 

[enclosure  No.  14.] 

Headquarters  Steamer  Louisiana  Belle, 

Plaquemine , La.,  February  15,  1863 — 10  p.  m. 

Colonel  Holcomb  : 

Please  send  the  following  to  General  N.  P.  Banks: 

General  : Information  received  induces  me  to  believe  another  route  exists  free 
from  drift.  I will  explore  it  before  coming  to  a final  decision. 

W.  H.  EMORY, 

Brigadier- Genera  l.  i 


[Inclosure  No.  15.] 

By  telegraph  from  La  Fourche , La.,  to  Maj.  Gen.  C.  C.  Augur. 

The  following  dispatch  has  just  been  received: 

Brashear  City,  La.,  February  17,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Weitzel: 

The  Diana  and  Kinsman  approached  within  a mile  of  the  fort  at  Butte-&-la-Rose 
on  either  side  of  Cow  Island.  I attempted  to  get  the  Diana  within  sight  of  the  tort, 
but  Captain  Goodwin  refused.  The  Kinsman  went  the  northern  passage;  drove  m 5 
pickets,  and  was  stopped  by  sharpshooters.  Information  from  the  inhabitants  ap- 
parently confirms  information  before  received,  that  the  force  at  Butte-a-la-Kose  does 
not  exceed  six  companies  and  four  pieces  of  artillery.  A thorough  reconnaissance 
was  made  of  the  route  to  Indian  Village.  After  pushing  through  one  drift  we  found 
two  others  extending  as  far  as  one  could  see.  It  was  impossible  to  penetrate  them. 
Communication  with  General  Emory  is  therefore  effectually  blocked.  The  water  is 
everywhere  rising,  flooding  what  little  land  there  is. 

Most  respectfully,  FRA1IK  W.  LORING, 

Aide-de-Camp. 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier-General,  U.  S.  Volunteers. 


[In closure  No.  16.] 

Berwick  Bay,  La.,  February  17, 1863. 
Brigadier- General  Emory,  Plaquemine,  La.: 

The  Diana  and  Kinsman  approached  within  1 mile  of  the  fort  at  Butte- 
a-la-Rose  on  either  side  of  Cow  Island.  I attempted  to  get  the  Diana 
within  sight  of  the  fort,  but  Captain  Goodwin  refused.  The  Kinsman 
went  the  northern  passage;  drove  in  5 pickets,  and  was  stopped  by 
sharpshooters.  Information  from  the  inhabitants  apparently  confirms 
information  before  received,  that  the  force  at  Butte-fi-la-Rose  does  not 
exceed  six  companies  and  four  pieces  of  artillery.  A thorough  recon- 


Chap.  XXVH.] 


BAYOU  PLAQUEMINE,  ETC. 


249 


naissance  was  made  of  the  route  to  Indian  Village.  After  pushing 
through  one  drift  we  found  two  others  extending  as  far  as  one  could 
see.  Communication  between  Indian  Village  and  Lake  Chicot  is  ef- 
fectually blocked.  The  water  is  everywhere  rising,  flooding  what  little 
land  there  is.  Butte-h-la-Rose  is  most  submerged,  and  is  impracticable 
for  cavalry  and  artillery,  and  only  with  great  difficulty  practicable  for 
infantry.  A few  days  of  wet  weather  will  submerge  it  unless  the  drift 
in  Bayou  Sorrel  be  soon  cleared  away.  It  threatens  to  choke  all  the 
outlets  from  Lake  Chicot  northward,  and  so  to  cut  off  communication 
between  here  and  Butte- Ala-Rose. 

FRANK  W.  LORING, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


[Inclosure  No.  17.] 


Bayou  La  Fourche,  La.,  February  14,  1803. 

Colonel  Holcomb  : 

Send  the  following  dispatch  to  General  Emory  as  soon  as  possible: 

Manning’s  Landing,  La.,  February  14,  18G3. 

Brigadier-General  Emory  : 

Yonr  aide  has  returned  to  Brashear  City  on  the  Diana.  He  telegraphs  the  route  to 
Indian  Village  is  blocked  by  drift,  which  will  prevent  any  movement  on  your  part 
from  Indian  Village.  The  force  at  Butte-^-la-  Bose  is  three  heavy  guns  and  about  400 
men. 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General , TJ.  S.  Army. 


[Inclosure  No.  18.] 

By  telegraph  from  Headquarters  Third  Division,  steamer  Louisiana  Belle, 
Plaquemine , La.  (17 th),  to  Major-General  Banks. 

General:  1 have  some  prospect  of  removing  the  raft  in  one  of  the 
bayous.  I therefore  suggest  that  the  Diana  be  held  in  readiness  to  co- 
operate. I have  notified  General  Weitzel. 

1 W.  H.  EMORY, 

Brigadier- General. 


[Inclosure  No.  19.] 


By  telegraph  from  Plaquemine , La.,  to  Major-  General  Banks,  commanding . 

Every  bayou  choked  with  drift-wood — impassable  and  immovable 
from  this  direction.  I am  on  mv  way  down  to  see  you. 

W.  H.  EMORY, 
Brigadier- Genera  l. 

flnclosure  No.  20.] 

Camp,  Indian  Village,  La., 

February  19,  1863. 

General  Emory  : 

Sir.:  I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  that,  in  accordance  with  in- 
structions from  Major  Boardman,  I proceeded  to  explore  and  ascertain 
the  extent  of  drift  in  the  Bayou  Sorrel,  and,  if  possible,  to  proceed  to 


250 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  M.  MEX.  [ChaK  XXvn 


Lake  Chicot.  I succeeded  in  reaching  the  termination  of  the  first  drift, 
which  was  about  1 mile  in  extent.  Sounding  its  depth,  I found  it  com- 
posed of  one  mass  of  logs,  roots,  big  and  small  trees,  boards,  &c.,  jammed 
tightly  for  30  feet  (the  whole  length  of  my  pole).  Two  miles  farther  I 
found  s second  drift  of  about  the  same  extent.  It  was  now  dark,  and 
having  waded  and  crossed  several  dangerous  breaks  in  the  levee,  fear 
of  losing  my  two  men  compelled  me  to  return.  From  sources  I deem 
perfectly  reliable  I learn  there  is  another  and  more  formidable  drift  3 
miles  from  the  mouth  of  Lake  Chicot,  into  which  it  extends ; that  it  has 
been  forming  two  years ; that  there  is  no  current  to  carry  off  the  logs 
if  we  should  succeed  in  detaching  them ; that  their  removal  is  an  im- 
possibility, and  the  loosening  of  the  first  drift  will  only  embarrassmat- 
ters  more  at  the  third  and  last. 

I have  the  honor,  sir,  to  be  yours,  respectfully, 

HENRY  COEHEN, 

Capt.  Company  IT,  One  hundred  and  seventy-third  N.  T.  Vols. 


[Addenda.] 


Carrollton, 


~ — 7 

* (Received,  New  Orleans,  February  26, 1863.) 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Irwin,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

The  following  is  a telegram  received  from  Colonel  Currie,  by  which 
it  will  be  seen  he  reports  the  country  between  the  Plaquemine  and 
Fausse  River  and  the  Atchafalaya  is  impracticable  for  all  arms.  I 
have  ordered  him  to  concentrate  at  Plaquemine  and  be  on  his  guard 
against  attack. 

W.  H.  EMORY, 
Briqadier-  General. 


General  W.  H.  Emory  : 

The  reconnaissance  has  just  returned,  having  reconnoitered  as  far  as 
Fausse  on  Mississippi,  Madam  Parlanger’s  on  the  Fausse  River,  and 
within  2 miles  of  the  mouth  of  Cow  Head  Bayou  on  the  Atchafalaya. 
The  command  used  up.  Had  to  make  forced  marches  to  avoid  assault 
from  2,400  from  Port  Hudson  and  some  cavalry  reported  to  be  coming 
along  the  State  road  from  near  the  mouth  of  Bayou  Alabama.  Full 
particulars  will  accompany  my  report  to  Colonel  Paine  to-morrow 


The  launches  have  not  yet  returned  and  will  not  be  in  till  late.  The 
men  prostrated  by  fatigue.  Will  send  Louisiana  Belle  and  launches 
down  to-morrow  morning  early  to  Carrollton.  In  my  opinion  the  country 
is  impracticable  for  all  arms  of  the  service.  Loss  1 man  and  2 prisoners; 

4 paroled.  _ 

L.  D.  H.  CURRIE, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


251 


PORT  nUDSON,  LA. 

MARCH  7-27,  1863. — Operations  against  and  about  Port  Hudson,  La. 

STJjVtMlAJRY  OE  THE  PRUSTCIPAL  EXTENTS. 

March  7,  1863.— Banks'  forces  move  to  Baton  Rouge. 

9-10,  1863.— Skirmishes  on  the  Comite  River,  at  Montesano  Bridge,  etc. 

14-15,  1863.— Engagement  between  Union  fleet  and  Port  Hudson  batteries. 

Demonstrations  on  land  front  against  Port  Hudson. 

17,  1863.— Expedition  from  Montesano  Bayou  toward  Port  Hudson. 

Operations  on  west  bank  of  the  Mississippi. 

19,  1863. — Reconnaissance  to  False  River. 

24,  1863. — Expedition  to  Hermitage  Landing. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1.— Maj.  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  the 
Gulf,  of  operations  March  7-27. 

No.  2.— Capt.  William  W.  Rowley,  U.  S.  Signal  Corps,  Chief  Signal  Officer,  of  opera- 
tions March  7-22. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  Joseph  L.  Hallett,  Acting  Signal  Officer,  of  operations  March  10-16. 
No.  4.— Col.  Thomas  E.  Chickering,  Forty -first  Massachusetts  Infantry,  of  skirmishes 
on  the  Comite  River,  at  Montesano  Bridge,  etc. 

No.  5— Brig.  Gen.  William  Dwight,  jr.,  U.  S.  Army,  of  expedition  from  Montesano 
Bayou,  toward  Port  Hudson. 

No.  6. — Col.  Theodore  W.  Parmele,  One  hundred  and  seventy-fourth  New  York 
Infantry,  of  operations  on  west  bank  of  the  Mississippi. 

No.  7. — Col.  N.  A.  M.  Dudley,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  of  reconnaissance 
to  the  mouth  of  False  River. 

No.  8. — Col.  Charles  J.  Paine,  Second  Louisiana  Infantry  (Union),  of  reconnaisance 
to  the  mouth  of  False  River. 

No.  9. — Col.  N.  A.  M.  Dudley,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  of  expedition  to 
Hermitage  Landing. 

No.  10. — Capt.  James  M.  Magee,  Seoond  Company  Massachusetts  Unattached  Cavalry, 
of  expedition  to  Hermitage  Landing. 

No.  11. — Maj.  Gen.  Franklin  Gardner,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Port  Hudson,  of 
operations  March  7-26,  with  correspondence  and  orders. 

No.  12. — Capt.  J.  M.  Magruder,  of  skirmish  at  Montesano  Bridge. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks,  TJ.  8.  Army , commanding  De- 
partment of  the  Gulf,  of  operations  March  7-27. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Orleans,  La.,  March  21,  1863. 

In  pursuance  of  the  plan  suggested  in  my  last  dispatches  the  fleet 
under  the  command  of  Rear-Admiral  Farragut  made  the  contemplated 
effort  for  the  successful  passage  of  the  river  batteries  at  Port  Hudson 
on  Saturday  evening,  the  14th  instant.  The  fleet  consisted  of  the  flag- 
ship Hartford,  Monongahela,  Richmond,  and  Mississippi,  with  a gun- 
boat lashed  upon  the  port  side  of  the  first  three  named  vessels.  The 
Essex  (iron-clad),  Sachem,  and  six  mortar-boats  held  position  below 
the  forts,  enfilading  by  their  fire  the  lower  ba  tteries. 

The  fleet  moved  from  Baton  Rouge  on  Friday  evening  at  4 o’clock, 
and  anchored  below  Port  Hudson  until  8 o’clock  on  Saturday  evening, 
when  it  commenced  the  contemplated  movement,  and  at  11.30  o’clock 


252 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

the  rebel  batteries  opened  fire  upon  the  leading  ship,  which  was  returned 
by  the  fleet  with  terrific  and  successful  energy  until  1 o’clock  in  the 
morning.  The  passage  was  only  partially  successful.  The  Hartford, 
with  the  Albatross,  ran  the  gauntlet  successfully.  The  Monongahela 
reached  the  center  batteries,  when  she  was  disabled  by  an  accident  to 
her  machinery  and  fell  back  to  her  former  position.  The  Richmond  was 
disabled  by  a shot  through  her  steam-drum,  and  followed  the  Monon- 
gahela. The  Mississippi,  having  passed  the  center  batteries,  ran 
aground,  and,  after  sustaining  the  concentrated  fire  of  the  batteries  for 
half  an  hour  and  removing  the  sick  and  wounded,  she  was  fired  and 
blown  up  by  order  of  her  commander,  Smith.  Nothing  was  saved  from 
the  ship  but  officers  and  crew  and  nothing  was  left  to  the  enemy. 

Admiral  Farragut,  with  the  Hartford  and  Albatross,  was  reported 
at  Waterloo  on  Sunday.  The  Richmond,  Monongahela,  and  the  gun- 
boats Essex  (iron-clad),  Sachem,  Genesee,  and  Kineo,  with  the  six  mor- 
tars, reached  Profit’s  Island,  3 miles  below  Port  Hudson. 

The  loss  of  life  was  chiefly  sustained  by  the  Mississippi.  It  is  be- 
lieved that  the  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners  will  not  exceed  70.  The 
loss  on  the  other  vessels  was  comparatively  light,  but  including  among 
the  wounded  the  inestimable  officers  Commander  McKinstry,  of  the 
Monongahela,  who  was  injured  by  a fall  from  the  bridge,  which  was 
shot  away,  arid  Lieutenant  Cummings,  of  the  Richmond,  who  has  since 
died.  . 

The  land  force  under  my  command,  at  the  suggestion  of  Admiral 
Farragut,  moved  to  Baton  Rouge  on  the  7th  instant,  with  the  exception 
of  such  detachments  as  were  necessary  to  hold  the  several  positions 
occupied  by  our  army  on  the  lower  river.  The  effective  force  thus  con- 
centrated at  Baton  Rouge  was  less  than  17,000  effective  men.  The 
non-arrival  of  the  fleet  remaining  at  New  Orleans  for  repairing  ma- 
chinery detained  us  at  Baton  Rouge  until  Friday,  the  13th  instant, 
when  General  Grover’s  division  moved  for  Port  Hudson.  General 
Emory’s  division  followed  at  daybreak  on  the  14th  instant,  and  Major- 
General  Augur’s,  the  reserve,  at  the  same  hour.  General  Grover  en- 
camped near  the  church,  at  the  intersection  of  the  BajTou  Sara  road 
leading  to  the  plains  in  the  rear  of  Port  Hudson  and  the  road  to  Spring- 
field  Landing,  where  communication  was  established  with  the  fleet  on 
Saturday,  the  14th  instant,  at  2 p.  m.  General  Emory  moved  a brigade 
on  the  same  road  at  the  point  of  intersection  with  the  direct  road  to 
Port  Hudson  and  the  road  to  Ross  Landing,  touching  the  lower  line  of 
batteries,  and  another  force  was  posted  near  Springfield  Landing,  to 
maintain  connection  with  the  river  and  fleet,  the  position  being  3 miles 
in  rear  of  land  fortifications  and  on  the  flank  of  the  lower  rebel  bat- 
teries. The  object  of  the  movement  was  to  make  a diversion  during 
the  passage  of  the  fleet,  and  not  to  make  an  attack  with  the  expecta- 
tion of  carrying  the  works.  The  assistance  of  the  fleet  would  be  indis- 
pensable in  any  determined  attack,  and  the  hope  of  the  naval  and  land 
officers  was  that  it  might  run  the  batteries  with  as  little  firing  as  pos- 
sible. No  decisive  encounter  with  the  enemy  was  anticipated  there- 
from, unless,  as  was  hoped,  they  should  come  out  of  the  works. 

These  positions  were  assumed  at  2 p.  m.  on  Saturday,  the  14th  in- 
stant. My  intention  was  to  move  the  batteries,  with  a protecting  force, 
upon  the  Ross  Landing  road,  which  terminated  on  the  bank  of  the  river 
on  the  line  of  the  lower  batteries.  This  would  give  us  a flank  fire,  m 
line  with  that  of  the  Essex  and  Sachem  and  the  mortars  directly  into 
the  land  and  water  fortifications.  A part  of  General  Emory’s  division 
and  the  whole  of  Grover’s  forces,  posted  near  the  junction  of  the  road 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


253 


PORT  HUDSON,  LA. 

to  Boss  Landing  and  the  direct  road  to  Port  Hudson,  would  be  ready 
to  advance  upon  the  rear  of  the  works  if  opportunity  offered,  or  to  repel, 
by  a flank  attack,  any  force  debouching  upon  the  road  to  attack  the 
batteries.  The  remaining  brigades  of  General  Emory  and  the  division 
of  General  Augur  held  in  reserve  2 miles  in  the  rear  upon  the  Bayou 
Sara  road.  Such  was  the  disposition  of  the  main  force  at  2 p.  m.  on 
Saturday,  the  14th  instant. 

While  waiting  the.  movements  of  the  fleet  the  minor  dispositions, 
covering  the  position  we  held,  were  as  follows  : 

The  roads  leading  from  Baton  Bouge  are  six  in  number : 

First.  The  Highland  road,  crossing  the  Bayou  Manchac  and  leading 
to  the  Pass  of  that  name. 

Second.  The  Olay  Cut  road,  with  two  intersecting  roads  crossing  the 
Comite  and  Amite  Bivers. 

Third.  The  Greenwell  Springs  road,  leading  direct  to  Camp  Moore. 

Fourth.  The  Clinton  road,  leading  direct  to  Clinton. 

Fifth.  The  Bayou  Sara  road,  upon  which  our  march  was  made. 

Sixth.  The  road  to  Springfield  Landing,  which  was  on  line  of  com- 
munication with  the  river. 

We  had  information,  which  could  not  be  disregarded,  that  a support- 
ing force,  in  the  event  of  an  attack  upon  Port  Hudson,  was  at  an  inter- 
mediate point  between  Port  Hudson  and  Vicksburg,  and  that  a cavalry 
torce  of  1 ,‘^00  men  was  on  the  Clinton  road,  with  rumors  of  a force  on 
the  other  side  of  the  Amite,  from  Mobile  and  Camp  Moore.  The  bridges 
on  these  roads  were  destroyed  by  my  order  on  the  day  preceding  our 
march,  and  each  intersecting  road  was  covered  by  a small  force  by  the 
Highland  road  to  that  of  Springfield  Landing.  Our  cavalry  being- 
weak  in  numbers,  the  deficiency  was  supplied  by  infantry.  In  addition 
to  these  detachments  two  regiments,  under  command  of  Colonel  Chick- 
ering,  of  the  Forty-first  Massachusetts,  were  left  at  Baton  Bouge  to 
protect  the  camp  against  the  threatened  cavalry  raids  of  the  enemy. 
The  force  with  which  I was  enabled  to  move  against  Port  Hudson  did 
not  exceed  12,000  infantry — a force,  at  the  best,  far  inferior  in  numbers 
to  that  of  the  enemy. 

The  enemy’s  pickets  appeared  on  all  these  roads,  but  were  promptly 
driven  in  as  we  approached  the  works,  without  serious  loss  or  contest 
on  our  part.  It  was  my  intention  to  open  fire  upon  the  lower  works 
from  the  Boss  Landing  road.  We  had  relied  for  this  movement  upon 
the  maps  prepared  for  this  occasion,  with  great  industry  and  ability, 
from  local  county  maps  and  general  information  obtained  from  the 
people.  The  reconnaissances  of  the  afternoon,  however,  developed  the 
fact  that  the  Boss  Landing  road  did  not  exist,  and  we  necessarily  were 
forced  to  change  the  direction  of  our  operations  to  the  rear  of  the 
enemy’s  works  by  the  Port  Hudson  road,  and  to  enter  upon  new  recon- 
naissances with  "that  view.  These  were  pushed  with  vigor  until  dark 
to  within  600  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works  and  preparations  made  for 
moving  our  artillery  upon  that  road.  Up  to  this  moment  it  had  been 
understood  that  the  passage  of  the  fleet  was  to  be  made  in  the  gray  of 
the  morning  and  not  at  night ; but  at  5 o’clock  I received  a dispatch 
from  the  admiral  stating  that  he  should  commmence  his  movement  at 
8 o’clock  in  the  evening.  It  was  impossible  for  me  to  construct  bridges 
and  repair  the  almost  impassable  roads  for  artillery  in  season  to 
co-operate  with  the  fleet  by  a concentrated  artillery  fire.  I had  just 
left  the  rear  of  the  enemy’s  works  in  company  with  General  Grover,  in 
conclusion  of  the  reconnaissances  of  the  enemy,  when  the  fleet  and  bat- 
teries opened  their  fire  at  11.30  p.  m.  Had  the  original  purpose  been 
carried  out  my  batteries  >vould  have  been  in  position  before  morning. 


254 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 


We  had  waited  nearly  ten  days  for  the  fleet,  detained  by  the  break- 
age of  machinery,  and  lost  the  opportunity  of  crossing  its  fire  with  that 
of  our  artillery  in  the  premature  commencement  of  the  action  by  as 
many  hours. 

The  reconnaissances  were  pushed  with  vigor  from  2 o’clock  until 
the  opening  of  the  fire  at  11  p.  m.  Whenever  the  enemy’s  pickets 
appeared  they  were  driven  in,  cavalry  or  infantry,  until  it  was  mani- 
fest that  they  were  determined  not  to  venture  out  of  the  works  to  give 
or  receive  battle. 

In  the  early  part  of  these  movements  Col.  John  S.  Clark,  of  my  staff, 
who  was  near  the  enemy’s  lines,  was  seriously  wounded,  his  horse  being 
killed,  by  the  same  shot,  under  him.  A captain  of  cavalry  was  also 
wounded  and  captured.  Several  dead  bodies  were  left  upon  the  ground 
by  the  rebels  and  some  of  the  wounded  brought  into  our  camp.  The 
entire  command  was  underarms  during  the  night,  but  no  general  action 
occurred. 

Information  having  been  received  from  the  signal  corps  that  the 
Hartford  and  Albatross  had  safely  passed  at  Springfield  Landing,  and 
the  balance  of  the  fleet,  with  exception  of  the  Mississippi,  was  in  safety 
on  this  side,  the  troops  rested  upon  their  arms  until  Sunday  evening, 
when  they  fell  back  near  Bayou  Montesano,  and  encamped  from  5 to  8 
miles  from  Baton  Bouge. 

On  Tuesday  the  troops  again  advanced  upon  the  Clinton  and  Bayou 
Sara  roads,  the  enemy’s  pickets  retiring  before  them,  but  offering  no 
serious  resistance,  returning  to  camp  during  the  night. 

It  had  been  understood,  in  the  event  of  the  passage  of  any  portion  of 
the  fleet,  that  communication  with  the  river  above  Port  Hudson  should 
be  made  by  the  Army.  Accordingly  two  regiments,  with  a section  of 
artillery  and  a company  of  cavalry,  under  Colonel  Parmele,  of  New 
York,  were  sent  on  Monday,  the  16th  instant,  to  force  a passage  from 
opposite  Profit’s  Island,  under  protection  of  the  fleet,  to  some  point 
above  Port  Hudson. 

The  rebels  having  cut  the  State  levee  opposite  Port  Hudson,  with  a 
view  to  prevent  the  passage  of  the  troops  by* the  flood,  I sent  forward 
on  Wednesday  a brigade,  under  command  of  Colonel  Dudley,  of  the 
Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  with  instructions  to  make  a passage  by  the 
bed  of  False  River,  if  necessary,  or  to  ascertain  and  report  definitely 
the  obstructions  which  should  make  it  impracticable.  I accompanied 
this  expedition  with  several  of  my  staff  officers,  moving  up  the  river 
opposite  the  batteries  within  range  of  the  enemy’s  guns.  A full  view 
of  the  batteries  was  obtained,  of  which  complete  sketches  were  made 
by  the  topographical  and  engineer  officers,  who  advanced  to  the  cut. 
The  crevasse,  occasioned  by  the  cutting  of  the  State  levee,  is  about  ( 0 
yards  wide  and  had  obtained  a depth  of  2J  feet.  This  was  easily  forded 
by  the  cavalry  and  infantry,  but  the  rise  of  water  having  swept  away 
the  bridges,  it  was  impossible  to  distinguish  the  course  of  the  bayous, 
making  the  passage  impracticable,  except  for  horsemen.  Subsequently 
Colonel  Paine,  of  the  Second  Louisiana  Infantry,  with  a detachment  ot 
his  com  maud,  crossed  to  the  river,  about  3 miles  above  Port  Hudson, 
commanding  a view  of  the  river,  but  failed  to  obtain  any  information  of 
the  fleet  above.  Colonel  Dudley  to-day  makes  an  effort  to  reach  Water- 
loo, 6 miles  above  the  forts,  after  which  he  will  return  with  his  command 
to  Baton  Rouge. 

Thursday  evening  three  small  river  steamers  came  down  the  river 
and  rested  under  the  batteries.  They  appeared  to  me  to  have  come 
from  Thompson’s  Creek,  2 miles  above  Port  Hudson,  and  to  be  intended 


Chap.  XXVII.]  PORT  HUDSON,  LA.  255 

for  the  transport  of  troops  across  the  river  to  meet  our  troops.  No  re- 
sistance has  been  offered  to  them,  however,  except  from  the  batteries 
at  the  fort.  To-day  I expect  a report  of  the  final  result  of  this  recon- 
naissance. 

The  force  of  the  enemy  on  the  river  front  is  not  less  than  thirty  or 
forty  guns,  in  strong  works  and  position.  The  land  fortifications  extend 
from  near  Eoss  Landing  to  the  creek,  above  the  river  batteries,  encom- 
passed by  strong  field  works  and  defended  at  intervals  with  field  artil- 
lery and  a garrison  of  not  less  than  20,000  men.  Its  strength  is,  how- 
ever, in  the  power  of  concentrating  troops  at  this  point.  The  utmost 
force  *1  can  bring  to  its  assault  or  investment  will  not  exceed  17,000  men, 
without  abandoning  to  the  enemy  vital  points  on  the  Lower  Mississippi. 
My  conviction  is  now  more  firm  than  before  this  reconnaissance,  that  it 
is  not  in  the  power  of  the  troops  under  my  command  to  carry  this  posi- 
tion by  assault  or  siege  without  re-enforcements.  It  is  universally 
represented  by  the  enemy  to  be  stronger  than  Vicksburg.  I cannot 
doubt  that,  in  itself,  it  is  so.  My  command  is  ready  to  make  the  assault, 
but  my  conviction  is  strong  that  it  would  end  in  the  useless  sacrifice  of 
my  men.  W e are  now  in  the  best  possible  position  to  make  a successful 
attack,  if  in  sufficient  force.  The  Hartford  and  Albatross  can  enfilade 
the  works  from  above  ; the  balance  of  the  fleet  from  below.  A heavy 
battery  could  now  be  easily  planted  on  the  opposite  side  in  front  of  these 
works.  The  river  batteries  could  not  resist  the  concentrated  fire.  A 
land  force  moving  at  the  same  time  upon  the  rear  equal  to  the  garrison, 
and  capable  of  meeting  promptly  any  re- enforcements,  would  complete 
the  certain  reduction  or  evacuation  of  the  post.  This  requires  re-en- 
forcements here  and  the  co-operation  of  the  forces  near  Vicksburg,  which 
I hope  may  be  secured.  This  is  worth  an  earnest  effort. 

I can  but  repeat  the  opinion  expressed  in  previous  dispatches,  that 
the  freedom  of  the  Mississippi  is  the  suppression  of  this  rebellion.  The 
objects  expected  to  be  obtained  by  running  the  batteries  were : First, 
communication  with  the  land  and  naval  forces  at  Vicksburg;  second, 
defeating  the  construction  of  new  batteries  between  Port  Hudson  and 
Vicksburg;  third,  cutting  off  supplies  by  the  Eed  Eiver;  fourth,  ob- 
taining an  opportunity  to  enfilade  the  Eed  Eiver  batteries  from  above ; 
and,  fifth,  the  destruction  of  the  rebel  steamers  in  the  river. 

All  these  objects  have  been  successfully  accomplished  except  the  last, 
and,  with  exception  of  the  loss  of  the  Mississippi,  none  of  the  anticipated 
injuries  have  been  sustained.  The  complete  success  of  the  expedition 
may  be  thus  justly  assumed. 

General  Weitzel  informs  me  that  the  Queen  of  the  West  and  the  Webb 
are  at  Butte-a-la-Eose,  on  the  Atchafalaya,  threatening  an  attack  upon 
his  position  (the  inclosed  dispatches  show  the  position  he  occupies). 

It  is  impossible  to  send  the  gunboats  he  desires  immediately,  but  in 
all  other  respects  he  will  be  strengthened  at  once.  It  is  my  purpose  to 
commence  without  delay  military  movements  upon  th*  Atchafalaya  or 
the  Teclie,  which  were  interrupted  by  the  naval  and  land  expeditious 
to  Port  Hudson.  I beg  leave  to  assure  you  that  no  time  will  be  lost 
hereafter  in  action.  My  troops  are  in  good  health  and  in  the  best  spirits 
and  condition.  Insufficient  land  and  water  transportation  and  the  weak- 
ness of  the  cavalry  are  the  only  obstacles  that  we  shall  now  encounter, 
and  these  are  being  strengthened  every  day. 

In  our  movements  beyond  the  lines  of  the  army  I have  appropriated 
all  the  products  of  the  country  to  the  use  of  the  Government,  not  allow- 
ing speculators  to  follow  us  and  buy  and  sell  under  cover  of  our  forces. 
In  the  recent  expedition  to  Port  Hudson  not  less  than  $300,000  worth 


256 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

of  cotton  and  sugar,  seized  by  the  officers  of  the  Government,  have 
been  turned  over  to  the  chief  quartermaster  of  the  department.  Re- 
ceipts have  been  given  tlierefor  to  the  parties  from  which  the  property 
bas  been  taken,  stating  fully  the  circumstances  under  which  the  seizure 
is  made.  T shall  pursue  this  course  hereafter  unless  otherwise  directed 
by  the  Government,  and  entertain  no  doubt  the  Department  expenses 
can  in  a great  degree  be  defrayed. 

I returned  to  New  Orleans  from  Port  Hudson  last  evening,  and  shall 
to-day  go  to  the  headquarters  of  General  Weitzel.  I have  ordered  Gen- 
eral Grover’s  division  to  move  from  Baton  Rouge  to  his  support  imme- 
diately. . . A1  , , i . 

I cannot  close  this  dispatch  without  again  referring  to  the  total  in- 
sufficiency of  the  forces  and  material  within  my  reach  for  the  work  that 
is  expected  of  me  in  this  department. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- Genera  l , Comm  anding. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  TJ.  S.  Army , Washington , 7>.  C. 

p.  s. During  the  operations  on  the  14th  the  following  detachments 

were  thrown  out  from  Grover’s  division  : The  One  hundred  and  fifty- 
ninth  New  York,  Col.  E.  L.  Molineux ; a section  of  artillery,  and  Com- 
pany E,  First  Louisiana  Cavalry,  moving  on  the  Clinton  plank  road 
parallel  to  the  march  of  the  main  body  of  the  division,  and  taking  post 
at  the  intersection  of  that  road  and  the  cross-road  leading  from  Spring- 
field  Landing.  This  cross-road,  like  most  of  the  others,  differed  essen- 
tially from  what  it  was  represented  on  the  map,  being  for  a considerable 
part  of  the  distance  a mere  by-path. 

From  Emory’s  division  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-second  New  York, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Blanchard,  a section  of  artillery,  and  a squad  of 
cavalry  moving  on  the  same  road  up  to  the  point  held  by  the  above- 
named  detachment.  Three  companies  of  the  One  hundred  and  sixty- 
second  New  York,  under  Major  Bogart,  with  a few  mounted  men,  were 
detached  to  destroy  by  tire  the  Strickland  Bridge  over  the  Comite, 
which  the  expedition  previously  sent  out  under  Colonel  Chickeriug, 
Forty-first  Massachusetts,  could  not  reach.  Captain  Dunham,  assistant 
adjutant-general,  who  was  ordered  to  superintend  the  execution  of  this 
duty,  rejoined  headquarters  during  the  afternoon,  reporting  the  work 
effectually  done,  but  that  there  was  a ford  just  above  passable  lor  cav- 
alry and  infantry.  These  three  companies  remained  at  the  junction  ot 
the  Clinton  road  and  the  cross-road  to  watch  the  latter. 

The  Forty-eighth  Massachusetts,  Col.  E.  F.  Stone;  a section  ot  Ar- 
nold’s battery  (G),  Fifth  Artillery,  and  Company  A,  Second  Rhode 
Island  Cavalry,  formed  a guard  to  the  train. 

The  troops  left  in  Baton  Rouge  consisted  of  the  Forty-first  Massa- 
chusetts, Col.  Thomas  E.  Chickeriug;  One  hundred  and  seventy-third 
New  York,  Col.  C.  B.  Morton  ; One  hundred  and  seventy-filth  New  York, 
Col.  M.  K.  Brvan ; Third  Louisiana  Native  Guards  (colored),  Col.  John 
A.  Nelson:  Eighteenth  New  York  Battery,  Captain  Mack,  and  com- 
pany F,  of  the  Second  Rhode  Island  Cavalry.  The  post  was  placed 
under  the  command  of  Colonel  Chickeriug.  T a- 

Besides  this  force  the  siege  guns,  manned  by  the  Twenty-first  mui- 
diana  Artillery,  Col.  J.  W.  McMillan,  were  placed  in  position  on  the 
river  front  to  guard  against  any  contingency  which  might  arise  m the 
event  of  disaster  to  the  fieef. 


Chap.  XXVII. ) 


PORT  HUDSON,  LA. 


257 


One  company  of  the  One  hundred  and  thirty -third  New  York  was  at 
Plaquemine,  and  one  company  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventy-third 
New  York  was  near  Lobdell’s  Store,  on  the  right  bank,  to  break  up  the 
enemy’s  signal  communication. 

‘ N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Orleans , La .,  March  27,  1863. 

Sir:  Since  my  dispatch  of  the  21st  instant  (which  should  have  been 
No.  7)  the  force  consisting  of  Dudley’s  brigade  and  the  One  hundred 
and  seventy-fourth  New  York,  of  Chapin’s  brigade,  of  Augur’s  division; 
two  sections  of  Arnold’s  battery  (G),  Fifth  Artillery ; two  companies 
(D  and  E)  of  the  Second  Ehode  Island  Cavalry,  and  Magee’s  company 
(B)  of  Massachusetts  unattached  cavalry,  all  under  the  command  of 
Col.  N.  A.  M.  Dudley,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  has  succeeded  in  open- 
ing communication  with  a point  of  the  river  near  the  mouth  of  False 
River,  above  Port  Hudson.  A party  of  cavalry  sent  forward  from  a 
detachment,  consisting  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventy -fourth  New 
York  and  Second  Louisiana,  under  Col.  Charles  J.  Paine,  of  the  latter 
regiment,  reached  that  point  on  the  19th. 

Colonel  Paine,  who  led  this  party  in  person,  reports  that  he  could 
discover  no  signs  of  the  Hartford  or  Albatross,  and  could  hear  nothing 
of  them.  Contrabands  and  deserters  reported  that  the  admiral  had 
passed  up  the  river. 

On  the  20th  four  steamers  were  seen  to  arrive  at  Port  Hudson,  said 
to  be  from  Red  River.  Five  quite  intelligent  negroes,  who  came  down 
from  Natchez  in  skiffs,  reported  that  two  of  our  big  ships  had  passed 
that  point  on  their  way  up,  said  to  be  part  of  the  fleet  engaged  at  Port 
Hudson.  It  seemed  almost  certain  therefore  that  the  admiral  had 
passed  the  mouth  of  Red  River  and  gone  to  Vicksburg. 

My  object  in  sending  this  force  across  the  river  was  therefore  at- 
tained ; but,  upon  the  earnest  solicitation  of  Commander  Alden,  Colonel 
Dudley  was  permitted  to  remain  at  Winter’s  plantation  for  several  days 
longer,  in  hopes  that  the  Hartford  might  return  in  the  early  part  of  this 
week,  and  with  the  purpose  of  affording  to  Admiral  Farragut  an  oppor- 
tunity of  rejoining  in  person  the  main  portion  of  his  fleet,  still  below 
Port  Hudson,  and  of  transferring  his  tbig  to  another  vessel,  as  he  would 
probably  desire  to  do. 

On  the  25th,  however,  still  hearing  nothing  of  the  admiral,  and  having 
put  the  divisions  of  Grover  and  Emory  under  marching  orders,  I ordered 
Colonel  Dudley  to  rejoin  his  division  at  Baton  Rouge.  It  is  reported  to 
me  to-day  that  these  orders  have  been  executed. 

Should  the  admiral  return  to  the  vicinity  of  Port  Hudson  he  will 
undoubtedly  be  seen  or  heard  of  by  the  fleet  lying  just  below  that  place. 
I think  we  can  easily  establish  and  maintain  communication  with  him. 

Incidentally  to  the  main  object  of  his  expedition,  Colonel  Dudley  suc- 
ceeded in  securing  considerable  supplies  of  fresh  beef,  sugar,  piolasses, 
and  cotton,  and  a number  of  horses  and  mules.  The  fresh  beef  especially 
was  a welcome  addition  to  the  supplies  of  both  the  Army  and  Navy. 

Copies  of  the  reports  of  Colonels  Dudley  and  Parmele,  dated,  re- 
spectively, 19th  and  17th  instant,  are  inclosed. 

I take  leave  to  bring  to  your  special  notice  the  energy,  professional 

17  R R— VOL  XV 


258  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  IChai*.  XXVII. 

skill,  and  correct  judgment  displayed  in  the  management  of  tliis  expe- 
dition, after  he  assumed  command  of  it,  by  that  excellent  and  zealous 
officer  Col.  N.  A.  M.  Dudley,  Thirtieth  Massachusetts,  commanding  the 
Third  Brigade  of  Augur’s  division. 

I inclose  a copy  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  Dwight’s  official  report  of  an 
expedition,  consisting  of  his  own  brigade,  of  Grover’s  division,  and 
Ingraham’s  brigade,  of  Emory’s  division,  with  detachments  of  cavalry 
and  artillery,  sent  out  under  his  command  on  the  17th  instant  to  occupy 
our  positions  of  the  14, th  and  15th,  on  the  Bayou  Sdra  and  Clinton  roads. 
The  object  of  this  expedition,  to  cover  the  seizure  and  transportation  to 
Baton  Bouge  of  large  quantities  of  cotton,  which  wre  had  discovered 
between  that  point  and  Port  Hudson,  having  been  fully  accomplished, 
General  Dwight  returned  the  same  night. 

Small  forces  of  cavalry  were  sent  out  to  the  Comite  and  Amite  Bivers, 
on  the  Greensburg  and  Clay  Cut  roads,  to  bring  in  beef-cattle,  horses, 
and  mules.  They  obtained  some  quantities  of  beef  and  a few  animals, 
but  the  latter  are  very  scarce  in  this  country. 

I transferred  my  headquarters  to  New  Orleans  on  the  24th. 

On  the  25th  orders  were  issued  to  General  Grover,  already  prepared 
for  the  movement,  to  proceed  by  water  to  Donaldsonville  and  thence 
march  to  Thibodeaux.  The  road  across  the  country  is  not  yi  very  good 
condition,  and  may  be  rendered  difficult  by  rains ; but,  in  consequence 
of  the  lack  of  transportation  by  water  and  rail,  it  would  require  too  much 
time  to  make  the  movement  over  the  Opelousas  Bailway.  Forty-eight 
hours  are  required  to  move  a single  brigade  over  that  road  under  ordi- 
nary circumstances. 

Dwight’s  brigade,  of  Grover’s  division,  arrived  at  Donaldsonville 
to-day.  The  steamboats  were  immediately  sent  back  to  Baton  Bouge 
for  another  brigade.  Emory,  notified  to  be  in  readiness,  will  follow 
Grover,  and  will  probably  have  to  move  over  the  railway,  as  we  have 
not  enough  land  transportation  to  move  two  divisions  at  the  same  time 
over  a road  of  any  length. 

Brigadier-General  Weitzel  telegraphed  me  on  the  18th  that  he  had 
reliable  information  of  the  arrival  of  the  Queen  of  the  West  and  Webb 
at  Butte- Ala-Bose,  and  requested  that  all  the  light-draught  gunboats 
drawing  less  than  7 feet  should  be  sent  to  Berwick  Bay  at  once.  Com- 
modore Morris  and  Commander  Alden  both  informed  me  that  there 
were  no  gunboats  of  that  class  which  could  be  sent.  Without  a supe- 
rior force  of  gunboats  in  Berwick  Bay  Weitzel  could  not  hold  his 
position  on  those  waters.  The  presence  of  the  two  new  gunboats  at 
Butte-fi-la-Bose  seemed  to  indicate  an  attack,  having  for  its  evident 
result,  if  successful,  the  cutting  offi  of  his  force.  In  falling  back  with 
his  command  to  Bayou  Boeuff  Bridge,  which  movement  was  carried  out 
on  the  21st  instant,  1 am  satisfied  that  General  Weitzel  acted  correctly. 
I went  to  Bayou  Boeuff  in  person  on  the  22d  for  the  purpose  of  examin- 
ing the  situation  of  affairs  there  and  conferring  with  General  Weitzel 
in  regard  to  our  future  operations.  I have  ordered  the  siege  train, 
rnanued  by  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  Artillery,  Colonel  McMillan,  and 
two  sections  of  20-pounder  Parrotts,  manned  by  the  Eighteenth  New 
York  Battery,  to  re-enforce  General  Weitzel.  When  they  arrive  we 
shall  have  a commanding  force  of  artillery  on  that  line,  and  Weitzel  will 
then  resume  his  position  at  Brashear  City.  I do  not  now  anticipate  an 
attack  or  that  anything  of  moment  will  occur  in  that  quarter  until  we 
are  ready  to  strike. 

I have  also  the  honor  to  inclose  a partial  report  from  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Sherman  of  a reconnaissance,  which,  in  pursuance  of  instructions  1 


Chap.  XX YU.] 


PORT  HUDSON,  LA. 


259 


liad  previously  given  him,  he  sent  out  to  Pouchatoula  on  the  23d  in- 
stant, under  the  command  of  Col.  Thomas  8.  Clark,  Sixth  Michigan.* 
The  forces  engaged  were  the  Sixth  Michigan  and  five  companies  of  the 
One  hundred  and  sixty-fifth  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  Abel  Smith.  Colonel 
Clark’s  orders  were  to  ascertain  the  force  of  the  enemy  on  the  lower 
end  of  Jackson  Railroad,  drive  them  out  of  Pouchatoula,  and  break  up 
the  railroad  bridges  across  the  Pouchatoula  River.  f have  not  as  yet 
received  the  official  reports  of  this  reconnaissance,  but  I am  able  to 
state  that  these  orders  have  been  successfully  carried  out,  and  that  we 
now  hold  securely  Manchac  Pass  and  the  defile  leading  from  the  Pass 
to  Ponchatoula.  I propose  to  have  the  bridges  over  the  Pass  rebuilt 
as  soon  as  practicable,  with  a view  to  future  operations  on  the  Jackson 
Railway. 

Simultaneous  with  this  reconnaissance  a demonstration  was  made  on 
the  lower  Amite  by  three  companies  of  cavalry  and  one  regiment  of 
infantry,  under  Col.  Frank  S.  Nickerson,  Fourteenth  Maine,  to  threaten 
the  road  leading  from  the  Mississippi  to  Springfield  and  Pouchatoula. 
This  demonstration  was  skillfully  executed  and  materially  aided  the 
main  enterprise  under  Colonel  Clark. 

The  want  of  cavalry,  which  I have  so  frequently  and  so  strongly 
represented,  is  felt  almost  hourly  in  every  movement.  Large  detach- 
ments of  infantry  are  required  to  do  slowly  and  uncertainly  what  a 
small  party  of  cavalry  would  accomplish  speedily  and  accurately.  We 
must  use  a brigade  to  hold  a road  which  a squadron  could  patrol.  I 
cannot  but  regret  that  any  consideration  of  economy  should  have  pre- 
vented the  Government  from  sending  to  this  department  all  the  cavalry 
which  it  could  control.  I feel  especially  the  loss  of  the  Second  Massa- 
chusetts Cavalry,  raised  expressly  for  my  expedition,  for,  besides  its 
strength,  I relied  upon  Colonel  Lowell  to  infuse  the  necessary  vigor 
into  the  whole  cavalry  service,  and  particularly  into  companies  which 
have  recently  come  to  us  from  Rhode  Island  and  New  York. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding . 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in- Chief,  Washington , Z>.  C. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  William  W.  Rowley , II.  S.  Signal  Corps , Chief  Signal 
Officer , of  operations  March  7-  22. 

Office  Chief  of  Signal  Corps,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf, 

Baton  Rouge , La .,  March  22,  18(53. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  reporCthat  on  the  7th  instant  I received 
orders  from  Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf  to  proceed  with  it  to 
this  place. 

I was  accompanied  by  Lieutenants  Russell,  Eaton,  and  Abbott,  acting 
signal  officers. 

We  arrived  at  this  point  the  evening  of  the  8th  instant.  My  party 


* See  March  21-20.  Expeditions,  &c.,  pp.  280-289. 


260 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

and  myself  immediately  joined  Captain  Roe’s  party,  which  had  been 
here  for  some  time. 

I found  the  whole  party,  upon  inspection,  very  well  equipped  and 
ready  for  the  held.  I established  constant  daily  practice  during  the 
few  days  we  were  here. 

On  the  13th  instant  I received  orders  to  furnish  the  flag-ship  Hart- 
ford with  two  signal  officers  and  the  iron-clad  Essex  with  one.  I ac- 
cordingly sent  First  Lieut.  S.  M.  Eaton  and  Second  Lieut.  J.  C.  Abbott, 
with  two  flagmen,  for  the  Hartford,  and  First  Lieutenant  Jenks,  with 
two  flagmen,  for  the  Essex. 

I also,  under  orders,  detailed  Lieutenants  Halle tt,  Dane,  and  Rund- 
lett,  with' their  flagmen,  to  accompany  Brigadier-General  Grover,  com- 
manding division.  Captain  Roe  and  Lieutenant  Russell  were  to  accom- 
pany me  with  Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf. 

General  Grover  took  the  advance.  No  occasion  was  had  for  the  use 
of  signals  until  we  arrived  at  a point  called  Barnes’  Cross-Roads,  14 
miles  from  this  place  and  6 from  Port  Hudson. 

The  fleet  had  in  the  mean  time  sailed  up  the  river  to  the  head  of  Profit’s 
Island,  about  4 miles  below  Port  Hudson.  Reference  to  the  map  in- 
closed herewith  will  show  the  position.*  Barnes’  Cross-Roads  is  about 
5 miles  from  the  river.  I was  ordered  to  dispatch  an  officer  to  the  river 
(Springfield  Landing)  to  open  communication  with  the  fleet.  Lieuten- 
ant Hallett,  with  two  flagmen  and  an  escort  of  cavalry,  proceeded  im: 
mediately  to  the  point  designated  and  opened  communication  with  the 
Hartford.  I inclose  a copy  herewith  of  his  report  to  me,  which  con- 
tains a copy  of  messages  sent  and  received. 

The  country  between  the  Cross-Roads  and  the  river  is  flat  and  heavily 
timbered,  so  that  signaling  could  not  be  effected  without  much  difficulty, 
and  as  we  wrere  to  remain  there  but  a few  hours  we  did  not  attempt  it. 
Messages  were  sent  between  us  and  Lieutenant  Hallett  by  couriers. 

We  remained  at  the  Cross-Roads  during  the  night  of  the  14th  instant. 
About  11  o’clock  p.  m.  our  fleet  attempted  to  pass  the  batteries  at  Port 
Hudson.  The  Hartford  and  Albatross  got  safely  past.  The  others  were 
disabled  and  were  obliged  to  return.  The  war- steamer  Mississippi  got 
aground  just  under  the  batteries.  The  crew,  after  suffering  heavy  loss, 
set  her  on  fire  and  abandoned  her.  After  burning  a while  she  floated 
off  and  down  the  river,  and  finally  blew  up  with  a tremendous  explo- 
sion. The  remaining  vessels  of  the  fleet  were  but  temporarily  damaged, 
with  slight  loss. 

On  the  morning  of  the  15th  instant  we  took  up  line  of  march  toward 
Baton  Rouge  (having  accomplished  our  object),  arriving  here  in  the 
evening. 

No  further  use  was  made  of  the  Signal  Corps.  In  fact  the  corps  and 
cavalry  were  the  only  branches  of  the  army  that  did  anything,  as  not 
a gun  was  tired  during  the  trip. 

Upon  reaching  here  the  general  desired  me  to  open  communication 
across  the  point  of  land  opposite  Port  Hudson,  between  our  fleet  at 
Profit’s  Island  and  the  Hartford,  above  Port  Hudson-.  A brigade  was 
detailed  as  escort ; Captain  Roe,  with  three  officers,  accompanied  the 
expedition.  Upon  crossing  the  neck  of  land  they  ascertained  that  the 
Hartford  had  gone  up  the  river.  The  expedition  returned  without 
seeing  the  Hartford.  Lieutenant  Eaton  is  aboard  the  Hartford,  if  not 
killed.  Lieutenant  Abbott  was  transferred  to  the  sloop-of-war  Rich- 
mond before  her  attempt  to  pass  the  batteries,  where  he  still  remains. 
Lieutenant  Jenks  still  remains  on  board  the  Essex. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXTEL] 


POUT  HtJDSON,  LA. 


261 


All  ray  officers  did  their  duty  with  alacrity  and  fidelity.  First  Lieut. 
J.  L.  Halle tt  is  deserving  of  particular  commendation  for  the  manner 
in  which  he  held  communication  with  the  fleet  for  more  than  eighteen 
hours  in  a position  very  much  exposed  to  an  attack  from  the  enemy,  he 
having  but  a small  squad  of  cavalry. 

Lieutenant  Abbott,  during  the  passing  of  the  batteries  by  the  Rich- 
mond, was  in  the  maintop  watching  for  signals  from  the  Hartford.  He 
was  doubly  exposed,  for  the  Richmond  had  got  abreast  of  the  last 
battery,  when  a ball  passed  through  her  steam-chest,  disabling  her  at 
once.  She  immediately  slued  around  and  drifted  past  all  the  batteries. 
When  you  consider  that  the  batteries  at  Port  Hudson  extend  for  the 
distance  of  3 miles  you  will  agree  with  me  in  saying  that  the  position 
of  Lieutenant  Abbott  was  not  so  agreeable  as  could  be  wished  for. 

The  six  officers  with  Brigadier- General  Wreitzel  were  not  with  us,  as 
liis  command  was  and  is  still  at  Berwick  Bay. 

I have  the  pleasure  to  inform  you  that  Lieut.  W.  B.  Roe  has  been 
promoted  to  a captaincy  in  his  regiment,  the  Sixteenth  Michigan  Vol- 
unteers. His  commission  bears  date  November  3,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  ROWLEY, 

Capt.  and  Chief  Acting  Signal  Officer , Dept,  of  the  Gulf. 

Maj.  Albert  J.  Myer,  Signal  Officer , U.  S.  Army. 


No.  3. 

Deport  of  Lieut.  Joseph  L.  Hallett , Acting  Signal  Officer , of  operations 

March  10-16. 

Headquarters  Signal  Corps, 

Baton  Rouge.  La .,  March  16,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  Special  Orders, 
No.  1,  received  from  Headquarters  of  the  Signal  Corps,  under  date  of 
the  10th  instant,  I reported  to  Brigadier-General  Grover,  accompanied 
by  First  Lieut.  Henry  C.  Dane  and  Second  Lieut.  Isaac  H.  Rundlett, 
with  their  flagmen,  for  duty  at  2 p.  m.  on  the  same  day. 

At  4.30  p.  m.  on  the  13th  day  of  March,  1863,  we  took  up  our  line  of 
march  on  the  Bayou  Sara  road  with  Brigadier-General  Grover’s  division, 
and  at  7 o’clock  halted  for  the  night  at  Green’s  plantation,  8 miles 
from  Baton  Rouge. 

At  6.20  on  the  following  morning  the  march  was  continued  for  6 
miles,  when  we  again  halted  at  Barnes’  Cross-Roads,  14  miles  from 
Baton  Rouge,  where  we  encamped. 

At  12  m.,  in  obedience  to  verbal  orders  from  Brigadier-General  Gro- 
ver, I proceeded,  with  my  flagmen  and  a cavalry  scout,  to  Springfield 
Landing,  6 miles  from  Barnes’  Cross-Roads,  where  I found  the  steam- 
transport  Saint  Maurice,  and,  embarking,  proceeded  at  once  to  open 
communication  with  the  fleet,  which  lay  3 miles  below  Port  Hudson. 

The  following  is  a correct  transcript  of  messages  sent  and  received 
by  me  from  Saturday,  the  14th,  to  Sunday,  March  15,  1863,  inclusive : 

Saturday,  March  14. 

[Sent  off  1.30  p.  hi.] 

Admiral  Farragut,  Ship  Hartford  : 

My  command  ia  at  Barnes’  Cross-Roads,  and  occupies  the  road  to  Ross  Landing,  on 


262  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

the  flank  and  rear  of  the  rebel  batteries.  When  will  yon  open  fire?  We  shall  be 
ready  this  evening.  N.  P.  BANKS, 

* M.  G.  C. 

[Sent  off  7 p.  m.] 

Lieutenant  Eaton,  Ship  Hartford  : 

I shall  be  on  board  the  Saint  Maurice  until  morning  at  the  Springfield  Landing. 
If  you  have  any  message  for  General  Banks  send  a boat  to  the  landing  and  it  will  be 

lorwarded.  HALLETT,  33. 

Sunday,  March  1*5 — 3 a.  m. 

[Received.  1 

General  Banks  wants  to  know  wbat  that  firing  is. 

[Sent  off  3.15  a.  m.] 

Ship  Landing,  March  15. 

Major-General  Banks  : 

I cannot  say,  but  think  it  is  a fire  raft.  Will  send  word  as  soon  as  I find  out. 

J • Xj*  HA-L-L-L 1 1 j 
Lieutenant  and  Acting  Signal  Officer. 


[Sent  off  6 a.  m.] 

Springfield  Landing,  March  15,  1863. 


Major-General  Banks  : 

Sir:  The  Hartford  and  Albatross  passed  the  rebel  batteries  last  night,  and  are 
now  anchored  above  Port  Hudson.  The  Richmond  received  a shot  through  steam- 
drum, and  was  obliged  to  turn  down  when  abreast  the  town. 

The  Mississippi  ran  ashore  under  the  batteries ; was  set  fire  to  and  blown  up  to 
prevent  her  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

The  Monongahela  returned  on  account  of  soipe  accident  to  her  machinery,  whicn 
prevented  her  from  stemming  the  current.  t>  , 

The  Richmond,  Monongahela,  Genesee,  andKineo  are  anchored  5 miles  below  Port 


Richmond,  loss,  3 killed,  15  wounded;  Monongahela,  10  killed,  wounded  unknown ; 
Mississippi,  loss  large,  but  not  exactly  known. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  L.  HALLE  1 1 , 
Lieutenant  and  Acting  Signal  Officer. 


[Sent.1 


Lieutenant  Abbott,  on  hoard  the  Richmond  : 
Is  the  Richmond  going  to  New  Orleans  ? 


I believe  not. 


[Received.] 

[Sent.] 


Are  the  boats  going  to  open  fire  to-day  ? 


No. 


[Received.] 

[Sent.] 


Cease  signaling. 
Cease  signaling. 


[Received.] 

[Received.] 


Headquarters  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

March  15,  1863. 

Lieut.  J.  L.  Hallett,  Acting  Signal  Officer  : 

Return  here  with  your  party  at  once.  The  Saint  Maurice  will  proceed  to  Baton 
Rouge  at  once.  w w.  ROWLEY. 


Chap.  XXVH.l 


PORT  HUDSON,  LA. 


263 


In  obedience  to  the  above  order  I left  my  station  at  Springfield 
Landing  at  10.30  a.  m.,  and  reported  to  yon  at  General  Banks’  head- 
quarters at  4 p.  m.,  March  15,  1863. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  L.  HALLETT, 
Acting  Signal  Officer. 

Capt.  W.  W.  Rowley, 

Chief  Signal  Officer , Department  of  the  Gulf 


No.  4. 

Reports  of  Col.  Thomas  F.  Chickering,  Forty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry , 
of  skirmishes  on  the  Comite  River , at  Montesano  Bridge , &c. 

Headquarters  Forty-first  Regiment, 
Pierce’s  Cross-Roads,  March  10,  1863 — 6 a.  m. 

Colonel:  Your  dispatch  of  last  evening  has  just  been  handed  me. 
In  reply  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  1 reached  this  place  (Pierce’s 
Cross-Roads)  at  6 o’clock  last  evening,  and  immediately  detached  the 
company  of  cavalry  and  four  companies  of  infantry  to  Strickland  and 
Bogler’s  Bridges.  * They  returned  about  10  o’clock  p.  m.,  having  com- 
pletely destroyed  by  fire  Bogler’s  Bridge.  They  attempted  to  destroy 
the  Strickland  Bridge,  but  met  .with  such  opposition  from  Confederate 
pickets,  and  it  being  very  dark  and  rainy,  returned  to  the  main  re- 
serve. 

At  3 o’clock  this  morning  I again  dispatched  the  cavalry  and  three 
companies  of  the  Forty-first  Infantry,  with  orders  to  destroy  the  Strick- 
land Bridge.  The  detachment  is  now  absent,  but  momentarily  ex- 
pected to  return,  when  I shall  resume  the  march  to  Roberts  or  Comite 
Bridge  and  fulfill  my  orders  at  all  hazards.  I have  been  compelled  in 
person  to  remain  with  the  main  body,  fearing,  from  reports  of  prisoners 
and  contrabands,  an  attack.  To  the  best  of  my  information  the  enemy 
are  9,000  infantry,  encamped  at  Roberts  Bridge,  about  double  my  own 
force,  yet  I am  confident,  with  my  two  pieces  of  artillery,  of  success. 
These  reports  are  derived  from  contrabands  and  planters  traveling  over 
this  road  last  night,  whom  I hold  as  prisoners,  to  prevent  their  giving 
notice  to  the  enemy  of  our  approach. 

I left  Baton  Rouge  at  2 o’clock  p.  m.  yesterday.  I applied  without 
success  for  one  ambulance  to  accompany  the  expedition.  Three  men 
fell  from  sickness  and  exhaustion  on  the  march  to  this  place,  whom  I 
was  obliged  to  leave  by  the  road-side.  About  twenty  shots  on  each 
side  last  night  without  loss;  was  too  dark  to  know  if  they  took  effect 
upon  the  enemy. 

I take  up  the  line  of  march  for  Roberts  Bridge  immediately  after 
having  destroyed  the  Strickland  Bridge,  to  prevent  the  enemy  cutting 
off  our  return.  I shall  hold  the  post  till  further  orders. 

I would  respectfully  suggest  that  at  least  one  ambulance  be  sent  to 
me.  No  conveniences  for  writing  on  the  field. 

Verv  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  E.  CHICKERING, 

Colonel  Forty-first , Commanding  Reconnaissance . 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


264 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVlt 

Comite  Bridge, 

March  10,  1863—11.30  a.  m. 

Sir  : The  detachment  sent  to  destroy  the  Strickland  Bridge  returned 
at  8.30  this  a.  in.,  having  failed  after  five  hours7  trial  to  reach  the  said 
bridge.  All  the  roads  to  the  bridge  from  this  direction  are  impassable 
for  cavalry  or  infantry,  on  account  of  the  deep  mire  above  the  men’s 
knees.  The  troops  returned  very  much  exhausted,  both  men  and 
horses. 

At  9 o’clock  I started  for  this  place.  Arrived  near  the  bridge,  I de- 
ployed one  company  as  skirmishers  to  recon  noiter.  They  were  fired  at' 
by  "the  Confederate  pickets,  some  twelve  shots,  without  injury  that  I 
have  yet  learned.  Upon  hearing  the  firing  returned  by  our  skirmish- , 
ers  I brought  up  the  whole  force  to  the  bridge,  planted  my  artillery  to 
rake  the  bridge,  and  one  gun  up  the  river.  The  Confederates  contested 
the  bridge,  but  after  firing  thirteen  shells  skedaddled.  My  skirmishers 
pursued  them  across  the  bridge  and  drove  them  off.  My  forces  are  now 
in  the  road,  with  a thick  wood  on  either  side.  I have  just  given  orders 
to  burn  and  destroy  the  bridge  as  per  your  order,  and  shall  then  take 
up  the  march  for  the  city,  when,  if  you  still  desire  to  have  the  Strick- 
land Bridge  destroyed,  we  must  approach  it  from  the  plank  road  via 
Dougherty’s  plantation.  From  the  best  information  I can  obtain  the 
point  is  useless  to  us,  as  no  body  of  troops  could  possibly  cross  the 
bridge  or  gain  admittance  to  any  of  our  roads,  now  that  we  have  de- 
stroyed the  Bogler  Bridge. 

After  seeing  the  Comite  Bridge  destroyed  I shall  march  to  the  city, 
unless  otherwise  ordered.  Orders  will  reach  me  on  the  road  to  the  city, 
which  will  be  faithfully  fulfilled. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  E.  CHICKERING, 

Colonel  Forty -fir st,  Commanding  Detachment. 

Brigadier* General  Andrews. 


No.  5. 

Deport  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  Dwight,  jr.,  If.  S.  Army,  of  expedition  from 
Montesano  Bayou  toward  Port  Hudson. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brigade,  Grover’s  Division, 

Camp  near  Montesano  Bayou,  Da.,  March  18,  1863. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  instructions  from  the  headquarters  of  the 
Nineteenth  Army  Corps  I moved  from  this  camp,  with  the  force  placed 
at  my  disposal,  at  about  1 p.  m.  yesterday,  March  17.  This  delay  in 
moving  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  command  was  out  of  rations  and 
it  required  this  time  to  supply  it. 

Just  before  moving  I instructed  Colonel  Ingraham,  commanding  the 
advanced  brigade  on  the  Clinton  plank  road,  to  move  according  to  your 
instructions,  and  that  he  should,  on  arriving  at  the  intersection  of  the 
Clinton  road  with  the  cross-road  from  the  Bayou  Sara  road,  at  which 
he  was  directed  to  halt,  send  a regiment  along  that  road  to  communi- 
cate with  me.  I heard  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  pickets  after  marching 
about  2 miles.  They  had  been  to  that  point  the  day  before  to  get  in- 
formation. At  Alexander’s  house,  at  the  main  cross-road  leading  from 
the  Bayou  Sara  road  to  the  Clinton  road,  my  advance  came  upon  some 


Chap.  XXVII.  ] 


PORT  HUDSON,  LA. 


265 


of  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  who  retreated  on  the  cross-road.  I sent  some 
cavalry  in  pursuit,  hoping  to  drive  them  into  Colonel  Ingraham  s hands, 
but,  after  losing  1 prisoner  to  us,  the  enemy  dispersed  through  the  by- 
paths in  the  woods.  I also  sent  some  cavalry  and  infantry  on  a road 
from  this  point  to  the  left  to  destroy  a bridge  over  the  same  bayou, 
which  is  crossed  by  the  bridge  which  General  Grover  destroyed  when 
the  whole  command  retired  on  Sunday,  March  15.  At  this  point  1 
learned  that  the  rebel  General  Rust,  with  two  ot  his  staff:,  had  been 
there  during  the  day  to  order  all  cotton  sent  to  Port  Hudson  $ that  he 
had  about  400  cavalry  and  some  infantry  at  the  Springfield  Landing 
cross  road,  near  the  church.  This  was  corroborated  at  Mr.  Merritt’s 
bouse,  near  by.  The  cavalry  of  my  advance  at  this  moment  retreated. 
They  had  made  a dash  at  the  church,  wounded  and  captured  one  of 
the  enemy,  and  been  followed,  as  the  enemy,  recovering  from  his  sur- 
prise, dashed  at  them  in  superior  force.  T immediately  sent  to  Colonel 
Van  Zandt  to  move  his  brigade  up  to  the  field  on  the  other  side  of 
Barnes’  house,  moving  forward  myself  to  the  position  indicated  in  your 
orders. 

Here  I remained  undisturbed,  except  by  a few  shots  from  the  enemy’s 
pickets,  which  extended  from  left  to  right  around  the  whole  skirt  of 
wood  in  front  of  my  position,  i,  e.,  from  the  burnt  bridge,  on  the  road 
to  Springfield  Landing,  to  beyond  the  church.  I soon  received  informa- 
tion from  Captain  Hodge,  commanding  the  train,  that  his  wagons  were 
loaded,  and  that  he  was  moving  to  the  rear.  I was  also  informed  by 
Captain  Godfrey,  of  the  cavalry,  that  he  could  not  establish  his  pickets 
in  the  wood,  and  that  the  enemy  was  in  strong  force  in  the  plains 
beyond. 

At  8.15  p.  m.  I sent  written  instructions  to  Colonel  Ingraham  to 
retreat,  and  immediately  began  to  dispose  of  my  command  in  the  road. 
The  silent  withdrawal  of  my  pickets  from  the  immediate  presence  of 
the  enemy  took  some  time,  and  it  was  10  p.  m.  before  I took  up  my 
march  for  this  camp,  which  I reached  at  1 this  a.  m.  with  my  whole 
command  without  any  loss  whatever. 

From  the  prisoners  taken  and  from  a country  woman  who  traveled 
from  the  neighborhood  of  Jackson,  Miss.,  during  the  late  advance  of 
the  whole  command  I learn  that  the  retreat  of  all  the  enemy’s  force 
which  was  outside  of  the  works  at  Port  Hudson  was  most  precipitate, 
and  a considerable  portion  of  that  force  then  dispersed,  and  is  now 
being  collected  together  again  from  distances  varying  from  20  to  40 
miles.  The  same  sources  of  information  indicate  that  the  soldiers  of 
the  enemy  have  a great  respect  for  the  strength  of  the  fortifications 
at  Port  Hudson  and  will  only  fight  there ; that  the  rebels  have  not 
heretofore  put  any  of  their  conscripts  on  picket  outside  the  works,  but 
that  since  this  whole  command  moved  back  to  this  position  they  have 
done  so. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  DWIGHT,  Jr., 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Detachment . 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


266 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

No.  6. 


Report  of  Col  Theodore  W.  Parmele , One  hundred  and  seventy -fourth  New 
York  Infantry , of  operations  on  west  hank  of  the  Mississippi 


On  Board  Steamer  Empire  Parish, 

Off  Pro fiVs  Island , Mississippi  River , March  17,  1863 — 8 p.  ra. 


Colonel:  I send  an  officer  with  this  on  steamer  Morning  Light, 
which  leaves  for  rations  and  coal.  I regret  that  after  the  severe  trials 
of  this  day’s  march  I cannot  yet  report  the  attainment  of  its  object. 

I left  with  the  troops  assigned  me  by  the  steamers  in  waiting  at  1 
o’clock  this  morning.  Not  finding  the  Reliance  or  any  gunboats  at 
Baton  Rouge  I came  without  delay,  after  telegraphing  to  headquarters. 
On  account  of  fog  we  reached  here  only  in  time  to  march  at  9 a.  m. 
The  disposition  of  forces  was  made  according  to  instructions,  and  but 
for  the  long  delay  in  travel  more  might  be  reported  of  importance. 

After  ten  hours  of  severe  marching  I returned  with  my  men  much 
worn  with  their  tramp  through  mud  and  water.  The  roads  are  flooded 
by  recent  rain  or  reported  cut  in  levee  below  the  Point.  The  latter 
may  be  true.  I have  sent  some  cavalry  to  examine  as  far  as  prudent, 
and  will  report  by  next  conveyance.  Contrabands  report  the  admiral 
at  Waterloo,  with  the  Hartford  and  Albatross.  I took  one  to  Captain 
Alden,  of  the  Richmond,  who  dispatched  him  with  some  communica- 
tions to  the  admiral. 

The  cause  of  my  return  without  getting  my  cavalry  to  the  river  was 
the  prolonged  march  and  possible  failure  by  extending  my  intervals 
with  such  poor  chances  of  sustaining  them  over  such  roads.  I have  I 
not  seen  the  enemy  in  force  or  detachments,  except  skulking  guerrillas. 
Our  advance  signals,  after  long  exchanges,  reported  the  enemy  in 
advance  of  us,  and  the  skirmishers  and  cavalry  thought  them  m our 
rear.  I do  not  credit  the  reports,  but  withdrew  my  cavalry  slowly,  after 
standing  my  regiments  several  hours.  After  making  satisfactory  ob- 
servations, it  being  late,  and  my  men  from  recent  exposure  being  unfit, 

I returned.  I was  well  supported  to-day  by  officers  and  men. 

Kespectfully,  T w.  PAEMELE, 

Colonel. 


Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Col.  N.  A.  M.  Dudley  , Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  of  re- 
connaissance to  the  mouth  of  False  River. 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  First  Division, 

March  19, 1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  major-gen- 
eral commanding,  the  result  of  the  reconnaissance  made  by  the  troops 

under  my  command  to-day.  „ _ . _ , T 

I sent,  under  the  command  of  Col.  C.  J.  Paine,  of  the  Second  Louisi- 
ana Volunteers,  the  One  hundred  and  seventy-fourth  New  York  Volun- 
teers, under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gott  5 the  Second  Lou- 


Chap.  XXVn.] 


PORT  HUDSON,  LA. 


267 


isiana  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Everett,  and  a detachment  of  the 
Second  Rhode  Island  Cavalry  in  a direction  directly  opposite  Port 
Hudson.  Colonel  Paine  succeeded  in  reaching  the  crevasse  with  his 
whole  force.  Finding  the  water  too  deep  for  his  infantry,  he  took  his 
cavalry,  and  after  a march  of  4 miles  reached  the  Mississippi  River  above 
Port  Hudson.  I respectfully  refer  the  commanding  officer  to  his  report 
of  the  discharge  of  the  duty  assigned  him. 

Colonel  Paine,  by  his  personal  courage,  military  skill,  and  indomitable 
perseverance,  has  almost  individually  accomplished  the  object  for  which 
hundreds  of  troops  were  deemed  necessary, 

1 am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

N.  A.  M.  DUDLEY, 

Colonel  and  Acting  .Brigadier  General , Commanding. 

Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 


No.  8. 

Report  of  Col.  Charles  J.  Fame , Second  Louisiana  Inf antry  (Union),  of  re- 
connaissance to  the  mouth  of  False  River. 

Camp  near  Port  Hudson,  La., 

March  19,  1863. 

Captain  : 1 have  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  commanding 
officer,  that  in  obedience  to  verbal  instructions  I proceeded  with  two 
regiments  of  infantry,  the  Second  Louisiana  and  One  hundred  and 
seventy-fourth  New  York,  and  about  20  cavalry,  at  2 p.  m . , directly  in- 
land from  the  Point.  After  marching  about  a mile  the  country  was  so 
flooded  with  water  that  I left  the  infantry  and  went  on  with  the  cavalry, 
leaving  squads  of  them  behind  to  watch  the  bridge  and  two  cross-roads. 
Reaching  a bay  (marked  on  the  map  False  River)  I turned  to  the  right 
and  galloped  to  the  Mississippi,  striking  it  about  2 miles  from  and  above 
Port  Hudson,  and  at  the  mouth  of  False  River.  I examined  the  river 
for  ships  of  war,  but  could  see  none.  I examined  the  banks  of  Pprt 
Hudson  and  could  see  no  vessels,  except  one  small  river  steamboat 
painted  white.  Part  of  the  shore  on  the  west  side  of  the  Mississippi 
River  and  above  False  River  was  not  in  sight  and  could  not  be  seen  by 
any  one  on  the  south  side  of  False  River,  which  cannot  be  forded.  A 
good  road  crosses  False  River  at  a dike  about  a mile  from  its  mouth. 

I am,  captain,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  J.  PAINE, 

Colonel  Second  Louisiana  Volunteers , Commanding  Expedition. 

Captain  Speed,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Col.  N.  A.  M.  Dudley , Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Infantry , of  ex- 
pedition to  Hermitage  Landing. 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  First  Division, 

Bivouac  opposite  Port  Hudson , La.,  March  25,  1863. 
Inclosed  I have  the  honor  to  send  an  official  copy  of  the  report  of  a 
very  successful  expedition  which  I sent  out  yesterday  morning  under 


268 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYTL'  < 

the  command  of  Captain  Magee,  supported  by  two  others  sent  on  his 
flanks„accompanied  by  Lieutenant  Dean,  of  my  staff.  His  detailed  re- 
port will  give  the  general  commanding  full  particulars  of  all  the  facts.  ' 
Captain  Magee  is  entitled  to  the  highest  commendation  for  the  prompt 
and  perfect  execution  of  the  orders  given  him.  He,  with  his  whole  com- 
mand, was  over  five  hours  in  the  water.  The  perseverance  of  his  men 
and  officers  is  only  surpassed  by  their  perfect  success. 

Lieutenant  Dean  volunteered  to  accompany  the  expedition.  Captain 
Magee  speaks  in  the  warmest  terms  of  his  gallantry  and  zeal. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  A.  M.  DUDLEY, 

Colonel  and  Acting  Brigadier- General. 
Capt.  George  B.  Halsted, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Capt.  James  M.  Magee , Second  Company  Massachusetts  Unat- 
tached Cavalry , of  expedition  to  Hermitage  Landing. 

Bivouac,  opposite  Port  Hudson, 

March  24,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit,  for  the  information  of  the  command-  i 
ing  officer,  the  following  report  of  an  expedition  made  to-day  by  my 
company,  in  accordance  with  the  orders  received  this  morning: 

I left  the  bivouac  of  the  command  at  10  a.  m.,  and  under  the  guid- 
ance of  a creole,  a prisoner  in  our  hands,  formerly  a resident  of  this 
region,  proceeded  to  the  Hermitage  Landing,  a point  at  the  head  of  the 
lower  mouth  of  the  False  Biver,  and  nearly  opposite  Port  Hudson. 
The  route  for  about  3 miles  was  through  a dense  forest,  overflowed  with 
water  belly-deep  for  horses,  intersected  at  many  points  by  bayous 
from  10  to  20  feet  deep  and  distance  across  from  30  to  50  yards,  which 
our  horses  had  to  swim.  On  arriving  at  the  main  road,  which  runs 
parallel  with  the  south  levee  of  the  False  Eiver,  myself  and  Lieutenant 
Dean,  who  accompanied  me  on  the  expedition  and  rendered  me  most 
valuable  aid  and  who  contributed  much  toward  our  success,  rode  to 
the  Point  to  reconnoiter.  On  discovering  no  enemy  at  the  Point,  where 
a considerable  force  was  found  two  days  before,  I moved  my  command 
forward  to  the  dike  where  the  rebel  steamer  .Hope,  loaded  with  600 
barrels  of  molasses,  lay,  which,  on  the  execution  of  your  order,  I burned 
with  its  freight.  I then  left  a portion  of  my  men  in  the  rear  and  pro- 
ceeded with  the  balance  to  the  junction  of  the  False  and  Mississippi 
Bivers  (Hermitage  Landing),  where  I found  over  1,000  barrels  of  mo- 
lasses, all  of  which  I destroyed  or  rolled  into  the  river. 

At  this  point  I found  a rebel  machine-shop,  at  present  used  as  a 
repair-shop  for  guns.  This  was  burned,  with  its  contents,  together  with 
Government  granary,  containing  15,000  bushels  of  corn,  intended  for 
Port  Hudson.  After  destroying  all  the  property,  including  a drug- 
store, having  a large  assortment  of  valuable  medicines,  and  some  out- 
buildings, one  the  post-office,  I then  proceeded  to  two  or  three  different 
points  on  the  Mississippi,  where  I had  a full  view  of  the  river ^4  or  5 
miles  above  Waterloo.  Neither  the  Hartford  nor  Albatross  were  in 
sight,  and  no  accurate  information  could  be  obtained  from  either  whites 
or  contrabands  of  their  whereabouts. 


Cbaf.  XXVTI  ] 


PORT  HUDSON,  LA. 


269 


Believing  I had  fully  carried  out  Actiug  Brigadier-General  Dudley’s 
instructions  I started  on  my  return,  when  I discovered  three  of  the 
enemy  at  a short  distance  in  the  wood,  pursued  them,  caught  them, 
and  turned  them  over  to  the  guard. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  MAGEE, 

Capt.  2d  Unattached  Mass.  Cav .,  Comdg.  Detached  Expedition . 

Captain  Speed, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  11. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Franklin  Gardner , G.  S.  Army , commanding  at 
Port  Hudson , of  operations  March  7-26,  with  correspondence  and 
orders. 

Port  Hudson,  March  9,  1863. 

(Deceived  March  9,  1863.) 

Large  re-enforcements  arrived  at  Baton  Rouge  yesterday  and  day 
before.  Force  cannot  be  less  than  30,000. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Jackson,  March  9, 1863. 

Your  telegram  of  9th  received.  You  have  now  all  the  force  I can 
give  you.  The  odds  are  large  against,  but  I am  too  much  pressed  on 
all  sides  to  give  you  more.  Endeavor  to  get  in  all  the  subsistence  you 
can.  I believe  you  will  whip  their  demoralized  army. 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  Franklin  Gardner, 

Port  Hudson , La. 


Port  Hudson,  La.,  March  10, 1863. 
The  lieutenant  of  the  Essex  is  reported  arrested  for  treason.  My 
advanced  pickets  have  been  driven  in. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General . 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Jackson,  March  10,  1863. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Miller,  at  Ponchatoula,  telegraphs  as  reliable  the 
following  information : 

General -Banks  .left  New  Orleans  for  Baton  Rouge  Saturday.  Will  attack  Clinton 
first  with  8,000  men  and  tlien  railroad.  Barges  ready  at  New  Basin  to  transport  890 
to  Pass  Mancliac,  to  march  up  road  to  Ponchatoula. 


270 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


If  Banks  attempts  this,  East’s  brigade  might  attack  his  rear  and  whip 
him.  If  you  believe  you  are  about  to  be  attacked  keep  all  the  subsist- 
ence stores  you  have.  Give  me  your  opinion  as  to  the  possibilities. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-  General . 

Major-General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson. 


Port  Hudson,  March  11,  1863. 

There  is  not  yet  any  movement  in  force  by  the  enemy.  The  attack 
on  the  pickets  was  not  followed  up. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Port  Hudson,  March'll,  1863—1  a.  m. 
Enemy  are  advancing  on  Camp  Moore  road.  Force  not  ascertained, 
but  supposed  to  be  a strong  raid. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major- General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Port  Hudson,  March  11,  1863. 

(Receive.d  March  12,  1863.) 
The  enemy  has  not  developed  his  plans.  Outside  report  from  Baton 
Rouge  says  he  will  advance  10,000  toward  Clinton  and  the  rest  against 
this  place,  or  that  he  will  advance  the  whole  force  toward  Clinton  and 
pass  gunboats  by  to  starve  us  out. 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


FRANK.  GARDNER, 
Major- General , Commanding. 


Port  Hudson,  March  11,  1863. 

(Received  March  12,  1863.)* 

The  enemy  have  advanced  a small  force  to  the  Comite.  They  do  not 
appear  to  be  advancing  with  their  whole  force.  It  will  be  impossible 
to  operate  from  this  point  toward  Ponchatoula,  but  an  advance  toward 
Clinton  will  leave  his  rear  exposed.  Rust  is  here,  and  all  of  my  opera- 
tions will  have  to  be  from  this  poiut.  I will  keep  you  advised. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Port  Hudson,  March  12, 1863. 

Enemy  were  not  advancing  at  3.30  p.  m.  Weitzel’s  brigade  reported 
arrived  to-day.  I have  received  some  corn ; more  will  be  in  to-morrow. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General . 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Ciiap.  XXVH.] 


PORT  HUDSON,  LA. 


271 


Port  Hudson,  il larch  12,  1863. 

The  enemy  appear  to  be  advancing  slowly  on  three  roads.  I have 

three  days’  corn  and  thirty  days’  meat. 

d PRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La.,  March  13,  1863. 

General  : I think  the  enemy  will  give  up  attempting  to  land  their 
whole  force  at  Springfield  on  account  of  the  water.  Below  the  point 
near  Troth’s  Landing  they  could  effect  a landing  out  of  range  of  my 
guns,  but  would  have  to  march  by  Troth’s.  I therefore  desire  you  to 
place  a regiment  of  infantry  and  one  light  battery  at  Troth’s  house  on 
picket.  The  advance  at  this  point  can  easily  be  resisted.  Keep  your 
brigade  ready  for  any  emergency  to  move  at  a moment’s  notice.  I shall 
rely  upon  you  to  resist  the  enemy  at  Troth’s,  and  I think  I will  merely 
keep  them  in  observation  at  Springfield. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 

Brig.  Gen.  Albert  Rust,  Commanding  Brigade. 


Port  Hudson,  March  14,  1863. 

The  bombardment  commenced  at  2 p.  m.  Firing  very  slow.  Fleet 
not  in  range  of  my  guns.  The  land  forces  are  advancing. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La.,  March  14,  1863. 

General:  The  steamboats  have  arrived  with  corn  just  in  time.  I 
shall  get  them  all  off  to-night.  The  enemy  are  now  bombarding  this 
place  and  their  land  forces  have  advanced.  Their  whole  fleet  of  eleven 
vessels  is  in  sight,  but  nothing  decided  is  yet  shown  in  their  opera- 
tions. I shall  need  17,000  bushels  of  com  per  month  for  the  commis- 
sary and  20,000  bushels  for  quartermaster;  also  about  1,200,000  pounds 
of  fodder.  It  is  impossible  to  obtain  these  supplies  elsewhere  than  from 
Red  River. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major- General. 

Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor, 

Commanding  West  Louisiana , Alexandria , La. 


Port  Hudson,  March  14,  1863. 

The  firing  from  the  enemy  is  once  in  two  or  three  minutes  at  long 


272 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTL 


range  since  2 o’clock.  No  harm  done.  The  reports  of  the  position  of 
land  forces  not  accurate.  Their  advance  have  been  skirmishing  3 miles 
from  breastworks. 


FRANK  GARDNER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 


Headquarters, 
Port  Hudson , La .,  March  14,  1863. 


Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Monday  last,  March  9, 
the  enemy  gave  some  indications  of  advancing,  and  on  Tuesday  moved 
out  with  considerable  force  of  infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery  on  the 
three  roads,  but  made  a halt  only  a few  miles  from  Baton  Rouge.  He 
moved  a portion  of  his  forces  by  transports  about  5 miles  above  Baton 
Rouge  at  the  same  time,  and  also  sent  up  one  gunboat,  which  drove  in 
my  signal  parties  from  the  lower  stations,  capturing  2 men. 

Yesterday  he  advanced  five  gunboats,  the  Mississippi  and  Richmond, 
with  three  transports,  and  landed  a small  force  of  cavalry  and  two  regi- 
ments of  infantry  at  Springfield  Landing,  about  10  miles  below  here  by 
the  road.  They  marched  rapidly  to  the  Baton  Rouge  road  and  passed 
down  that  to  the  road  to  Taylor’s  Landing,  and  embarked  again  at  that 
point.  I started  Wingfield’s  cavalry  immediately  on  the  receipt  of  the 
intelligence,  but  they  were  too  late.  The  enemy  effected  nothing  except 
driving  in  the  small  interior  cavalry  pickets  and  stealing  a few  horses. 
The  expedition  was  of  more  benefit  to  my  men  than  theirs,  as  it  pro- 
duced immediate  cheerfulness  and  hopes  of  a fight. 

The  five  gunboats  anchored  in  sight,  but  not  in  range.  Six  in  sight 
this  morning.  No  news  from  the  front. 


Major-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Port  Hudson,  La.,  March  14,"  1863. 


General  Orders, 


! 


No.  27. 


# 


# 


III.  The  confinement  of  all  officers  and  men  who  are  under  charges 
will  have  their  arrest  suspended  until  further  orders.  They  will  return 
to  duty  with  their  respective  commands. 

IV.  The  enemy  has  at  last  determined  to  advance  against  this  place 
to  make  an  effort  here  to  open  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi.  The 
major-general  commanding  has  entire  confidence  in  his  gallant  and 
veteran  troops,  and  feels  satisfied  that  their  conduct  on  this  occasion 
will  be,  as  heretofore,  distinguished  by  their  bravery,  endurance,  and 
cheerfulness.  Let  every  man  do  his  duty  and  we  will  hold  this  point  in 
defiance  of  the  numbers  they  bring  against  us. 

V.  The  troops  will  be  required  to  remain  continuously  at  the  breast- 
works, except  the  necessary  details  of  teamsters,  company  cooks  (not 
to  exceed  eight  to  a company),  and  hospital  details.  All  men  detached 
will  be  required  to  have  their  arms  and  accouterments  at  all  times  within 
their  reach. 

VI.  The  small-arms  ammunition  and  ammunition  for  the  field  bat* 


Chap.  XXVII.]  PORT  HUDSON,  LA.  273 

teries  will  be  distributed  at  once  and  kept  securely  skeltered  under 
tents  and  in  charge  of  guards. 

VII.  Infantry  pickets  will  be  called  in  closer  to  the  breastworks  and 
he  replaced  by  cavalry  pickets.  After  the  appearance  of  the  enemy 
each  brigade  commander  will  post  such  guards  as  may  be  necessary  to 
prevent  surprise. 

VIII.  Eations  will  be  cooked  so  as  to  keep  two  days  ahead,  and  the 
men  will  have  their  haversacks  supplied  and  canteens  tilled.  Water 
barrels  at  the  breastworks  will  be  filled. 

IX.  Each  regiment  will  furnish  its  proportion  of  wall-tents  for  gen- 
eral infirmary,  and  medical  officers  will  see  that  their  litter  details  are 
properly  provided. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner: 

T.  FEIEXD  WILLSOH, 
Assistant  Adjutant - General < 


Port  Hudson,  March  15, 1863. 

General  Pemberton: 

We  have  burned  one  gunboat  in  front  of  Port  Hudson.  The  others 
have  gone  back. 

FEAXK.  GAEDHEE, 

Major-  General . 


Port  Hudson,  March  15,  1863 — 2 a.  m. 
Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

One  gunboat  passed  at  12  m.  She  returned  our  fire  boldly.  Don’t 
know  if  we  hit  her.  Steamboats  have  started. 

FEAHK.  GAEDHEE, 

Major-  General. 


Port  Hudson,  March  15, 1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

Gunboat  fight  lasted  heavily  from  11  to  2.  All  came  up  within  range. 
Hartford  and  Monongahela  passed  crippled.  Mississippi  burned.  Eich- 
mond  disabled  and  sent  back.  Our  loss  very  small.  Forces  by  land 
advanced,  but  all  is  quiet  this  morning. 

FEAXK.  GAEDHEE, 

Major-  General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

Ho.  76.  ) Port  Hudson,  La.,  March  15, 1863. 

######  # 

II.  Brig.  Gen.  A.  Buford,  having  reported  for  duty  at  this  post,  in  ac- 
cordance with  Special  Orders,  Ho.  68,  from  Headquarters  Department 
of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana,  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  a 
brigade,  to  consist  of  Tenth  Arkansas,  Third  Kentucky,  Seventh  Ken- 
tucky, Edwards’  consolidated  Alabama  regiment,  Snodgrass’  consoli- 
dated Alabama  regiment,  and  the  Watson  Battery  of  four  pieces,  from 
Bust’s  brigade. 

18  r r — vol  xv 


274 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap. 


XXVIL 


III.  Buford’s  brigade  will  take  post  at  the  breastworks  on  the  left  of 
Beall’s  brigade.  Bust’s  brigade  will  constitute  the  general  reserve. 

IY.  So  much  of  General  Orders,  No.  26,  from  these  headquarters,  as 
refers  to  batteries  from  Bust’s  brigade  is  revoked.  Brigadier-General 
Bust’s  artillery  will  be  parked  in  such  position  that  it  may  be  ordered 
to  any  point  necessary. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner: 

T.  FBIEND  WILLSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General.. 


Port  Hudson,  March  16,  1863. 

The  Essex  fought  at  long  range.  The  Hartford  passed  with  the 
Monongahela  lashed  on  the  far  sidel  The  former  much  damaged,  but  j 
gone  up  river. 

I have  ten  days’  subsistence. 

FBANK.  GABDNEB, 

Major-General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Port  Hudson,  La.,  March  16, 1863. 
The  Essex  did  not  pass.  They  say  she  won’t  fight.  The  vessels  are 
still  above.  All  quiet. 

FBANK.  GABDNEB, 

Major-General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Port  Hudson,  March  16, 1863. 

It  is  not  safe  to  send  a boat  down.  The  Hartford  and  Monongahela 
are  up  the  river.  Last  reports  the  land  forces  had  withdrawn.  Fleet 
still  in  sight  just  below. 

FBANK.  GABDNEB, 

Major-General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La .,  March  16,  1863. 

General  : The  enemy’s  fleet  came  up  within  range  at  11  o’clock  on 
the  night  of  the  14th,  and  being  discovered,  made  a terrific  fight  with 
my  batteries  from  11  until  2,  attempting  to  pass  seven  vessels  by.  The 
result  was  the  Hartford  (flag-ship)  passed  with  the  gunboat  Mononga- 
hela lashed  on  the  far  side.  The  Hartford  was  very  much  damaged. 
The  frigate  Mississippi  was  burned  immediately  opposite,  and  the  frigate 
Bichmond  was  badly  crippled  and  had  to  fall  back. 

The  fleet  consisted  of  fourteen  vessels,  steam  frigates,  sloop-of-war, 
gunboats,  and  mortar-boats,  and  all  except  the  mortar-boats  came  with- 
in range.  The  firing  was  terrific  for  three  hours.  The  enemy  was  very 
much  damaged  in  all  her  vessels  within  range,  and  prisoners  state  that 
the  loss  must  have  been  as  much  as  200.  Our  loss  was  1 killed  and  8 
wounded. 


Chap.  XXVTL] 


PORT  HUDSON,  LA. 


275 


I had  four  steamboats  unloading  until  the  moment  of  the  fight,  and 
I then  sent  them  up  the  river.  They  have  all  escaped,  as  the  Hartford 
was  too  badly  damaged  to  pursue. 

I request  that  you  send  them  back  with  corn  as  soon  as  the  enemy 
passes  beyond  the  Red  River,  which  I suppose  will  be  the  case  in  a day 
or  two. 

We  have  only  ten  days’  allowance  of  corn. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 

Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor, 

Gomdg.  District  of  Western  Louisiana , Alexandria , La. 


Port  Hudson,  March  17,  1863. 

Enemy  have  landed  from  four  transports  on  opposite  side  of  the 
river.  Are  bombarding  us  slowly  from  long  range.  Land  troops  en- 
tirely withdrawn. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La.,  March  17,  1863. 

Sir  : The  enemy  are  landing  troops  from  transports  on  the  west  side 
of  the  Mississippi.  Their  object  must  be  to  march  above  this  place, 
and  I think  that  cutting  the  grand  levee  above  now,  as  previously  or- 
dered by  General  Taylor,  might  interfere  with  their  plans.  I shall 
watch  them  closely. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 

Commanding  Officer  Mouth  of  Red  River. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La .,  March  18,  1863. 

General  : I desire  you  to  move  out  immediately  with  one  battery 
(without  caissons)  and  the  infantry  of  your  brigade  (except  two  regi- 
ments to  be  left  at  the  breastworks),  by  Plain’s  Store  and  on  the  Baton 
Rouge  road,  to  skirmish  with  the  enemy’s  advance.  I have  ordered 
Maxey’s  brigade  on  the  Springfield  road,  and  you  must  endeavor  to 
find  his  position.  My  object  is  not  to  attack  the  enemy  with  my  whole 
force  outside,  but  to  interfere  with  his  advance  and  cause  him  to  de- 
velop his  troops.  If  anything  can  be  effected  within  about  9 miles  of 
this  place  I will  send  you  support  if  necessary.  Send  me  in  frequent 
written  reports  and  let  me  know  precisely  where  it  would  be  necessary 
to  send  any  support.  Move  cautiously ; keep  your  skirmishers  well  in 
your  front. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 

Brigadier-General  Beall. 

P.  S. — You  can  make  use  of  the  cavalry  on  the  road. 


276 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La.,  March  18,  1863. 

General  : 1 desire  that  you  will  take  the  infantry  of  your  brigade 
(except  two  regiments  to  be  left  at  the  breastworks)  by  the  lane  to  the 
left  just  as  the  road  to  Troth’s  deviates  to  the  right,  and  move  out  to- 
ward the  Springfield  road  to  skirmish  with  the  advance  of  the  enemy. 
I ordered  Beall’s  brigade  by  Plain’s  Store  and  Baton  Rouge  road  at  the 
same  time.  Endeavor  to  obtain  accurate  information  and  send  in  fre- 
quent couriers.  My  object  is  not  to  seek  an  engagement  with  my  whole 
force  outside,  but  to  interfere  with  the  enemy’s  advance  and  cause  him 
to  develop  his  troops.  If  anything  can  be  effected  within  9 miles  of 
this  place  I will  move  out  additional  troops  to  support  you.  I will  send 
you  some  few  cavalry  for  couriers.  Send  me  word  precisely  where 
additional  troops  should  go. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 

Brigadier-General  Maxey. 

P.  S. — You  can  take  one  battery  without  cassions,  with  good  horses, 
if  you  deem  it  necessary. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , £#.,  March  18,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  en- 
gagement at  this  post  during  the  night  of  the  14th  instant  with  the 
enemy’s  fleet : 

During  the  day  of  the  14th  the  enemy  advanced  with  his  entire  force, 
two  divisions  by  the  Bayou  Sara  road  and  one  by  the  direct  road  to 
Clinton,  and  moved  his  fleet  up  the  river  to  within  sight  but  out  of 
range.  At  2 o’clock  p.  in.  he  commenced  bombardment  slowly  from  his 
mortar-boats  at  long  range  and  gradually  increasing  the  range  until 
he  threw  his  shells  within  the  lower  part  of  the  breastworks.  This  was 
continued  until  6,  without  producing  any  other  result  than  continued 
cheers  from  the  men  as  his  shells  exploded.  During  the  day  Rust’s 
pickets  (his  brigade  being  in  advance  of  the  breastworks)  skirmished 
successfully  with  the  enemy’s  advance.  At  11  o’clock  at  night  the  fleet 
moved  up,  intending  to  pass  seven  vessels  by,  but  were  discovered  im- 
mediately on  starting  by  the  signal  corps  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
river,  who  sent  up  signal  rockets,  and  Rust’s  light  batteries  at  Troth’s 
opened  on  them. 

The  enemy  immediately  commenced  bombarding  from  his  mortar-boats 
and  firing  from  all  his  vessels  as  he  came  in  range.  They  advanced  in 
the  following  order,  as  has  been  ascertained  from  prisoners  : Steamship 
Hartford  (flag-ship),  with  gunboat  Kineo  (not  Monongahela,  as  reported)  ! 
lashed  on  far  side ; steamship  Richmond,  gunboat  Genesee,  gunboat 
Monongahela,  steamship  Mississippi,  gunboat  Sachem,  another  not 
known,  iron-clad  Essex  (remaining  at  long  range),  and  six  mortar-boats 
towed  above  the  point.  While  passing  up  all  opened  their  broadsides 
as  rapidly  as  possible.  Rust’s  two  field  batteries  at  Troth’s  Landing 
first  received  this  tremendous  firing ; but,  strange  to  say,  without  any 
harm,  although  the  batteries  kept  up  this  unequal  contest  until  the  last. 
Next  was  Miles’  20-pounder  Parrott  gun,  which  was  beautifully  served; 
and  then  followed  the  heavy  guns,  first  of  De  Gournay’s  battalion,  and 
next  the  First  Tennessee  Artillery,  under  De  Gournay’s  command ; next 
the  battery  served  by  four  companies  of  Colonel  Steed  man’s  First  Ala- 


chaf.  xxvn.] 


277 


PORT  HUDSON,  LA. 

bama  Regiment,  the  remaining  companies  of  this  regiment  being 
posted  on  the  bluff  as  sharpshooters,  but  unfortunately  the  enemy  did 
not  come  in  near  this  bank  until  after  passing  them. 

The  five  steamboats  which  had  brought  provisions  from  Red  River 
were  unloading  until  the  morning  of  the  battle  and  got  under  way  in 
time  to  escape.  The  enemy’s  fleet  advanced  boldly,  but  were  hand- 
somely received  by  our  batteries.  The  Hartford,  with  the  gunboat 
lashed  to  her,  only  succeeded  in  passing  a little  before  12  ; all  the  rest 
of  the  fleet  were  driven  back  and  evidently  much  damaged.  The  Mis- 
sissippi was  burned  immediately  opposite,  and  the  Richmond  driven 
back  after  she  had  reached  the  Point. 

The  gallant  conduct  and  skill  of  the  men  at  the  batteries  are  deserv- 
ing of  the  highest  praise.  The  cheerfulness  of  the  whole  command 
during  this  terrific  bombardment  and  cannonading  for  three  hours  gives 
evidence  of  the  stubborn  resistance  the  enemy  will  meet  in  any  attack 
on  this  Point. 

The  damage  done  to  the  enemy  cannot  be  ascertained,  but  all  could 
see  vessel  after  vessel  withdraw  from  the  fight  and  one  drifting  down, 
and  the  enemy  even  discontinued  the  bombardment  when  his  broadsides 
were  out  of  range  at  about  2 a.  m. 

The  enemy’s  land  forces  made  an  advance  immediately  after  the  naval 
fight,  but  again  fell  back  a short  distance  and  retreated  on  the  afternoon 
and  during  the  night  of  the  15th  instant,  with  some  appearance  of  dis- 
order. His  main  body  is  over  15  miles  from  here.  Yesterday  he  landed 
troops  from  four  transports  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  with  the 
intention  of  making  a line  of  communication  above,  as  I am  informed 
by  deserters  ; but  I have  cut  the  levee,  which  will  materially  interrupt 
him. 

My  signal  corps,  under  Captain  Youngblood,  has  rendered  the  most 
important  service,  and,  driven  back  from  station  to  station,  they  still 
continued  to  send  up  messages  and  send  up  rockets  when  the  fleet 
advanced. 

I regret  to  state  that  Captain  Youngblood  and  perhaps  four  others 
have  been  captured  on  the  other  side  of  the  river. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  R.  Waddy,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , March  21,  1863. 

Sir  : I deem  it  my  duty  to  state  that  I have  inadvertently  omitted 
in  my  official  report  of  the  engagement  at  this  place  to  mention  the 
just  praise  that  is  due  to  Lieut.  Col.  M.  J.  Smith,  as  chief  of  heavy 
artillery.  I therefore  request  that  the  following  may  be  added : 

The  conduct  of  Lieut.  Col.  M.  J.  Smith,  as  chief  of  heavy  artillery, 
during  the  engagement,  is  deserving  of  the  highest  commendation.  He 
was  present  in  the  batteries  during  the  whole  time,  and  directed  the 
firing  with  conspicuous  coolness,  skill,  and  energy,  having  previously 
arranged  the  ammunition  and  given  full  instructions  in  reference  to  the 
firing  at  each  gun. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  R.  Waddy,  A.  A.  G .,  Jackson , Miss. 


278  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

Beturn  of  Casualties  in  picket  engagement  and  during  bombardment  of  Port  Hudson , La., 
on  the  evening  and  night  of  March  14,  1863. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  lists.] 


Command. 

Enlisted  men  killed. 

Officers. 

o 

1 

aded. 

1 

P ! 
9 

s 

rS 

c 

X 

1 

Aggregate. 

1st  Alabama  Heavy  Artillery 

1 

1 

49th  Alabama 

i | 

1 

9th  Louisiana  Partisan  Rangers 

i 

1 

12th  Louisiana  "Battalion _ _ 

1 

2 

3 

Louisiana  Legion  (Miles’) 

1 

1 

1st  Mississippi  Artillery . _ _ 

2 

2 

1st  Tennessee  Battalion  

2 

2 

1st  Tennesj.ee  Battalion  Heavy  Artillery 

1 

1 

10th  Tennessee . 

2 

2 

30th  Tennessee 

1 

1 

3 

5 

51st  Tennessee 

1 

1 

Total 

1 

3 

18 

20 

General  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  31.  ) Port  Hudson , La .,  March  18,  1863. 

The  major-general  commanding  expresses  his  acknowledgments  to 
the  troops  under  his  command  for  their  handsome  conduct  during 
the  engagement  with  the  enemy’s  fleet  on  the  night  of  the  14th  instant. 
The  excellent  spirit  shown  by  all  during  this  terrific  cannonading 
evinces  the  determined  bravery  which  animates  them.  The  coolness, 
bravery,  and  skill  shown  by  the  men  at  the  batteries  is  deserving  of 
the  highest  praise,  and  this  conduct  is  a just  compliment  to  the  officers 
in  command  of  the  batteries.  The  important  and  gallant  services  ren- 
dered by  the  signal  corps,  under  Captain  Youngblood,  is  also  deserv- 
ing of  special  mention.  Driven  back  from  station  to  station,  they  still 
continued  to  give  important  information  up  to  the  last  moment. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner: 

T.  FRIEND  WILLSON, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.  '• 


Port  Hudson,  March  19,  1863. 

Three  steamboats  here  and  more  coming.  1 will  take  care  of  them. 
Enemy  has  strong  force  on  west  side  of  river.  Those  on  this  side  have 
gone  back  to  9 miles  of  Baton  Rouge. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Port  Hudson,  March  21,  1863 

Enemy  on  this  side  has  gone  back  to  Baton  Rouge.  Large  force  on 
west  side.  I do  not  think  they  have  got  above  me  yet. 


Chap.  XXVII.  1 


PORT  HUDSON.  LA. 


279 


Fleet  still  below,  firing  at  long  range  at  supply  boats  yesterday.  I 
can  only  use  one  landing  and  unloading  is  necessarily  slow,  but  I keep 
a detail  day  and  night. 

Shall  I send  a boat  up  Big  Black  1 FKANK  OCONEE. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Port  Hudson,  March  26,  1863. 

Enemy’s  fleet  fire  at  us  occasionally.  The  troops  have  burned  houses 
on  west  side  of  river;  on  this  side  have  gone  back  to  near  Baton  Rouge. 
More  cavalry  is  greatly  needed  to  keep  the  enemy  in  check.  Corn 
here  about  30,000  bushels.  FRAKK.  GARDNEE, 

Major- General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La.,  March  27,  1863. 

Colonel  : The  enemy  commenced  landing  troops  on  the  wbst  bank 
of  the  river  below  this  point  on  the  17th  instant.  I cut  the  levee  above 
him  in  time  to  stop  his  advance  with  artillery.  A day  or  two  after- 
ward I was  informed  that  he  had  passed  a small  force  of  cavalry  above 
the  slough,  and  I ordered  a battalion  to  be  ready  to  pass  over  above, 
but  the  same  afternoon  the  enemy  succeeded  in  obtaining  accurately 
the  range  of  the  upper  steamboat  landing,  which  compelled  me  to  send 
the  boats  up  Thompson’s  Greek  to  unload.  This  occasioned  a delay, 
and  next  day  the  citizens  informed  me  that  the  enemy  had  passed  a 
large  force  beyond  the  slough,  and  I gave  up  my  expedition  to  the  west 
side.  The  reports  of  the  citizens  were  very  conflicting  and  unreliable, 
and  afterward  they  came  to  me  by  committees  to  urge  the  sending  a 
force  on  the  west  side.  I did  not  feel  justified  in  doing  so  under  the 
circumstances,  although  I was  informed  that  the  enemy  were  commit- 
ting great  depredations.  They  re-embarked  yesterday  and  sent  their 
mortar-boats  down  the  river. 

I have  no  information  to-day  whether  they  left  a small  force  of  cav- 
alry or  not.  If  they  have  done  so  it  will  require  cavalry  to  look  alter 

them,  and  I cannot  spare  any.  , , , . , 

The  whole  force  of  the  enemy  except  four  vessels  has  gone  back  to 
Baton  Rouge.  My  latest  information  does  not  give  any  indications  as 
yet  of  any  other  move.  I have  sent  Colonel  Simonton  with  one  legi- 
ment,  abattery,  and  a squadron  of  cavalry  to  Tangipahoa,  in  accordance 
with  telegraph  from  the  lieutenant-general  commanding. 

A dispatch  from  Colonel  Miller  yesterday  says  the  enemy,  about  1,500, 
are  fortifying  at  Ponchatoula. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Jaclcson,  Miss. 


280 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Capt.  J.  M . Magruder , of  skirmish  at  Montesano  Bridge. 

Bayou  Sara  Boad  Picket  Post, 

March  9,  1863. 

General  : My  pickets  at  the  Montesano  Bridge  have  just  been 
driven  in  by  the  enemy.  The  enemy  crossed  on  some  drift-wood  and 
planks  at  the  bridge.  One  of  our  men,  I am  afraid,  mortally  wounded. 
I am  near  the  bridge  with  about  50  men,  watching  their  movements. 
I do  not  think  it  an  advance  in  force.  It  was  a cavalry  force  that  at- 
tacked us.  I will  send  a prompt  account  of  any  movement  the  enemy 
may  make.  I have  no  news  from  the  plank  road,  which  sustains  me  in 
the  impression  that  no  movement  in  force  is  contemplated.  I will  place 
pickets  at  Montesano  Bridge  again  to-night.  At  present  I think  the 
enemy  are  at  the  bridge  lying  in  ambush  for  us.  There  is  great  excite- 
ment in  Baton  Bouge  to-day.  The  Yankees  appear  to  have  been  fight- 
ing a sham  battle  all  day.  The  firing  of  musketry  has  been  continuous 
all  day. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

J.  M.  MAGBUDEB, 

Captain , Commanding  Bayou  Sara  Picket  Post. 

Major-General  Gardner. 


MARCH  21-30,  1863. — Expedition  from  Hew  Orleans  to  Ponchatoula,  La., 

and  skirmishes. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Defenses  of  New 
Orleans. 

No.  2. — Col.  Thomas  S.  Clark,  Sixth  Michigan  Infantry,  commanding  expedition. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  Col.  Abel  Smith,  jr.,  One  hundred  and  sixty-fifth  New  York  Infantry. 
No.  4. — Lieut.  Gen.  John  G.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of 
Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana. 

No.  5. — Maj.  F.  Dumonteil,  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  6. — Maj.  M.  R.  Clark,  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  7. — Lieut.  Col.  H.  H.  Miller,  Twentieth  Mississippi  Infantry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman , U.  S.  Army , commanding 
Defenses  of  New  Orleans. 

Headquarters  Defenses  of  New  Orleans, 

March  27,  1863. 

Colonel:  In  reply  to  the  verbal  directions  of  Major-General  Banks, 
conveyed  by  one  of  his  aides  this  morning,  I have  the  honor  to  state 
that  no  official  report  has  yet  been  received  from  Colonel  Clark,  Sixth 
Michigan,  in  command  of  the  expedition  to  Ponchatoula;  but  for  the 
immediate  information  of  the  general,  which  I have  received  from  a 


Iuap.  XXVIL]  EXPEDITION  FROM  NEW  ORLEANS.  281 

pencil  note  from  Colonel  Clark  and  from  officers  just  from  his  com- 
mand, I can  furnish  him  the  outlines. 

Having  directed  Colonel  Clark,  on  the  21st  instant,  to  make  a recon- 
naissance of  the  country  north  of  Manchac  Pass,  with  the  view  of  ascer- 
taining the  force  of  the  enemy  on  the  Jackson  Eailroad,  driving  them 
out  of  Ponchatoula  if  possible,  and  breaking  up  the  railroad  bridges 
across  the  Ponchatoula  Kiver  above  that  village,  the  troops  at  his  dis- 
posal were  placed  in  position  at  Manchac  Pass,  in  order  too  that  the 
operation  could  be  performed  on  the  23d  instant. 

On  that  day  the  Sixth  Michigan  Eegiment  was  put  on  board  a little 
steamer  (Savory)  and  three  small  schooners,  sent  up  from  New  Orleans 
for  that  purpose,  and,  escorted  by  the  little  gunboat  Barataria  (two 
guns),  ascended  the  Ponchatoula  to  Wadesborough  Landing,  a point  3 
miles  from  a village  of  that  name.  In  the  mean  while  five  small  com- 
panies of  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-fifth  New  York  Volunteers,  under 
Lieut.  Col.  Abel  Smith,  crossed  the  Passes  in  small  boats,  sent  up  from 
New  Orleans  for  that  purpose,  and  landed  on  the  railroad  track.  This 
force  was  supported  by  a field  rifled  gun,  manned  by  men  of  the  Ninth 
Connecticut  Volunteers,  which  was  intended  to  hold  the  passage-way 
leading  up  from  the  Pass  in  any  event. 

In  consequence  of  the  severe  storm  on  that  day  and  the  difficult  and 
serious  character  of  the  river  the  transports  were  unable  to  get  up  to 
the  lauding  until  the  morning  of  the  next  day.  In  the  mean  while  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Smith  had  cleared  the  defile  leading  to  Ponchatoula  of 
the  enemy,  and  securely  held  its  head  until  the  arrival  of  the  Sixth 
Michigan  at  the  village. 

After  some  smart  skirmishing  on  all  sides,  conducted,  as  I understand, 
in  admirable  order,  the  enemy,  which  was  found  to  consist  of  three  com- 
panies of  cavalry,  was  entirely  routed  and  driven  off.  Not  a 'person  ap- 
pears to  have  been  killed  on  our  side,  though  Colonel  Clark  reports  6 
wounded.  What  loss  the  enemy  sustained  I have  not  learned,  except 
1 officer  and  4 privates  taken  prisoners.  Ponchatoula  lies  upon  the  rail- 
road, and  about  10  miles  by  rail  and  17  or  20  by  the  river  from  the  North 
Pass.  Two  or  three  schooners  loaded  with  cotton  and  stores  were  cap- 
tured, and  two  schooners  loaded  with  cotton  and  lying  at  Wadesborough 
Landing  were  found  burned  by  the  enemy  to  prevent  them  falling  into  the 
hands  of  Colonel  Clark.  Colonel  Clark  then  advanced  a portion  of  his 
troops  and  destroyed  two  railroad  bridges,  one  across  the  bayou  about 
1 mile  beyond  the  village  and  about  40  feet  in  length,  and  the  other 
across  the  Ponchatoula  Eiver  about  2 miles  above  the  village  and  about 
200  yards  in  length. 

From  all  I have  thus  far  learned  this  affair  was  conducted  hand- 
somely and  with  good  judgment,  and  reflects  much  credit  on  Colonel 
Clark.  Much  credit  is  due  also  to  Captain  [Le  Grand  W.]  Perce,  my 
division  quartermaster,  for  the  energy  he  displayed  in  collecting  and 
controlling  the  transportation.  He  was  present  too  with  Colonel  Clark 
during  the  whole  expedition,  and  I am  informed  displayed  both  vigor 
and  judgment.  As  soon  as  Colonel  Clark  renders  his  report  it  will  be 
duly  forwarded. 

Not  knowing  wdiat  force  would  be  found  at  Ponchatoula,  and  deter- 
mined to  have  the  pest-hole  cleared  out  at  all  events,  I ordered  Colonel 
Nickerson,  commanding  at  Bonnet  Carre,  to  make  a demonstration 
on  the  Lower  Amite  Eiver  at  the  same  time  with  three  companies  of 
cavalry  and  one  regiment  of  infantry,  thus  threatening  the  road  leading 
to  Springfield  and  Ponchatoula  from  the  Mississippi  Eiver.  From 
Colonel  Nickerson  1 have  heard  only  by  telegraph.  He  was  on  the 


282 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Amite  in  time,  and  while  making  a feint  of  bridging  and  crossing  that 
stream  he  reports  that  he  was  assailed  by  an  enemy’s  force  from  the . 
opposite  bank,  but  my  opinion  is  that  the  force  there  was  not  large. 

It  is  my  intention  to  hold  Manchac  Pass  and  as  much  of  the  railroad 
beyond  as  will  prevent  raids  upon  the  Pass  by  the  enemy  as  an  ele- 
ment of  some  importance  to  the  defense  of  the  city,  and  to  this  end  the 
troops  are  now  throwing  up  a breastwork,  in  order  to  hold  the  defile 
leading  from  the  Pass  to  Ponchatoula  against  any  reasonable  force  the 
enemy  would  attempt  a raid  with. 

In  the  mean  while  I respectfully  solicit  the  attention  of  the  general 
commanding  to  the  importance  of  having  the  great  bridges  across  both 
Passes  repaired  at  an  early  day,  so  that  in  case  of  successes  of  greater 
importance  we  shall  be  ready  to  push  cars  beyond  without  delay.  The 
work  required  on  these  bridges  is  large. 

Very  respectfully, 

T.  W,  SHERMAN, 
j Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


Lieutenant-Colonel  Irwin, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf  , New  Orleans , La. 

p.  s.__i  should  have  stated  also  that  the  schooner  Corypheus  (two 
guns)  accompanied  the  expedition  and  covered  the  North  Pass  during 
the  operation  at  Ponchatoula. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  S.  Clark , Sixth  Michigan  Infantry , commanding 

expedition. 

Manchac  Pass,  La.,  March  29, 1863. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  orders  of  date  March  20,  1863,  I proceeded 
with  my  command  to  Frenier  Station  on  the  morning  of  the  21st,  and 
there  bivouacked  for  the  night,  assuming  command  at  that  post.  I 
found  four  companies  of  General  Nickerson’s  brigade  at  Frenier  and  De 
Sair  Stations. 

On  Sunday,  the  22d,  at  7 a.  m.,  I proceeded  with  the  command  to 
Manchac  Pass,  leaving  about  100  men  to  guard  the  bayou  and  road  in 
my  rear.  Arrived  at  South  Manchac  Pass  at  1 p.  m.  same  day.  At  6 
p.  m.  five  schooners  and  one  small  steamer,  containing  five  companies 
of  Colonel  Smith’s  regiment,  One  hundred  and  sixty-fifth  New  York 
Volunteers;  one  company  of  my  own  regiment;  two  rifled  field  pieces, 
in  charge  of  a detachment  of  the  Ninth  Connecticut  Volunteers,  and  a. 
launch,  mounting  one  rifle,  manned  by  a detachment  of  the  Ninth  Regi- 
ment Connecticut  Volunteers,  arrived  on  the  morning  of  the  23d.  I 
debarked  the  One  hundred  and  sixty  fifth  New  York  Volunteers,  placed 
one  field  piece  on  the  north  side  of  the  island  where  the  railroad  bridge 
crossed  the  North  Pass,  and  embarked  the  troops  brought  by  me  from 
Frenier,  consisting  of  the  Sixth  Regiment  Michigan  Volunteers,  two 
small  companies  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventy-seventh  New  York 
Volunteers,  one  company  of  the  Fourteenth  Maine  Volunteers,  and  one 
company  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Maine  Volunteers.  The  embarkation 
was  made  in  the  midst  of  a terrible  storm  of  wind  and  rain,  which  de- 
layed us  very  much.  I now  directed  Colonel  Smith  to  proceed  up  the 


Chap.  XXVII.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  NEW  ORLEANS. 


283 


railroad  to  within  3 miles  of  Ponchatoula,  take  position,  and  hold  the 
.pass  until  he  heard  the  signal  of  attack  from  me  at  Wadesborough  Land- 
ing, when  he  was  to  advance  and  form  a junction  with  me  at  Poncha- 
touia.  I then  proceeded  with  the  main  body  of  the  troops  up  the  Tick- 
faw  Eiver  and  Ponchatoula  Creek  to  Wadesborough  Landing,  3 miles 

from  Ponchatoula.  . . „ 

Owing  to  the  great  difficulty  of  navigation  m the  creek,  from  its  ex- 
tremely tortuous  course,  we  did  not  arrive  at  Wadesborough  until  about 
noon  the  24th.  I immediately  debarked  the  troops,  threw  out  skir- 
mishers, and  advanced  toward  Ponchatoula.  About  half  a mile  Irom 
the  landing  we  found  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  in  strong  force,  and, 
believing  from  the  number  of  skirmishers  that  the  enemy  were  in 
stronger  force  than  we  had  supposed,  immediately  formed  line  of  battle 
and  advanced  three  companies  ahead,  skirmishing.  We  drove  them 
steadily  before  us,  the  main  body  never  coming  within  range  ot  their 
fire,  into  and  through  Ponchatoula.  I immediately  sent  four  companies, 
under  command  of  Captain  Trask,  Fourteenth  Maine  Volunteers,  to 
the  bridge  across  the  Ponchatoula  Creek,  2 miles  above  Ponchatoula, 
and  dispatched  a messenger  to  Colonel  Smith  to  inform  him  that  we 

occupied  the  town.  , , . 

Colonel  Smith’s  regiment  arrived  about  3 p.  m.  He  had  a suarp 
skirmish,  losing  3 men  wounded,  but  drove  the  enemy  before  him.  Ihe 
enemy  made  a slight  stand  at  the  bridge,  and  I sent  up  four  companies, 
under  Colonel  Bacon,  to  make  the  work  sure.  They  destroyed  that 
bridge,  and  also  one  smaller  one  a mile  this  side.  # 

Having  accomplished  the  object  of  the  expedition  thus  far,  and  be- 
lieving the  village  of  Ponchatoula  could  not  be  held  against  torces 
greater  than  my  own,  I ordered  the  schooners  and  gunboats  in  I on- 
chatoula  Creek  to  the  North  Pass,  and  fell  back,  on  the  afternoon  ot 
the  25th,  to  a point  3 miles  south  of  Ponchatoula,  on  the  railroad,  with 
the  main  body  of  my  command,  leaving  six  companies  at  Ponchatoula, 
under  command  of  Major  Clarke,  Sixth  Regiment  Michigan  Volunteers, 
as  picket  and  provost  guard,  with  orders  to  fall  back  on  the  mam  body 
in  case  of  attack.  I here  erected  a small  battery  of  railroad  iron  and 
mounted  one  of  the  field  pieces,  in  charge  of  the  detachment  of  the  Ninth 
Connecticut  Volunteers.  . _ , 

On  the  evening  of  the  26th  the  enemy  appeared  m strong  force  and 
attacked  our  pickets  at  Ponchatoula.  The  pickets  immediately  retired 
to  the  main  body  at  the  point  spoken  of.  No  firing  took  place  after 
the  skirmishers  retreated.  As  far  as  we  can  learn  they  have  a *?r(^ 
consisting  of  2,000  infantry,  300  cavalry,  and  two  12-pounder  held 
pieces- 

The  point  occupied  by  us  could  have  been  easily  held  against  this 
force,  but,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  getting  rations  for  the  troops  up 
from  the  Pass,  I determined  to  fail  back  to  the  bend  in  the  railroad, 
about  8 miles  this  side  of  Ponchatoula,  and  did  so  last  night,  where  1 
now  am.  I am  erecting  a small  battery  at  this  point.  I forgot  to 
mention  that  on  our  arrival  at  Wadesborough  Landing  we  found  the 
schooner  L.  H.  Davis  in  flames.  We  also  found  two  schooners  loaded 
with  cotton.  We  have  captured  some  12  prisoners,  who  have  been 
r sent  on  to  New  Orleans. 

Owing  to  the  very  bad  weather  the  march  over  the  trestle  worn 
from  Kenner  was  not  only  difficult  but  dangerous,  and  many  ot  our 
men  were  compelled  to  fall  out  by  reason  of  hurts  received  b>  tailing 
through  the  trestle  work.  n 

The  skirmish  on  the  24th  was  conducted  by  Captains  Orithu,  Lorn- 


284 


W.  FLA  , S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 


pany  A ; Montgomery,  Company  H,  and  Lieutenant  Dickey,  Company 
E,  Sixth  Regiment  Michigan  Volunteers,  who  bore  themselves  admi- 
rably, and  on  the  afternoon  of  the  26th  by  Company  D,  Sixth  Michigan 
Volunteers,  under  Lieutenant  Mcllvaine,  and  Company  K,  under  Cap- 
tain Chapman,  one  company  Zouaves,  Captain  Thorpe,  the  letter  of 
which  I do  not  know,  the  whole  under  command  of  Major  Clarke,  Sixth 
Michigan  Volunteers,  and  the  pickets  were  brought  in  in  good  shape. 

I feel  very  much  obliged  to  Lieutenant  Colonel  Smith  for  his  hearty 
and  effective  co-operation  throughout  the  entire  expedition.  Lieut.  C. 
W.  Stone,  quartermaster  of  the  expedition,  has  labored  earnestly  and 
efficiently,  and  accomplished  a great  deal  with  very  few  facilities. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  returning  my  thanks  for  the  assist- 
ance rendered  me  by  Captain  Perce,  of  your  staff,  during  his  stay  with 
me.  He  was  continually  by  my  side,  ready  to  assist  me  in  every  pos- 
sible way.  Captain  Bailey  also  rendered  me  valuable  service  in  the 
erection  of  breastworks. 

I inclose  Colonel  Smith’s  report;  also  a communication  from  the  en- 
emy. 

My  total  loss  is  9 wounded,  none  seriously,  while  that  of  the  enemy 
is  reported  at  3 killed  and  11  wounded,  1 mortally. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  S.  CLARK, 
Colonel , Commanding  Expedition. 

Capt.  Wickham  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  New  Orleans , La. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Abel  Smith,  jr.,  One  hundred  and  sixty -fifth  New 

YorJc  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  165th  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers, 
Ponchatoula , La.,  March  25,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  compliance  with 
the  orders  of  the  colonel  commanding,  I disembarked  my  battalion  on 
the  morning  of  the  23d  at  about  8.30  a.  m.  and  took  up  the  march  about 
10.30  a.  m.  along  the  railroad,  across  Jones’  Island,  to  the  North  Pass, 
which  I crossed  immediately  and  halted  on  the  north  side  in  obedience 
to  orders.  Sending  out  an  advance  guard,  they  discovered  a rebel 
picket  about  1 mile  beyond  guarding  two  schooners  loaded  with  cotton. 
They  drove  the  pickets  before  them  and  seized  the  schooners.  The  cap- 
tain of  one  of  the  schooners  was  killed  while  coming  toward  us  to  notify 
me  (as  was  alleged  by  his  companion)  that  the  coiton  belonged  to  the 
subjects  of  a foreign  power. 

Not  hearing  further  from  the  colonel  commanding,  I pushed  on  across 
the  trestle  work  and  bivouacked  for  the  night  on  the  railroad,  the  rebel 
picket  keeping  up  a continuous  firing  during  the  night. 

At  daybreak  I moved  forward  and  halted  at  the  opening  in  the  pine 
wood.  This  was  a very  strong  position,  and  could  have  been  success- 
fully held  against  a large  force  by  a very  few  men,  and,  as  I had  been 
ordered  to  remain  at  this  place  until  hearing  the  signal  from  Colonel 
Clark,  I did  not  attempt  to  move  farther  on,  but  only  to  hold  my  posi- 
tion. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


EXPEDITION  FROM  NEW  ORLEANS. 


285 


At  12  m.  a flag  of  truce  advanced  from  Colonel  Miller,  commanding 
the  rebel  forces,  when  I received  from  him  the  inclosed  communication 
in  relation  to  the  cargoes  of  the  two  schooners.  You  will  also  please 
find  inclosed  my  answer  to  the  communication.* 

About  1 p.  m.  I heard  the  signal  and  advanced  and  drove  the  enemy 
into  the  wood.  About  2 miles  from  Ponchatoula  we  met  the  party  sent 
by  the  colonel  commanding  toinform  us  that  he  was  in  the  town.  Moved 
rapidly  forward  and  arrived  here  about  3 p.  m. 

Have  to  report  3 men  wounded  slightly. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

ABEL  SMITH,  Jr., 

Lieut.  Col .,  Comdg.  One  hundred  and  sixty -fifth  Regt.  A.  Y.  Vols. 
Lieutenant  Dickey,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Gen.  John  <7.  Pemberton,  G.  8.  Army , commanding  Be 
partment  of  Mississippi  and  Bast  Louisiana. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  March  27, 1863. 

The  enemy  have  been  driven  back  beyond  Ponchatoula  by  the  troops 
uuder  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  H.  H.  Miller  in  such  hot  pursuit  that  they 
were  compelled  to  burn  their  own  stores  placed  in  railroad  depot $ also 
fired  the  place,  but  our  troops  extinguished  the  flames. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-  General . 

General  S.  Cooper. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Maj.  F.  Bu  Monteil , Assistant  Adjutant- General,  G.  S.  Army . 

Tangipahoa,  March  24,  1863. 

Positive  information  Ponchatoula  in  hands  of  the  enemy.  Telegraph 
operator  at  Tickfaw  says  Colonel  Miller’s  command  at  Hammond  Sta- 
tion, half  way  between  Tickfaw  and  Ponchatoula.  Enemy  reported 
1,000  strong/  The  locomotive  gone  to  Tickfaw  to  bring  back  rolling 
stock  from  that  station  here.  Expected  back  in  one  hour.  I sent  two 
officers  with  it.  Will  telegraph  you  if  I receive  any  further  news. 
Have  in  all  20  men.  I will  send  all  fit  for  duty  to  Colonel  Miller. 

F.  DUMONTEIL, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 
Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Maj.  M.  R.  Glarlc,  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  G.  8.  Army. 

Brookhaven,  March  26, 1863. 

Sent  to  Colonel  Miller  120  infantry,  including  one  company  cavalry 

* Inclosures  transferred,  under  date  of  March  24,  1863,  to  Series  III. 


286 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


dismounted,  and  sent  one  company  of  cavalry,  which  were  at  Osyka,  as 
cavalry,  yesterday  afternoon.  Also  forwarded  the  infantry  that  came 
down  from  Jackson  yesterday. 

M.  It.  CLARK, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 
Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


No.  7. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  H.  E.  Miller , Twentieth  Mississippi  Infantry. 

Ponchatoula,  March  23,  1863 — 10.30  p.  m. 

Party  of  20  men  sent  forward  this  evening  advanced  to  within  1 
mile  ofcotton  schooners.  Met  the  enemy  and  engaged  him.  He  being 
in  greatly  superior  force,  compelled  retreat.  Skirmishing  upon  my 
advanced  pickets.  Enemy  appeared  to  be  engaged  in  some  kind  of 
work  on  railroad.  Night  so  dark  and  rainy  impossible  to  operate 
before  daylight.  Railroad  track  only  road  to  advance.  That  from  my 
pickets  to  enemy  is  trestle  work,  on  high  embankments,  with  impass- 
able swamp  either  side.  Will  advance  in  morning.  If  any  possibility 
of  success  will  attack.  Will  use  every  effort  to  execute  your  order  to 
retake  or  burn  vessels.  The  Choctaw  battalion  ordered  here  has  not 
reported.  Can  I be  re-enforced  ? From  information  received  from  va- 
rious sources  am  induced  to  believe  this  post  will  soon  be  attacked. 

H.  H.  MILLER, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  &c. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Four  miles  below  Ponchatoula, 

March  24,  1863—11  a.  m. 

I have  been  engaged  with  the  enemy  since  early  this  morning,  with 
occasional  skirmishing  during  the  night.  Cannot  estimate  his  force, 
but  greatly  superior  to  mine.  He  has  charged  me  repeatedly,  but  al- 
ways repulsed.  . 

Your  dispatch  received  at  the  moment  we  were  pursuing  them.  Have 
sent  flag  of  truce  to  communicate  your  instructions.  Enemy  intrenched 
1 mile  below  me.  Considering  ground  to  charge  over  I have  not  at- 
tempted to  dislodge  them.  Is  it  possible  to  re-enforce?  Can  you  give 
me  two  guns  ? I need  ammunition.  Please  send  it  by  special  tram. 
Thus  far  I have  lost  but  2.  Gunboat  reported  coming  up  Ponchatoula 
River  to  flank  me.  Some  picket  firing  in  that  direction.  Have  sent 
officers  to  report.  H.  h fflLLBR; 

Lieutenant-  Colonel. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Ponchatoula,  March  24, 1863. 

I have  whipped  the  enemy  on  the  railroad  back,  and  now  I am  under 
a flag  of  truce  with  them  communicating  your  order  to  them.  There  are 

150  Yankees  about  to  flank  me  from  Wadesborough. 

H.  H.  MILLER, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel. 


General  John  C.  Pemberton. 


ClTAT\  XXVII.] 


EXPEDITION  FROM  NEW  ORLEANS. 


287 


Cate’s  Shoe  Factory,  4 miles  north  of  Ponchatoula, 

March  24,  1863. 

1 have  been  engaged  with  the  enemy  in  force,  estimated  at  from  1,200 
to  1,500  men,  all  day.  I have  100  men.  The  force  that  attacked  by  rail- 
road I defeated,  but  the  gunboat  landed  several  hundred  at  Wades- 
borough  in  my  rear,  and  I was  compelled  to  retire.  I fought  the  latter 
for  some  time  near  Ponchatoula,  but  when  the  two  columns  united  I 
fell  back  2 miles  and  made  stand  until  sundown,  when  I drew  off  my 
command  to  this  place. 

The  command  behaved  splendidly.  My  loss  is  small  considering  the 
time  we  were  engaged.  If  you  can  re-enforce  me  I will  retake  Poncha- 
toula. It  will  require  500. 

H.  H.  MILLEE, 
Lieutenant-Colonel. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Ponchatoula,  via  Tickfaw, 

March  24,  1863. 

The  enemy  advanced  on  Ponchatoula  with  from  1,000  to  1,200  men 
strong,  and  I contended  every  inch  of  ground  with  them,  but  was  nec- 
essarily compelled  to  fall  back  on  account  of  being  overpowered.  Am 
now  fighting  them  2 or  3 miles  this  side  of  Ponchatoula  and  falling  back 
because  they  are  advancing  in  heavy  force,  and  if  you  can  send  me  re- 
enforcements as  soon  as  possible  I would  be  glad  for  you  to  do  so,  for  I 
am  very  anxious  to  whip  them  back  to  Pass  Manehac. 

H.  H.  MILLEE, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Cate’s  Factory,  4 miles  north  of  Ponchatoula, 

March  25.  1863 — 5 a.  m. 

Still  hold  this  factory.  Shall  endeavor  to  prevent  its  destruction  by 
enemy.  Enemy  encamped  2 miles  in  front,  on  ground  we  last  fought 
on.  Appear  engaged  during  night  either  destroying  railroad  or  build- 
ing breastworks.  Thankful  for  re- enforcements.  Soon  as  arrives  will 
resume  fight  by  attacking. 

H.  H.  MILLEE, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding. 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Gate’s  Shoe  Factory, 

March  25,  1863 — 2 p.  m. 

Since  my  last  no  change.  Enemy  still  in  position  2 miles  in  front. 
Appears  to  be  intrenched.  My  skirmishers  since  daylight  have  been 
trying  to  draw  him  out.  Shows  no  disposition  to  renew  fight.  I will 
not  attack  except  in  way  certain  of  success.  Two  iron-clad  gunboats  and 
two  transports  brought  them  to  Wadesborough.  Inhabitants  say  they 


288 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

claim  5,000  men.  I think  .1,500  altogether.  Regiment  attacked  me  in 
front  was  Wilson’s  Zouaves.  Whipped  them  easily.  Great  difficulty 
getting  them  stop  running  to  receive  flag  of  truce  with  communication 
about  cotton.  Officer  command  has  written  notice  cotton  property  for- 
eign subjects.  Answers  will  refer  to  superiors.  Await  anxiously  re- 
enforcements.  Troops  at  Osyka  and  trains  Tangipahoa.  Could  they 
not  be  sent  down?  With  500  men  enemy  can  be  cut  off  from  Wades- 

b0r0Ugl1-  H.  H.  MILLER, 

Lieutenant - Colonel , Commanding . 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Headquarters, 

Four  miles  north  of  Ponchatoula , March  25 — 8 p.  m. 
Enemy  fortified  at  bridge  we  last  fought  at.  Citizens  vary  in  reports 
of  numbers ; some  say  1,500,  others  as  high  as  5,000 ; believe  between 
1,000,  1,500.  No  news  from  re-enforcements. 

’ ’ ’ H.  H.  MILLER, 

Lieutenant- Colonel , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 


Headquarters, 

Two  miles  north  of  Ponchatoula , March  27 , 1863. 

Major  Lawrence,  250  men,  joined  daylight  yesterday,  making  total  400. 
Could  hear  nothing  of  artillery.  Enemy  continued  fortifying  bridges 
Ponchatoula  River  3 p.  m.  Moved  forward.  Heavy  skirmishing  from 
opposite  bank  of  river.  After  one  hour  flanked  him  by  tailing  tree 
across  river.  Charged  and  routed  him  complete^7.  Pursued  to  Poncha- 
toula, where  he  was  intrenched  with  large  number  men.  Drove  him 
out  and  pursued  3 miles  below  to  Prairie  Marsh,  where  he  had  con- 
structed con siderable  works ; only  approach  by  track  ; swamp  on  either 
side.  Night  fallen,  drew  off  pursuit,  and  now  occupy  position  on  Pon- 
chatoula River.  All  making  slight  works.  Enemy  burned  depot  Pon- 
chatoula, filled  with  their  commissary  stores  ; also  fired  most  buildings, 
but  succeeded  in  extinguishing.  Enemy  destroyed  all  private  property 
citizens  in  town.  His  force  consists  two  regiments  and  two  battalions 
infantry,  about  2,000  strong.  Say  re-enforcements  are  expected  from 
Baton  Rouge.  I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  conduct  of  officers  and  men 
of  this  command.  Enemy  just  reported  advancing  toward  Poncha- 
toula. If  he  comes  as  far  as  town  will  attack.  Whistle  of  gunboat 
reported  at  Wadesborough.  Have  sent  scout  in  that  direction.  Sup- 
pose General  Gardner’s  re-enforcements  will  arrive  to-night.  My  loss 
yesterday  1 severely  wounded ; enemy’s  supposed  heavy.  Captured  2 ; 
sent  to  Camp  Moore,  to  be  sent  to  Jackson.  Captain  Morrison  arrived 


last  night. 


H.  H.  MILLER, 
Lieutenant- Colonel , Commanding . 


General  Pemberton. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


EXPEDITION  FROM  NEW  ORLEANS. 


289 


Headquarters,  Hammond,  March  28, 1863. 

This  morning  sent  flag  with  substance  of  your  dispatch.  Answered 
as  folio  vvs: 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Front  of  Ponchatoula,  La.,  March  28, 1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  H.  H.  Miller, 

Commanding  at  Ponchatoula : 

Your  communication  of  27th  received.  The  colonel  commanding  the  brigade 
directs  me  to  say  that  it  will  he  referred  to  the  commanding  general  ot  the  depart- 
ment and  his  answer  to  the  same  transmitted  to  you.  mm/Pv 

W.  H.  DIl/KLi, 

Lieutenant  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

Enemy  still  intrenching  3 miles  below  Ponchatoula  on  railroad.  My 
cavalry  occupy  Ponchatoula.  My  line  of  defense  is  Ponchatoula  River, 
2 miles  north  of  town.  Position  strong  and  have  fortified  it  well.  Hear 
nothing  from  re-enforcements  from  General  Gardner.  If  permitted  will 
attack  when  arrives.  Enemy’s  loss  on  Tuesday’s  fight,  given  by  relia- 
ble citizens,  18  killed,  double  that  wounded.  Can’t  ascertain  number 
on  Thursday ; I had  several  wounded  on  Thursday ; only  1 seriously, 
none  killed.  Enemy  in  bad  condition ; huddled  on  railroad  in  swamps 
and  dying  rapidly  with  disease.  R H MILLEB, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 


Ponchatoula,  April  1,  1863. 

General:  On  night  30th  was  joined  by  Colonel  Simonton  with  380 
infantry,  battery  four  guns,  80  cavalry.  Same  night  my  pickets  drove 
enemy  from  first  line  of  defenses,  3 miles  below  town.  Next  morn- 
ing whole  command  moved  forward;  found  formidable  work  on  south 
side  Prairie  Marsh,  abandoned  work,  capable  containing  300  to  500 
men,  mounting  one  piece  artillery,  iron-clad  with  railroad  iron;  fol- 
lowed 3 miles;  met  flag  truce,  under  Colonel  Smith,  One  hundred  and 
sixty-fifth  Zouaves;  he  returned  Masonic  jewels  stolen;  same  officer 
communicated  with  about  cotton;  no  answer  yet  from  headquarters. 
Moved  down  railroad  sight  Manchac;  found  enemy  in  force  behind 
breastworks;  gunboats  in  Pass  protecting  them;  impassable  marsh 
either  side  road;  trestle  work  most  way.  Upon  consultation  with 
Colonel  Simonton  myself  agreed  impolitic  attack. 

Sent  scouts  forward;  learn  nothing  because  roads  straight;  scouts 
compelled  creep  sides  embankment,  but  discovered  on  trestle  work; 
remained  until  after  night;  withdrew  to  camp.  After  night  sent  party 
down  Tangipahoa  River  to  Pontchartrain  reconnoiter  enemy  in  that 
direction;  not  returned.  Enemy  destroyed  road  from  Ponchatoula  as 
far  as  went.  Enemy  reported  on  Amite  2,000.  Ordered  Garland’s  bat- 
talion, which  reported  to  me,  back  to  Amite  to  guard  river;  have  suffi- 
cient force  protect  against  front;  enough  spare  attack;  force  not  more 
2,000  that  crosses  Amite.  Commence  to-morrow  fortify  railroad  at 
Prairie  Marsh,  and  river  at  Wadesborough,  Tangipahoa,  and  lSTatalbany 
thoroughly  blockaded:  impossible  blockade  Ponchatoula  River. 

H.  H.  MILLER, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


19  R r— vol  xv 


290  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII 

MARCH  28,  1863. — Capture  of  U.  S.  steamer  Diana,  near  Pattersonville,  La. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Godfrey  Weitzel,  U.  S Army. 

No.  2.— Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Godfrey  Weitzel , TJ.  8.  Army. 

Bayou  Bgeuff,  March  28,  1863. 

Diana  went  up  Teche  on  reconnaissance  to-day  about  12  o’clock. 
Soon  after  heavy  firing  heard  for  an  hour.  Calhoun  started  and  is  now 
fast  aground  in  Grand  Lake  near  Bayou  Sorrel.  Estrella  is  at  mouth 
of  Atchafalaya;  have  sent  for  her.  Nothing  heard  of  Diana. 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General,  TJ.  8.  Volunteers. 

General  Banks,  New  Orleans. 


Bayou  Bceuff,  March  28,  1863. 

General:  I ordered  the  Diana  by  the  Grand  Lake  route  to  make  a 
reconnaissance.  I sent  two  companies  of  infantry  and  one  of  my  aides 
to  make  it  secure.  Instead  of  taking  the  route  I ordered,  for  some  un- 
accountable reason  they  went  by  the  Atchafalaya,  right  in  the  teeth  of 
the  enemy.  I believe  "she  and  all  on  board  are  gone.  The  Calhoun 
going  to  her  relief  got  aground ; went  without  a pilot,  because  Govern- 
ment drove  off  all  our  pilots  by  insufficiency  of  pay.  The  Estrella 
started  down  to  pilot  in  the  boats  and  is  40  miles  off.  The  wind  is ; 
favorable  to  get  the  Calhoun  off,  but  unfavorable  to  communicate  with 
the  Estrella.  Just  hurry  on  the  Indiana  battery  with  ammunition  and 
I am  right,  even  if  they  get  all  my  boats. 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General,  TJ.  8.  Volunteers. 

General  Banks. 


Bayou  Bceuff,  March  28, 1863. 
The  pilot  of  the  Diana  escaped;  Captain  Peterson  is  killed;  Lieu- 
tenant Allen,  my  aide,  is  wounded;  several  officers  killed  or  wounded. 
Gunboat  in  possession  of  the  enemy ; all  the  result  of  disobedience  of 
instructions. 

G.  WEITZEL, 
Brigadier- General,  TJ.  8.  Volunteers. 

General  Banks. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  G.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters, 

Near  Berwick  Bay,  La.,  March  28, 1863. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  the  capture  of  the  Federal  gunboat  Diana 
at  this  point  to-day.  She  mounted  five  heavy  guns.  Boat  not  seriously 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


ATTACK  ON  STEAMER  BARATARIA. 


291 


injured,  and  will  be  immediately  put  in  service.  Enemy’s  loss  in  killed, 
wounded,  and  prisoners,  150. 

E.  TAYLOE, 

Major- General. 


APRIL  7,  1863. — Attack  on  the  steamer  Barataria,  Amite  River. 

Report  of  Capt.  Gadi  Herren , First  Mississippi  Cavalry. 

Camp  Euggles,  April  12,  1863. 

Colonel  : On  Monday,  7th  instant,  you  directed  me  to  send  a scout- 
ing party  under  a trusty  non-commissioned  officer  to  Eome,  on  the 
Tickfaw  Eiver,  and,  if  practicable,  from  there  to  Duck  Bill,  on  the  lake 
shore,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Amite.  I detailed  from  my  squadron  for 
this  purpose  eight  men,  under  Corporal  Davidson,  to  proceed  as  you 
directed.  Arriving  at  Eome  (the  ferry)  Crossing  on  the  Tickfaw  Eiver, 
he  stationed  a portion  of  his  small  squad  to  guard  against  any  advance 
from  this  direction.  He  then  proceeded  with  the  remainder  of  his  force 
within  a mile  of  the  mouth  of  the  Amite,  where,  hearing  that  one  of 
the  enemy’s  boats  was  aground  at  this  point,  he  dismounted  his  men 
and  proceeded  to  attack  the  boat.  He  found  her,  within  50  or  75  yards 
of  the  shore,  stuck  hard  and  fast  on  the  east  bank  of  the  river.  The 
timber  skirting  the  river  bank  afforded  good  protection  against  the  shot 
and  shell  fired  from  the  gunboat.  He  soon  compelled  the  gunners  to 
abandon  their  guns  and  seek  protection  in  their  casemates.  He  suc- 
ceeded in  killing  two  of  the  enemy  while  attempting  to  get  aboard  with 
some  spars  which  they  were  using  to  get  their  boat  afloat.  Finding 
it  impossible  to  provoke  them  from  behind  their  protection  of  thick 
iron,  he  posted  a portion  of  his  men  near  enough  to  watch  the  move- 
ments of  the  boat  and  report  with  the  remainder  of  his  force  to  me  at 
this  place  at  10  o’clock  p.  m.  the  same  evening.  1 then  directed  him 
to  report  the  facts  to  you. 

At  12  o’clock  m.  the  same  evening  you  directed  me  to  take  my  whole 
squadron  and  proceed  at  once  to  the  mouth  of  the  Amite  Eiver  and 
capture  or  destroy  the  boat  reported  aground  there.  On  reaching  the 
point  designated  I found  the  enemy  had  hastily  abandoned  and  set  fire 
to  the  boat  at  sundown  the  previous  evening,  leaving  nothing  but  a 
complete  wreck,  with  one  brass  rifle  gun,  which  was  still  above  water. 
This  boat  was  marked  Barataria  or  291 ; she  was  125  feet  long,  com- 
pletely covered  with  iron  one  inch  thick. 

Too  much  cannot  be  said  in  praise  of  the  coolness,  courage,  and  judg- 
ment displayed  by  Corporal  Davidson  and  the  brave  men  under  him  in 
destroying  with  their  rifles  (or  causing  the  destruction  of)  one  of  the 
enemy’s  most  formidable  boats  on  the  lake. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

GADI  HEEEENT, 

Captain , Comdg.  Squadron  First  Mississippi  Cavalry. 

Col.  J.  M.  Simonton, 

Commanding  at  Ponchatoula. 


292 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX  , N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

APRIL  9-MAY  14,  1863. — Operations  in  West  Lonisiana. 

SUMMARY  OR  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. 


April  9-11,  1863. — Union  Army  crosses  Berwick  Bay. 

11,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Pattersonville. 

12-13,  1863. — Engagement  at  Fort  Bisland  (Bethel  Place  or  Bayou  Teche),  near 

Centreville. 

13,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Porter’s  and  McWilliams’  Plantations,  at  Indian 

Bend. 

14,  1863. — Engagement  at  Irish  Bend. 

Skirmish  at  Jeanerette. 

16,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Newtown,  La. 

17,  1863. — Action  at  Bayou  Vermillion. 

17-21,  1863. — Expedition  from  Saint  Martinville  to  Breaux  Bridge  and  Opelouas. 

18,  1863.— Destruction  of  salt-works  near  New  Iberia. 

20,  1863. — Butte-a-la-Rose  captured  by  Union  fleet. 

Occupation  of  Opelousas  and  Washington  by  Union  forces. 

21,  1863.—Expedition  from  Opelousas  to  Barre’s  Landing  and  capture  of 

steamer  Ellen. 

22. 1863.  — Skirmish  on  the  Bayou  Bceuf  Road  near  Washington. 

26-29, 1863. — Expedition  from  Opelousas  toward  Niblett’s  Bluff. 

29-30, 1863. — Expeditions  from  Opelousas  to  Chicotville  and  Bayou  Bceuf. 

May  1, 1863. — Skirmish  near  Washington. 

6, 1863. — United  States  Navy  takes  possession  of  Alexandria. 

14. 1863. — Reconnaissance  to  Judge  Boyce’s  Plantation  and  skirmish. 

RETORTS,  ETC.* 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  the 
Gulf,  with  Return  of  Casualties. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Richard  Arnold,  U.  S.  Army,  Chief  of  Artillery,  Nineteenth  Army 
Corps,  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

No.  3. — Capt.  William  W.  Carruth,  Sixth  Massachusetts  Battery,  of  engagement  at 
Fort  Bisland. 

No.  4. — Capt.  Albert  G.  Mack,  Eighteenth  New  York  Battery,  of  engagement  at  Fort 
Bisland. 

No.  5. — Brig.  Gen.  Godfrey  Weitzel,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade,  First 
Division,  of  operations  April  2-May  11. 

No.  6. — Lieut.  Edmund  H.  Russell,  Ninth  Pennsylvania  Infantry  (Pennsylvania 
Reserve  Corps),  Acting  Signal  Officer. 

No.  7. — Capt.  Edmund  C.  Bainbridge,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  Battery  A, 
First  U.  S.  Artillery,  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

No.  8. — Lieut.  Col.  Frank  H.  Peck,  Twelfth  Connecticut  Infantry,  of  engagement  at 
Fort  Bisland. 

No.  9. — Brig.  Gen.  William  H.  Emory,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Division,  oi 
operations  March  13-May  2. 

No.  10. — Capt.  Richard  C.  Duryea,  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  Chief  of  Artillery,  of  engage- 
ment at  Fort  Bisland  and  skirmish  at  J eanerette. 

No.  11. — Lieut.  Eben  D.  Haley,  First  Battery  Maine  Light  Artillery,  of  engagement 
at  Fort  Bisland. 

No.  12. — Lieut.  John  E.  Morton,  First  Battery  Maine  Light  Artillery,  of  engagement 
at  Fort  Bisland. 

No.  13. — Capt.  Richard  C.  Duryea,  Battery  F,  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  of  engagement  at 
Fort  Bisland  and  skirmish  at  Jeanerette. 


; 


See  also  Appendix,  pp.  1089-1096. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA.  • 293  . 

No.  14.— Col.  Timothy  Ingraham,  Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  commanding 
First  Brigade,  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

No.  15.— Lieut.  Col.  Justus  W.  Blanchard,  One  hundred  and  sixty-second  New  York 
Infantry,  of  expedition  to  Barre’s  Landing,  etc. 

No.  16.— Col.  Halbert  E.  Paine,  Fourth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade,  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

No.  17. — Maj.  A.  Power  Gallway,  One  hundred  and  seventy-third  New  York  Infantry, 
of  expedition  from  Saint  Martinville  to  . Breaux  Bridge  and  Opelousas. 

No.  18.— JAeut.  Col.  Sidney  A.  Bean,  Fourth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  of  expeditions  to 
Plaquemine  and  Boyce’s  Plantation. 

No.  19.— Col.  Oliver  P.  Gooding,  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry,  commanding 
Third  Brigade,  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

No,  20.— Lieut.  Col.  W.  S.  B.  Hopkins,  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry,  of  en- 
gagement at  Fort  Bisland. 

No.  21.— Lieut.  Col.  William  L.  Rodman,  Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  of 
engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

No.  22.— Col.  John  W.  Kimball,  Fifty-third  Massachusetts  Infantry,  of  engagement 
at  Fort  Bisland. 

No.  23.— Col.  Michael  K.  Bryan,  One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  New  York  Infantry, 
of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

No.  24.— Brig.  Gen.  Cuvier  Grover,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fourth  Division,  of 
operations  March  26- April  20. 

No.  25. — Lieut.  Joseph  L.  Hallett,  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry,  Acting  Signal 
Officer. 

No.  26.— Lieut.  Thomas  S.  Hall,  Twenty-eighth  Maine  Infantry,  Acting  Signal 
Officer. 

No.  27. — Capt.  Ormand  F.  Nims,  Second  Battery  Massachusetts  Light  Artillery,  of 
operations  March  28-April  19. 

No.  28.— Capt.  Henry  W.  Closson,  Battery  L,  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  of  operations 
March  27-April  20. 

No.  29. — Lieut.  John  I.  Rodgers,  Battery  C,  Second  U.  S.  Artillery,  of  skirmish  at 
. Porter’s  Plantation  and  engagement  at  Irish  Bend. 

No.  30.— Brig.  Gen.  William  Dwight,  jr.,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade,  of 
operations  March  26-May  1. 

No.  31.— Col.  Richard  E.  Holcomb,  First  Louisiana  Infantry  (Union),  of  operations 
March  29-April  20. 

No.  32. — Lieut.  Col.  Michael  Cassidy,  Sixth  New  York  Infantry,  of  operations  March 
26- April  20. 

No.  33. — Col.  Jacob  Van  Zandt,  Ninety-first  New  Y6rk  Infantry,  of  engagement  at 
Irish  Bend  and  action  at  Bayou  Vermillion. 

No.  34. — Col.  Nicholas  W.  Day,  One  hundred  and  thirty-first  New  York  Infantry,  of 
operations  March  26-April  20. 

No.  35. — Col.  William  K.  Kimball,  Twelfth  Maine  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade,  of  operations  March  27-April  20. 

No.  36. — Col.  Henry  W.  Birge  [?],  Thirteenth  Connecticut  Infantry,  commanding 
Third  Brigade,  of  engagement  at  Irish  Bend. 

No.  37. — Capt.  Robert  T.  Dunham,  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  U.  S.  Army,  of  the 
capture  of  the  steamer  Ellen. 

No.  38. — Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Trans-Mississippi  De- 
partment, of  operations  April  9-23. 

No.  39. — Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  District  of  West  Louis- 
iana, of  operations  April  9-23. 

No.  40. — Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  Mouton,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  brigade,  of  operations 

April  11-19. 


•294 


W.  FLA  , S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYH. 
No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks , U.  8.  Army , commanding  De- 
partment of  the  Gulf , with  Return  of  Casualties. 

No.  9.1  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  Army  Corps, 

Camp  at  Brashear  City , £«.,  April  10,  1863. 

General  : I left  New  Orleans  on  the  8th  instant  and  established  my 
headquarters  at  this  point  the  same  evening.  Weitzel’s  brigade,  of 
Augur’s  division,  was  already  here,  with  three  batteries  and  two  sections 
of  artillery,  the  siege  train,  and  three  companies  of  cavalry.  Grover, 
excepting  his  cavalry,  was  then  at  Bayou  Boeuff  Station,  on  the  railway, 
about  9 miles  from  here.  Emory,  excepting  one  brigade  and  his  cav- 
alry and  two  batteries  left  at  Baton  Bouge,  was  at  Bayou  Bamas  Sta- 
tion, which  is  about  half  way  between  Brashear  and  Bayou  Boeuff.  The 
remaining  brigade  of  Emory’s  division  and  the  transportation  of  both 
divisions  were  behind,  moving  up  as  rapidly  as  possible.  The  cavalry 
was  en  route  from  Baton  Bouge. 

Emory  marched  at  7 o’clock  yesterday  morning  and  reached  here 
about  9.  Weitzel  began  to  cross  the  bay  about  10,  having  first  driven 
off  a small  party  of  the  enemy,  who  from  the  opposite  side  were  ob- 
serving our  movements.  Emory  followed  AV  eitzel  closely.  Both  divis- 
ions had  crossed  by  dark ; then  absolutely  necessary  transportation  and 
supplies  were  sent  over  during  the  night  and  this  morning.  The  limited 
amount  of  water  transportation  at  our  command  made  the  crossing  nec- 
essarily very  slow. 

Grover  had  marched  from  Bayou  Boeuff  at  9 a.  m.  and  arrived  here 
by  1 p.  m.  I had  intended  to  place  him  on  board  the  boats  at  night,  so 
that  he  might  leave  at  daylight  and  begin  to  land  by  9 a.  m.,  but  this 
was  impossible. 

On  Grand  Lake,  just  beyond  the  head  of  Cypress  Island,  and  within 
a few  miles  of  each  other,  are  two  shell  roads,  leading  from  what  are 
reported  as  good  landings,  a distance  of  1^  or  2 miles  to  the  Bayou 
Teche.  At  one  or  the  other  of  these  landings  I propose  to  disem- 
bark Grover,  with  the  object  of  taking  the  enemy,  who  is  at  Patter- 
sonville,  in  reverse  and  cutting  off*  his  retreat.  The  best  pilots  say 
that  our  steamers  cannot  come  nearer  than  about  1J  miles  to  the  shore, 
and  ail  our  information  confirms  the  truth  of  this.  From  that  dis- 
tance the  disembarkation  must  be  by  the  flats  which  we  have  collected 
and  prepared  for  that  purpose.  Using  all  the  expedition  possible,  Gro- 
ver cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to  land  and  take  up  position  in  less 
than  twelve  hours.  The  boats  cannot  run  at  night.  His  landing  must 
necessarily  take  place  by  daylight.  To  insure  this  he  must  leave  here 
by  daybreak.  The  moment  Grover  passes  Pattersonville  with  his  fleet 
the  enemy  will  certainly  take  the  alarm,  and  it  we  let  night  interrupt 
the  landing  he  will  escape.  We  do  not  move  against  the  enemy  in 
front  to-day,  as  I do  not  wish  him  to  take  the  alarm  any  sooner  than 
we  can  possibly  help.  We  can  whip  him  in  any  event,  but  if  he  stays 
where  he  is,  and  Grover  gets  into  position  before  we  attack  in  front, 
we  shall  destroy  him.  Everything  promises  success.  Having  destroyed 
the  enemy’s  force  and  his  salt-works  at  New  Iberia,  I propose,  if  time 
permits,  to  push  a force  as  far  as  Opelousas. 

Mr.  Gabaudan,  Bear- Admiral  Farragut’s  secretary,  arrived  here  this 
morning,  having  passed  Port  Hudson  in  a skiff  and  reached  Baton 
Bouge  on  the  8th  instant.  For  fear  of  accident  no  dispatches  were 
sent  by  him,  but  he  brought  me  verbal  intelligence  that  he  left  the 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


295 


#HAP.  XXVII.] 

admiral  opposite  Bayou  Sara,  with  the  Hartford,  the  Albatross,  and  the 
ram  Switzerland,  all  well;  that  the  Yazoo  expedition  was  reported  as 
abandoned ; that  our  troops  had  left  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Vicks 
burg  and  gone  to  some,  point  above;  that  the  Lake  Providence  Canal 
ba/proved  a success,  and  that  General  Grant  would  co  operate  with 
me  opposite  Bayou  Sara  with  20,000  men  about  the  1st  proximo.  This 
force1  he  tells  me  is  to  come  through  the  Tensas,  Black,  and  Red  divers. 

I have  sent  Mr.  Gabaudan  back  this  morning  with  a dispatch  to  Gen- 
eral Grant,  of  which  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  lor  your  infor- 
mation, and  which  I have  requested  him  to  commit  to  memory  and 
destroy.  General  Augur  will  send  a cavalry  force  across  the  river  to 

facilitate  Mr.  Gabaudan’s  return.  „ . , ,.  » 

If  the  iron-clads  now  reported  to  be  engaged  m the  reduction  of 
Charleston  are  sent  here  afterdhe  termination  ot  Grant 

mav  well  be.  I think  in  any  event  we  will  take  Mobile,  it  want 
sends  me  20,000  men  we  will  take  Port  Hudson.  „ 19„  „ 

I received  this  morning  an  extract  from  Special  Orders,  No.  123,  of 
the  16th  ultimo,  from  the  Adjutant-General’s  Office,  transferring  Key 
West  and  the  Tortugas  to  this  department.  By  the  Pulton,  leaving 
New  Orleans  on  the  14th,  I shall  send  an  officer  to  Key  W . est  to  com- 
municate with  the  commanding  officer  there  and  obtain  lnformaGon  as 
to  the  condition  of  affairs  in  that  district.  Brigadier-General  Wood- 
bnrv  has  not  vet  reported  to  me. 

I would  respectfully  request  that  the  postmaster  at  New  York  may 
be  instructed  to  make  up  the  mail  for  my  headquarters  in  a separate 
bag,  so  as  to  avoid  the  delay,  sometimes  of  two  or  three  days,  i^mden, 
tofts  distribution  in  New  Orleans;  and  that  these  bags  may  be  sent 
by  the  regular  steamers  instead  of  by  Government  transports,  which 
stop  at  New  Berne,  Port  Boyal,  Key  West,  and  other  points,  and  are 
delayed  at  each.  A week  or  ten  days7  delay  more  than  counterbalances 
any  pecuniary  sayjng  that  may  be  involved  in  sending  our  dispatches 

byiPre“pectMl?0ask  attention  to  a matter  that  will  soon  become  of 
great  importance  to  the  interests  ot  the  Government  m DePa^t““i 
The  terms  of  our  nine-months7  men  begin  to  expire  m May.  In  August 
all  will  have  expired.  We  shall  thus  lose  twenty-two  regiments  ot  in- 
fantry. This  will  leave  us,  in  the  whole  department,  exclusive  ot  lkey 
West,  concerning  which  I know  nothing  as  yet,  and  of  the  negroes,  but 
thirty-six  regiments  of  infantry,  and  an  effective  force  reporting  for 
duty  less  than  20,000  men  of  all  arms.  With  this  force  we  can  hold 
New  Orleans  and  the  La  Fourche — possibly  Baton  Eouge  but  we  can- 
not move  an  inch  or  even  hold  any  success  that  we  may  gam  by  our 
present  operations.  Not  an  hour  should  be  lost,  in  forwarding 
department  the  men  who  are  to  replace  the  nine-months  levies. 

I respectfully  suggest  that  a copy  of  this  dispatch  and  its  inclose 
be  sent  to  Major-General  Grant  by  a special  messenger,  and  that  I may 
be  informed  of  the  purport  of  the  latest  advices  from  bun. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 

servaut’  N.  V.  BANKS, 

Major-General  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  8.  Army,  Washington,  V.  C. 


296 


W.  FLxV.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  X.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 
[In  closure.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 
Camp  at  Brashear  City,  La,,  April  10,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  IT.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee : 

General  : The  secretary  of  Admiral  Farragut,  Mr.  Gabaudan,  called 
upon  me  at  Brashear  City  this  morning  and  gave  me  the  substance  of 
your  dispatch.  We  have  15,000  men  that  can  be  moved  with  facility. 
The  artillery  is  strong,  the  cavalry  weak,  but  we  hope  to  strengthen 
the  cavalry  without  delay,  as  one  of  the  results  of  this  expedition. 

We  shall  move  upon  the  Bayou  Teehe  to-morrow,  probably  encounter 
the  enemy  at  Pattersonville,and  hope  to  move  without  delay  upon 
Iberia,  to  destroy  the  salt-works,  and  then  upon  Opelousas.  This  is  the 
limit  proposed.  We  do  not  intend  to  hold  any  portions  of  this  country, 
as  it  weakens  our  force,  but  will  at  once  return  to  Baton  Bouge  to  co- 
operate with  you  against  Port  Hudson.  I can  be  there  easily  by  May  10. 

There  are  now  4,500  infantry  at  Baton  Bouge,  with  three  regiments 
of  colored  troops  and  two  companies  of  cavalry,  three  batteries  of  artil- 
lery, with  several  heavy  guns  in  position,  and  five  gunboats  and  six 
mortars.  The  land  force  is  under  command  of  Major-General  Augur; 
the  fleet  under  Captain  Alden,  of  the  Bichmond. 

We  shall  endeavor  to  establish  communication  with  Admiral  Farragut 
near  Bayou  Sara,  but  the  opening  of  the  levee  opposite  Port  Hudson 
may  make  it  impossible.  If  so,  we  will  communicate  with  you  freely, 
by  the  way  of  New  York,  as  to  our  progress.  I shall  be  very  glad  if  you 
will  communicate  with  us  in  the  same  manner.  To  avoid  delays  by 
mail  I will  send  my  dispatches  by  an  officer. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


No.  10.]  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  Army  Corps, 

Bouligny’s,  beyond  Neio  Iberia , La .,  April  17,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  we  set  out  on  the  11th 
instant  upon  the  expedition,  the  preparations  for  which  were  temporarily 
interrupted  by  the  necessity  for  co-operation  with  the  Navy  in  the  pas- 
sage of  the  fleet  by  Port  Hudson. 

With  Emory’s  division,  WeitzePs  brigade,  of  Augur’s  division,  and 
the  siege  train  I crossed  Berwick  Bay  on  the  9th,  10th,  and  11th,  and 
marched  on  the  morning  of  the  12th  upon  the  enemy,  strongly  intrenched 
at  Fort  Bisland,  about  4 miles  beyond  Pattersonville'.  The  enemy’s 
force  was  about  5,000,  including  three  batteries  of  artillery  and  a heavy 
proportion  of  mounted  troops  from  Texas. 

We  met  the  enemy  about  2 o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  after  a brisk 
engagement  drove  him  back  until  his  line  of  defense  was  revealed,  and 
took  up  a position  which  enabled  us  to  reconnoiter  his  works  to  advan- 
tage. Here  night  interrupted  us. 

Early  the  next  morning  the  attack  was  resumed.  We  soon  drove 
him  into  his  works  and  advanced  upon  them,  keeping  up  a heavy  fire 
of  artillery  to  silence  his  guns  and  prepare  the  way  for  an  assault.  At 
night-fall  we  had  disabled  the  gunboat  Diana  and  driven  her  out  of 
action,  almost  entirely  silenced  the  enemy’s  artillery,  and  advanced  on 
both  sides  of  the  bayou  to  within  about  400  yards  of  the  works. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


297 


During  the  night  I issued  orders  to  carry  the  works  by  assault  at  day- 
light, and,  having  done  so,  to  pursue  the  enemy  promptly  and  vigorously. 
The  enemv  began  to  evacuate  his  position  about  midnight. 

At  daylight  Paine’s  brigade,  of  Emory’s  division,  was  in  possession  of 
his  works.  The  pursuit  began  at  once,  although  the  men,  in  action  all 
the  day  previous,  bad  taken  no  food  for  more  than  twenty-four  hours. 
Since  then  we  have  been  following  close  upon  his  heels. 

Grover’s  division  embarked  on  the  night  ot  the  11th,  and,  having  been 
delayed  some  seven  hours  by  a heavy  fog,  proceeded  up  Grand  Lake  at 

0 a.  in.  on  the  12th,  to  land  at  one  of  the  landings. opposite  the  head  of 
Cypress  Island.  The  roads  from  these  landings  were  represented  as 
good  shell  roads.  They  turned  out  to  be,  for  a great  part  of  the  way, 
under  water  and  full  of  deep  holes,  so  as  to  be  utterly  impracticable  for 
all  arms.  The  gunboat  Arizona  got  aground,  and  it  took  four  hours  to 
get  her  off.  In  consequence  of  these  unfortunate  delays  it  was  not  until 
fate  in  the  afternoon  of  the  13th  that  Grover  had  disembarked  his  com- 
mand in  Indian  Bend  and  was  on  the  march  to  intercept  the  enemy’s 
retreat  at  Franklin. 

The  next  morning  he  met  and  defeated  the  enemy  at  Irish  Bend  and 
joined  us  at  Franklin  in  the  afternoon.  If  it  had  been  possible  for  him 
to  reach  Franklin  at  daylight  on  the  14th  we  should  have  captured  the 
enemy’s  artillery,  but  his  cavalry  would  have  escaped  through  the  prai- 
ries and  his  infantry  would  have  scattered  just  as  It  has  done. 

Counting  upon  holding  Franklin,  however,  on  the  morning  of  the  14th, 

1 should  have  carried  Fort  Bisland  on  that  morning,  but  it  would  have 
been  with  great  loss,  lor  the  position  was  very  strong  by  nature  and 
had  been  very  strongly  fortified. 

I was  prepared  to  make  the  assault  on  the  evening  of  the  13th } but 
had  it  succeeded  then  the  enemy  would  have  been  driven  back  before  I 
had  reason  to  expect  Grover  would  hold  Franklin. 

We  have  pursued  the  enemy  closely  more  than  50  miles ; we  have 
destroyed  the  Queen  of  the  West,  and  have  compelled  him  to  destroy 
the  gunboats  Diana  and  Hart,  with  supplies  of  subsistence  and  ammu- 
nition ; we  have  taken  eleven  guns,  one  steamer,  over  a thousand  pris- 
oners, and  large  quantities  of  ammunition,  cam  p equipage,  and  quarter- 
master’s stores  5 we  have  captured  and  destroyed  his  salt-works  below 
New  Iberia ; his  infantry  has  dispersed  over  the  prairies  and  in  the 
woods,  so  that  the  people  and  the  negroes  tell  us  nothing  but  cavalry 
and  artillery  passed  beyond  New  Iberia,  and  there  is  no  thought  among 
the  prisoners  or  inhabitants  that  he  will  make  any  stand  this  side  of 
Alexandria. 

On  the  9th  instant,  as  I learned  by  letters  from  Maj.  Gen.  Bichard 
Taylor,  commanding  the  Confederate  forces  in  this  district,  to  Captain 
Fuller,  commanding  the  gunboats,  he  was  preparing  to  attack  us  heavily 
in  the  La  Fourche,  seeking  to  regain  that  region  and  the  waters  of  Ber- 
wick Bay. 

On  the  12th  we  had  opened  the  attack  which  has  destroyed  his  army 
and  his  gunboats.  There  is  not  a gunboat  left  on  the  Teche. 

General  Taylor,  in  his  letters  to  Captain  Fuller,  refers  to  the  Grand 
Due  as  nearly  ready  to  receive  her  guns,  and  to  the  Mary  T.  as  not  to  be 
waited  for,  because  she  will  probably  not  be  ready  in  time  to  take  part 
in  his  contemplated  recapture  of  the  La  Fourche. 

I think  the  Webb  is  the  only  gunboat  now  in  condition  to  defend 
Butte-a-la-Bose,  and  have  ordered  our  gunboats  to  attack  and  take  that 
place,  aided  by  a detachment  of  infantry.  I shall  follow  the  enemy, 
without  pausing,  to  Opelousas.  • 


- 


293  W.  FLA  , S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Ciiap.  XXVII. 

- 

I cannot  close  this  hasty  dispatch  without  expressing  my  admiration 
at  the  good  conduct  of  my  officers  and  men  in  the  affair  of  Sunday 
before  Fort  Bisland  and  in  the  battles  of  Fort  Bisland  and  Irish  Benrl. 
I shall  take  occasion  to  ask  your  attention  to  individual  instances  of 
merit  hereafter,  but  I desire  now  to  bring  to  your  special  notice  the 
services  of  the  commanders,  Brigadier-Generals  Emory,  Grover,  and 
Weitzel,  to  whose  zealous  co-operation,  professional  skill,  and  devotion 
on  the  battle-field  we  are  largely  indebted  for  the  success  of  the  expe- 
dition. 

Great  credit  is  due  to  the  energy  and  efficiency  shown  by  the  officers 
of  the  Navy  in  this  operation. 

The  country  abounds  in  supplies  of  all  kinds,  which  I shall  apply  to 
the  utmost  to  the  purposes  of  the  Government. 

Our  loss  is  small,  but  as  we  have  made  hard  marches  every  day  and 
only  halted  at  night  it  has  been  impracticable  to  get  exact  figures. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief. 


No.  11.]  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  Army  Corps, 

Opelousas , La .,  April  23,  1863. 

General:  Since  my  Nos.  9 and  10,  of  the  17th  instant,  I have  had 
neither  time  to  prepare  formal  dispatches  nor,  until  now,  convenient 
opportunity  for  sending  them.  I have,  however,  endeavored  to  keep 
you  constantly  advised  of  our  movements  and  their  results  by  telegraph 
through  General  Sherman,  commanding  at  New  Orleans. 

On  the  evening  of  the  17th  General  Grover,  who  had  marched  from 
New  Iberia  by  a shorter  road  and  thus  gained  the  advance,  met  the 
enemy  at  Bayou  Vermillion.  The  enemy’s  force  consisted  of  a consider- 
able number  of  cavalry,  about  1,000  infantry,  and  six  pieces  of  artillery, 
masked  in  a strong  position  on  the  opposite  bank,  with  which  we  were 
unacquainted.  The  enemy  was  driven  from  his  position,  but  not  until 
he  had  succeeded  in  destroying  the  bridge  over  the  bayou  by  fire. 
Everything  had  been  previously  arranged  for  this  purpose.  The 
enemy’s  flight  was  precipitate. 

The  night  of  the  17th  and  the  whole  of  the  next  day  were  occupied 
in  pushing  forward  with  vigor  the  reconstruction  of  this  bridge. 

On  the  19th  the  march  was  resumed  and  continued  to  the  vicinity  of 
Grand  Coteau,  and  on  the  following  afternoon  our  main  force  occupied 
Opelousas,  the  cavalry,  supported  by  one  regiment  of  infantry  and  a 
section  of  artillery,  being  thrown  forward  to  Washington,  on  the  Cour- 
tableau,  a distance  of  6 miles.  The  command  rested  on  the  21st. 

Yesterday  morning  (the  22d)  I sent  out  Brigadier-General  Dwight, 
with  his  brigade  of  Grover’s  division  and  detachments  of  artillery  and 
cavalry,  to  push  forward  through  Washington  toward  Alexandria.  He 
found  the  bridges  over  Bayous  Oocodrie  and  Bceuff  destroyed,  and 
occupied  the  evening  and  night  in  replacing  them  by  a single  bridge  at 
the  junction  of  the  two  bayous.  The  people  say  that  the  enemy  threw 
large  quantities  of  ammunition  and  some  small-arms  into  Bayou  Coco- 
drie,  and  that  the  Texans  declared  they  were  going  to  Texas.  Here 
the  steamer  Wave  was  burned  by  the  enemy,  and  the  principal  portion 


C«ap.  XXYII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


299 


of  her  cargo,  which  had  been  transferred  to  a flat,  captured  by  us.  A 
dispatch  was  found  by  General  Dwight,  in  which  Governor  Moore  tells 
General  Taylor  to  retreat  slowly  to  Alexandria,  and  if  pressed  to  retire 
to  Texas.  General  Dwight  will  push  well  forward  to-day  and  probably 
halt  to-morrow,  to  continue  his  march  or  return,  according  to  circum- 
stances. 

A reconnoitering  expedition  sent  out  one  day’s  march  on  the  Texas 
road  has  discovered  nothing  of  the  enemy.  This  force  consisted  of  the 
Fourth  Wisconsin,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bean,  one  section  of  artillery, 
and  two  companies  of  the  Second  Rhode  Island  Cavalry. 

An  expedition,  consisting  of  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-second  New 
York,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Blanchard,  one  section  of  artillery,  and  Bar- 
rett’s company  (B),  First  Louisiana  Cavalry,  accompanied  by  Captain 
Dunham,  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  First  Lieutenant  Harwood, 
Engineers  (both  of  my  staff),  was  sent  out  yesterday  morning  by  way 
of  Barre’s  Landing  to  examine  the  Bayou  Courtableau  in  the  direction 
of  Butte-Ala-Rose.  Last  night  Captain  Dunham  reported  the  road  im- 
passable 4 miles  beyond  Barre’s  Landing,  and  that  the  expedition  cap- 
tured the  steamer  Ellen  in  a small  bayou  leading  out  of  the  Courtableau. 
This  capture  is  a timely  assistance  to  us, 

I informed  you  in  my  No.  9 that  I had  ordered  the  gunboats  to  take 
Butte-a-la-Rose.  This  was  handsomely  done,  without  serious  loss,  on 
the  morning  of  the  20th  instant,  by  Lieutenant-Commander  Cooke,  TJ. 
S.  Navy,  with  his  gunboats  and  four  companies  of  infantry.  We  cap- 
tured here  the  garrison  of  60  men  and  its  commander,  two  heavy  guns 
in  position  and  in  good  order,  a large  quantity  of  ammunition,  and  the 
key  of  the  Atchafalaya. 

1 immediately  sent  the  remainder  of  the  regiment,  part  of  which  went 
up  on  the  gunboats,  to  proceed  to  Butte-a-la-Rose,  the  whole  regiment  * 
to  garrison  that  work  and  hold  it  to  the  last  extremity. 

This  afternoon  the  steamer  Cornie,  which  we  captured  at  Franklin, 
has  arrived  at  Washington  with  supplies,  and  the  other  boats  are  on 
the  way.  The  depot  will  for  the  present  be  at  Washington  or  Barre’s 
Landing,  and  our  communication  will  be  by  the  Courtableau  and  Atcha- 
falaya. 

I have  just  learned  from  Major-General  Augur,  at  Baton  Rouge,  that 
it  is  reported  there  and  believed  by  Commander  Alden  and  himself, 
that  Admiral  Farragut  has  been  re-enforced  by  five  gunboats  from 
Vicksburg,  and  has  gone  to  the  Red  River  and  the  mouth  of  the  Atcha- 
falaya. I hope  General  Augur  will  have  had  signal  communication 
with  the  admiral  to-day. 

I inclose  for  your  information  copies  of  two  communications  from 
General  Grant,  dated  March  23  and  received  20th  instant ; of  one  from 
Admiral  Farragut,  dated  April  6 and  received  the  21st  instant,  and 
copies  of  my  replies.  I send  a duplicate  of  my  dispatch  to  General 
Grant  by  special  messenger  via  New  York. 

If,  as  General  Grant  informs  me,  he  can  well  spare  me  an  army  corps 
of  20,000  men,  I earnestly  request  that  that  force  may  be  sent  to  me  at 
the  earliest  practicable  moment,  and  I am  strongly  of  opinion  that  it 
should  join  me  on  the  Atchafalaya  and  proceed,  through  Grand  River 
or  Bayou  Sorrel  and  Bayou  Plaquemine,  to  Baton  Rouge.  I can  sup- 
ply this  re-enforcement  from  the  moment  it  joins  me  on  the  Atchafalaya, 
provided  it  brings  its  own  water  transportation. 

I hope  not  to  be  obliged  to  lose  a moment  in  improving  the  decisive 
advantages  gained  in  this  section.  We  have  destroyed  the  enemy’s 
army  and  navy,  and  made  their  reorganization  impossible  by  destroying 


300  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII 

or  removing  the  material.  We  hold  the  key  of  the  position.  Among 
the  evidences  of  our  victory  are  2,000  prisoners,  two  transports,  and 
twenty  guns  (including  one  piece  of  the  Valverde  .Battery)  taken,  and 
three  gunboats  and  eight  transports  destroyed. 

If  the  Government  will  send  20,000  more  troops  here  I will  take  Port 
Hudson  at  once.  If  it  will  send  the  iron-clads  that  were  engaged  at 
Charleston  I will  take  Mobile,  hold  its  forts,  and  close  its  harbor  against 
the  commerce  that  now  pours  into  its  gates  in  spite  of  the  blockade. 

Whether  General  Grant’s  forces  join  me  or  not,  I hope  you  will  at 
least  lend,  me  a sufficient  force  from  the  Department  of  the  South  to 
decide  matters  finally  in  this  department.  I can  send  them  back,  if 
necessary,  as  soon  as  it  is  done.  If  the  necessary  means  are  given  at 
once  the  opportunity  for  opening  the  Mississippi  is  in  our  hands. 

I hope  to  be  able  to  send  a detailed  report  of  our  operations  by  the 
next  mail. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief \ Washington , L>.  C. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  Vicksburg , Miss.,  March  23,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf  Port  Hudson , La. : 

General:  Your  communication  of  the  13th  instant,  per  Admiral 
Farragut,  was  duly  received.  The  continuous  high  water  and  the 
nature  of  the  country  almost  precluding  the  possibility  of  landing  a 
force  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Mississippi  anywhere  above  Vicksburg 
has  induced  the  hope  that  you  would  be  able  to  take  Port  Hudson  and 
move  up  to  Black  River.  By  the  use  of  your  transports  I could  send 
you  all  the  force  you  would  require. 

Finding  the  canal  commenced  here  last  summer  by  General  Williams, 

I have  prosecuted  that  work,  and  would  before  this  have  had  it  com- 
pleted to  the  width  of  60  feet  but  for  the  heavy  rise  in  the  river,  break- 
ing in  the  dam  across  the  upper  end.  It  is  exceedingly  doubtful  if  this 
canal  can  be  made  of  any  practical  use,  even  if  completed.  The  enemy 
have  established  a battery  of  heavy  guns  opposite  the  mouth  of  the 
canal,  completely  commanding  it  for  one-half  its  length. 

Soon  after  taking  command  here  I conceived  the  idea  of  getting  pos- 
session of  the  Yazoo  River  by  the  way  of  Moon  Lake  and  Yazoo  Pass. 
Five  gunboats  were  furnished  for  this  expedition,  and  I sent  in  addi- 
tion a division  of  troops,  to  which  has  since  been  added  considerable 
re-enforcements.  This  enterprise  promised  most  fairly,  but  for  some 
cause  our  troops  and  boats  delayed  so  as  to  give  the  enemy  time  to 
fortify.  My  last  information  from  this  command  was  to  the  17th. 
They  were  at  Greenwood,  on  the  Yazoo,  a fortified  place,  and  had 
abandoned  all  idea  of  getting  past  until  they  could  receive  additional 
ordnance  stores.  By  a prompt  movement  Yazoo  City  could  have  been 
captured  without  opposition.  i 

Admiral  Porter,  with  five  gunboats,  and  General  Sherman,  with  a 
division  of  troops,  are  now  attempting  to  get  into  the  Yazoo  by  the 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


301 


wav  of  Steele’s  Bayou,  Black  Bayou,  Deer  Creek,  Rolling  Fork,  and 
the  Sunflower.  They  got  as  far  as  Deer  Creek  without  any  great  diffi- 
culty, hut  1 fear  a failure  of  getting  farther.  This  experiment  failing, 
there  is  nothing  left  for  me  but  to  collect  all  my  strength  and  attack 
Haines’  Bluff.  This  will  necessarily  be  attended  with  much  loss,  but  1 
think  it  can  be  done  successfully. 

The  best  aid  you  can  give,  if  you  cannot  pass  Port  Hudson,  will  be 
to  hold  as  many  of  the  enemy  there  as  possible.  If  they  could  be  sent 
I could  well  spare  one  army  corps,  to  enable  you  to  get  up  the  river. 
Mv  effective  force,  including  all  arms,  will  be  between  60,000  and 
70" 000,  if  I bring  all  from  Memphis  that  can  be  spared  in  au  emer- 
gency/ An  attack  on  Haines’  Bluff  cannot  possibly  take  place  under 
two  weeks,  if  so  soon.  My  forces  are  now  scattered  and  the  difficulty 
of  getting  transportation  is  very  great. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 

Major-General . 


[Inclosare  No.  2.] 


March  23, 1863. 

Admiral  Farragtjt, 

Commanding  Gulf  Squadron : 

Admiral  : In  the  various  notes  I have  written,  including  the  dis- 
patch for  General  Banks,  I have  not  mentioned  that  soon  after  taking 
command  there  in  person  I collected  my  surplus  troops  at  Lake  Provi- 
dence and  directed  the  commanding  officer  to  effect  a passage  through 
from  the  Mississippi  River  to  Bayou  Macon.  •This  will  give  navigable 
water  through  by  that  route  to  the  Red  River.  This  is  now  reported 
practicable  for  ordinary  Ohio  River  steamers.  I sent  several  weeks 
ago  for  this  class  of  steamers  and  expected  them  before  this.  Should 
they  arrive,  and  Admiral  Porter  gets  his  boats  out  of  the  Yazoo,  so  as 
to  accompany  the  expedition,  I can  send  a force  ot,  say,  20,000  effective 
men  to  co-operate  with  General  Banks  on  Port  Hudson. 

This  force  certainly  would  easily  reduce  Port  Hudson  and  enable 
them  to  come  on  up  the  river  and  maintain  a position  on  high  land 
near  enough  to  Vicksburg  until  they  could  be  re-enforced  from  here 
sufficiently  to  operate  against  the  city. 

Please  inform  the  general  of  the  contents  of  this,  and  much  oblige 

your  obedient  servant,  _ 

J U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major- General. 


[iHolosure  No.  3.] 

United  States  Flag-Ship  Hartford, 

Above  Port  Hudson , La .,  April  6,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

My  Dear  General  : Thanks  to  an  overruling  Providence  lam  once 
more  within  communicating  distance  with  you,  and  I avail  myself  of 
the  first  opportunity  to  send  you  the  communication  of  General  Grant, 
together  with  this  dispatch.  It  is  my  intention  to  await  him,  and  to 
maintain  a rigid  blockade  of  Red  River  at  its  mouth  until  the  arrival 
or  failure  of  the  force  above  to  join  me  and  make  the  attack  upon  Port 
Hudson,  as  indicated  in  the  communication  of  General  Grant.  I con- 


302 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


fess  that  my  ignorance  of  the  inland  navigation  referred  to  prevents  me 
from  being  able  to  express  an  opinion  as  to  when  they  will  succeed,  if  at 
all,  in  accomplishing  their  work.  If  it  can  be  done  it  will  be  a clever 
thing,  but  I have  seen  so  little  accomplished  as  yet  by  our  forces  that  I 
have  now  determined  to  wait  until  something  is  accomplished  before  I 
form  an  opinion. 

The  failure  of  my  vessels  to  get  by  Port  Hudson  was  a sad  blow  to  me, 
and  yet  it  was  what  might  have  been  naturally  looked  for  in  a battle — 
a chance  shot  disabled  the  Richmond,  and  the  pilots  did  the  rest  by 
running  the  ships  ashore.  We  escaped  with  only  1 man  killed  and  2 
slightly  wounded,  and  the  vessel  was  not  injured  at  all,  although  she 
was  frequently  struck. 

I have  fought  the  batteries  at  Grand  Gulf  and  at  Warrenton  five  times 
since,  and  have  lost  3 more  of  my  men,  but  altogether  we  have  escaped 
very  well.  Had  two  more  of  my  vessels  passed  I would  not  have  to 
apply  to  Admiral  Porter  for  additional  vessels  to  blockade  Red  River. 
As  it  is,  I have  only  one  ram  (the  Switzerland),  and  my  force  being  so 
very  small,  we  are,  compelled  to  keep  together,  but  I hope  it  will  not  be 
long  before  we  hear  of  the  upper  fleet.  The  rashness  of  General  Ellet 
in  running  his  two  rams  down  in  open  day  deprived  me  of  the  use  of 
one  of  them;  still  even  one  is  better  than  none. 

I am  enabled  to  fill  up  my  coal  and  provisions  which  were  floated  down 
to  me. 

In  order  to  blockade  Red  River  I returned  there  as  soon  as  I could 
get  my  supplies  and  repair  damages  to  the  Switzerland. 

The  rams  did  not  lose  a man  in  passing  the  Vicksburg  batteries,  but 
the  Lancaster  was  sunk  and  the  Switzerland  received  two  shots  in  her 
boilers.  The  former  wq^  an  old,  worthless  boat  of  the  frailest  construc- 
tion. My  greatest  difficulty  is  to  keep  (he  Switzerland  in  fuel.  This 
ship  and  the  Albatross  have  over  a month’s  supply. 

I was  much  gratified  to  learn  that  you  were  in  possession  of  the  point 
opposite  Port  Hudson,  and  I hope  we  will  be  able  to  keep  open  the  com- 
munication. I shall  not  make  my  visits  often,  however,  as  I wish  to 
prevent  boats  going  either  up  or  down  the  Mississippi  from  Red  River. 
I suppose  that  they  will  attack  me  soon,  but  I am  all  ready  for  them, 
and  I suppose  we  will  get  used  to  fighting  after  a while. 

My  feelings  have  been  most  severely  exercised  in  consequence  of  the 
disaster  at  Port  Hudson.  Not  knowing  what  had  caused  it,  and  having 
such  implicit  confidence  in  the  several  commanders,  I felt  and  feared 
the  worst  of  consequences  to  them,  and  was  greatly  relieved  when  I 
learned  through'  rebel  papers  that  none  of  them  had  been  killed  but 
poor  Cummings,  who  was  a great  loss,  both  to  the  country  and  to  his 
family.  I hope  that  the  injury  to  McKinstry  is  not  so  great  as  they 
make" it  appear,  and  that  he  will  recover  without  the  loss  of  his  leg. 
The  failure  to  get  through  I know  was  almost  death  to  them  all.  Poor 
Smith ! I was  afraid  to  hear  from  him.  I saw  all  from  a distance,  yet 
was  unable  to  help  them,  and  blamed  no  one,  because,  as  I have  informed 
the  Department,  I knew  they  did  all  in  their  power  to  get  through. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours,* 

D.  G.  FARRAGUT, 
Rear-Admiral , Commanding. 

* For  Banks*  reply  to  this  letter,  under  date  of  April  23,  see  “Correspondence,  etc.,” 
p08t. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


303 


[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Opelousas , La.,  April  23,  1863. 

Major-General  Grant, 

Commanding  Forces  on  the  Upper  Mississippi : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  dis- 
patches, dated  at  Headquarters,  before  Vicksburg,  March  23,  1863,  on 
the  21st,  by  the  hand  of  Lieutenant  Tenney,  of  General  Augur’s  division, 
at  Baton  Rouge.  On  April  10  Mr.  Gabaudan,  private  secretary  of  Ad- 
miral Farragut,  commanding  the  Hartford,  at  the  mouth  of  Red  River, 
reported  at  my  headquarters  at  Brashear,  and  gave  me  verbally  the 
substance  of  your  dispatches,  which  he  said  he  had  read,  but  did  not 
bring  with  him  in  the  dangerous  passage  which  he  was  compelled  to 
make  of  the  batteries  of  Port  Hudson. 

The  information  received  from  Mr.  Gabaudan  differs  somewhat  from 
your  dispatches.  I understand  from  him  that  it  was  your  intention  to 
send  a force  by  the  way  of  Lake  Providence  and  the  Black  River,  pass- 
ing through  the  intermediate  bayous,  to  the  mouth  of  Black  River  on 
the  Red  River,  and  that  this  force  would  probably  reach  the  Red  River 
by  May  1st  proximo,  to  co-operate  with  my  command  against  Port 
Hudson. 

Stimulated  by  this  report  and  cheering  prospect  of  assistance  we 
pushed  with  vigor  the  expedition  upon  which  we  were  then  engaged. 
Our  success  has  been  complete.  We  have  utterly  destroyed  the  army 
and  navy  of  this  part  of  the  Confederacy,  and  made  it  impossible  for 
the  enemy  to  reorganize  his  forces  for  some  months  to  come.  We 
occupy  Opelousas,  and  my  advance  is  about  30  miles  in  front  of  this 
place,"  on  the  road  to  Alexandria. 

The  forces  of  the  enemy  are  divided,  a portion  of  Sibley’s  cavalry 
being  on  the  Plaquemine  Bayou,  on  the  road  to  Texas,  with  General 
Mouton  and  the  artillery  and  some  cavalry  on  the  road  to  Alexandria. 
The  infantry  is  completely  dispersed.  We  have  captured  2,000  pris- 
oners, 1,000  stand  of  arms,  ammunition,  ordnance  stores,  &c.,  twenty 
heavy  guns,  demolished  his  founderies  at  Franklin  and  New  Iberia,  and 
the  salt -works  below  Iberia.  We  have  captured  two  steamers  and  sev- 
eral boats,  and  compelled  the  destruction  of  ten  or  twelve  transport 
steamers,  some  of  them  laden  with  flour,  ammunition,  and ‘arms. 

The  gunboats  Diana,  Hart,  and  Queen  of  the  West  have  been  de- 
stroyed and  their  armament  captured  by  our  forces.  We  have  among 
our  prisoners  the  most  important  officers  of  all  arms,  Captain  Fuller, 
the  commander  of  their  fleet,  captured  from  the  Queen  of  the  West, 
known  here  as  the  “King  of  the  Swamp,”  long  in  the  Legislature  and 
at  the  head  of  the  filibuster  or  fighting  element  of  the  State,  whose 
candidate  he  was  for  the  office  of  Governor.  We  have  also  Captain 
Seinmes,  the  first  officer  of  their  artillery,  and  Colonel  Vincent,  the 
chief  of  their  cavalry.  They  can  make  no  stand  this  side  of  Alexandria. 

The  capture  of  the  fortifications  at  Butte-a-la-Rose  by  the  Army  and 
Navy,  which  occurred  on  the  morning  of  April  20,  opens  to  us  com- 
pletely the  Atchafalaya  to  the  Red  River.  Several  days  since  I ad- 
dressed to  the  admiral  an  inquiry  whether  he  could  navigate  the  Red 
River  to  Alexandria  and  to  yourself  a request  to  communicate  the  time 
when  your  co-operative  force  could  reach  Red  River.  Our  communica- 
tion with  the  admiral  is  open  only  on  Thursdays,  when  he  comes  down 
to  Port  Hudson.  It  will  be  communicated  to  him,  as  I am  informed, 


304  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chat.  XXVII. 

by  dispatches  from  General  Augur  to-day.  It  must  be  some  time  before 
it  reaches  you. 

I was  disappointed  in  learning  from  the  perusal  of  your  dispatches 
that  at  their  date  it  was  undetermined  whether  you  can  send  a force  to 
the  Bed  Biver  or  not,  on  account  of  the  deficiency  of  your  transporta- 
tion. It  is  a grief  on  my  part  that  I cannot  aid  you  in  this  respect. 
Our  transportation  is  lamentably  deficient.  I had  but  one  steamer 
with  which  to  pass  two  divisions  of  my  corps  over  Berwick  Bay  in  this 
campaign.  The  route  is  open,  but  I can  reach  Bed  Biver  only  by 
forced  marches.  It  is  six  days’  march  to  Alexandria,  and  four  or  five 
to  Simmesport,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Atchafalaya,  but  until  we  can  hear 
from  you  I shall  make  Washington,  on  the  JDourtableau,  my  base  of 
operations. 

We  can  co-operate  with  you  in  any  manner  you  suggest,  by  a junc- 
tion on  the  Bed  Biver  or  by  an  attack  from  Baton  Bouge,  joining  your 
forces  on  the  Bayou  Sara  in  the  rear  of  Port  Hudson.  My  belief  is 
that  this  is  the  best  method,  as  the  passage  of  the  Mississippi  from  the 
Bed  Biver  is  very  difficult  with  our  short  transportation  and  will  re- 
quire a landing,  and  places  us  between  the  armies  of  Vicksburg  and 
Port  Hudson;  but  we  shall  not  hesitate.  I wait  anxiously  to  hear  from 
you  upon  these  points,  viz : 

First.  When  can  you  be  at  the  mouth  of  the  Black  or  Bed  Biver? 

Second.  In  what  manner  shall  my  forces  co-operate  with  you? 

Third.  Can  you  furnish  transportation  for  your  passage  to  Port  Hud- 
son or  do  you  rely  upon  us  ? 

Fourth.  Can  you  supply  your  troops  or  will  you  rely  upon  us  ? 

Fifth.  Is  it  not  practicable  for  your  force  to  join  us  by  the  Atchafa- 
laya ? 

It  is  doubtful  if  we  can  supply  your  forces  from  New  Orleans  in 
operating  above  Port  Hudson,  on  account  of  our  deficient  transporta- 
tion. My  belief  is  that  the  best  junction  is  by  the  Atchafalaya.  We 
can  reach  Baton  Bouge  by  the  Grand  Biver  and  the  Plaquemine  with- 
out transshipment,  and,  our  forces  united,  make  the  reduction  of  Port 
Hudson  certain.  My  own  command  is  insufficient. 

Waiting  anxiously  your  response  and  with  full  confidence  in  your 
judgment  and  earnest  co-operation,  I am,  very  truly,  yours, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure  No.  5.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Opelousas , La.,  April  23,  1863. 

Major-General  Grant, 

Commanding  Forces  before  Vicksburg : 

General  : Further  reflection  upon  my  letter  of  this  date  and  addi- 
tional information  as  to  the  condition  of  the  country  on  this  line  leads 
me  to  urge  more  strongly  the  point  of  junction  indicated  at  its  close,  viz, 
by  the  Atchafalaya,  Grand  Biver,  and  Plaquemine  Bayou  to  Baton 
Bouge.  We  are  now  180  miles  from  New  Orleans.  It  is  with  great 
difficulty  that  we  obtain  supplies  now.  Corn  and  beef  are  our  chief 
support.  To  extend  this  line  a hundred  miles  farther,  as  it  will  be  on 
the  Bed  Biver,  increases  the  difficulty,  and  to  push  it  farther  still,  to 
the  opposite  side  of  the  Mississippi  at  Bayou  Sara,  will  render  supplies 
very  insecure,  if  not  impossible.  I commend  this  subject  to  your 
earnest  consideration. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA 


305 


By  the  Atchafalaya  all  difficulties  of  this  kind  are  obviated.  Sup- 
plies of  ammunition  and  provisions  are  secured;  a perfect  field  of  opera- 
tions is  in  our  possession,  and  the  united  forces  make  the  result  we 
wish  certain.  There  are  insuperable  difficulties  to  encounter  on  the 
other  line  from  the  extent  of  the  operations  and  the  deficiencies  of 
transportation.  They  cannot  be  too  carefully  weighed  nor  too  much 
consideration  given  to  the  advantages  presented  by  the  more  southerly 
route.  Let  me  say  that  all  my  ideas  on  the  subject  have  been  changed 
by  my  experience  in  this  campaign. 

Inclosed  I send- a map  indicating  the  route  proposed  for  co-operation, 
and  also  our  line  of  march  in  this  campaign.* 

I have  the  honor,  general,  to  subscribe  myself,  faithfully,  yoilr  friend, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding . 


No.  12.1  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  Army  Corps, 

Opelousas , La .,  May  2,  1863. 

General:  I returned  to  this  place  last  night  from  a brief  visit  to 
New  Orleans  upon  important  matters  connected  with  our  future  opera- 
tions. I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  operations 
that  have  taken  place  since  the  25th  ultimo: 

Colonel  Paine,  with  his  brigade  and  one  section  of  artillery,  was  sent 
out  on  the  Plaquemine  Brule  road,  southwest  from  Opelousas,  April 
26,  to  disperse  a considerable  force  of  cavalry  reported  in  that  direc- 
tion and  intending  to  attack  our  train.  The  enemy  was  found  to  have 
left,  and  is  reported  to  have  crossed  the  Mermenton  River  en  route  for 
Texas. 

April  27  a report  was  received  from  Colonel  [S.  G.J  Jerrard,  command- 
ing at  New  Iberia,  of  a disturbance  at  Saint  Martinville,  caused  by  a 
few  white  men  and  a party  of  negroes,  but  which  was  promptly  quelled. 

April  28  General  Dwight,  with  his  brigade  and  two  sections  of  artil- 
lery, was  ordered  to  fall  back  to  Washington  from  his  position,  about 
25  miles  in  advance  of  that  place,  on  the  Bayou  Bceufif  road,  where  his 
rear  was  much  exposed  to  the  attacks  of  the  numerous  cavalry  of  the 
enemy.  General  Dwight  made  several  partial  movements  with  success, 
greatly  alarming  and  puzzling  the  enemy. 

April  29  information  was  received  relative  to  Simmesport,  on  the  Atch- 
afalaya. The  enemy  have  left  that  place  for  Alexandria.  Road  from 
here  to  Simmesport  reported  good.  A reconnaissance  was  made  by 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Corliss,  of  the  Rhode  Island  Cavalry,  accompanied 
by  Lieutenant-Colonel  [W.  S.]  Abert,  which  was  pushed  out  on  the  road 
through  Chicotville  to  the  Bayou  Oocodrie,  a distance  upward  of  50 
miles.  The  enemy  had  no  force  on  that  road  except  a small  picket,  the 
whole  of  which  was  captured.  The  enemy  has  a considerable  force  of 
cavalry  on  the  Bayou  Boeuff  road,  but  he  has  no  force  to  offer  any 
strong  resistance  to  our  advance  to  Alexandria. 

The  collection  of  cotton  has  been  very  successful,  about  3,500  bales 
having  already  been  collected. 

Two  more  pieces  of  artillery  have  been  raised  from  the  wreck  of  a 
rebel  boat  near  Leonville,  making  twenty-two  guns  in  all  captured  from 
the  enemy.  About  six  hundred  sabers  were  also  recovered. 

One  soldier  has  been  shot  to  death  for  plundering  and  pillaging,  and 
some  others  are  being  tried  for  the  same  offense,  who  will  doubtless 

* Not  found. 

20  R r — yol  XY 


306 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYH 

have  to  suffer  the  same  penalty.  The  temptations  to  plunder  and  pil- 
lage have  been  so  strong,  and  the  disregard  of  reiterated  orders  forbid- 
ding it  such,  that  severe  measures  were  indispensable. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  ’ Hdqrs.  of  the  Army , Washington , D.  C. 


No.  16.]  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  Army  Corps, 

Opelousas , La.,  May  4, 1863. 

General  : On  April  20  Butte-a-la-Rose  was  captured  by  the  gun- 
boats attached  to  the  fleet  in  this  department,  orders  having  been  sent 
from  these  headquarters  to  make  an  attack.  From  that  date,  by  some 
unaccountable  and  unexplained  delay,  not  the  slightest  effort  was  made 
to  open  the  Atchafalaya  or  to  penetrate  the  Courtableau  to  the  head- 
quarters of  my  corps  at  Opelousas.  The  first  boat  that  opened  the 
Courtableau  to  Washington  was  the  Cornie,  a little  transport  steamer 
that  we, had  captured  from  the  enemy  on  that  bayou.  But  for  this  de- 
lay communication  would  early  have  been  opened  with  the  admiral, 
and  my  command  would  have  continued  its  march. 

On  the  2d  instant  communication  was  opened  with  Admiral  Farragut 
at  the  mouth  of  Red  River,  by  aid  of  the  gunboat  Arizona,  Captain 
Upton  commanding,  accompanied  by  Captain  Dunham,  of  my  staff. 
Copies  of  my  communications  to  the  admiral  are  inclosed.  I solicited 
his  co-operation  in  the  movement  against  Alexandria,  the  possession  of 
Red  River  being  necessary  for  the  security  of  our  supplies.  He  had 
been  waiting  anxiously  for  two  or  more  boats  that  had  passed  the  bat- 
teries at  Vicksburg,  but  up  to  this  date  they  had  not  joined  him.  He 
feared  that  he  would  not  receive  assistance  from  that  quarter.  It  ap- 
pears that  they  were  engaged  in  the  cannonade  upon  the  batteries  at 
Grand  Gulf.  He  said  if  he  could  be  supported  by  the  gunboats  on  our 
line  he  would  undertake  to  move  against  Alexandria  in  co-operation 
with  the  Army.  We  have  made  every  possible  exertion  5 have  been 
upon  the  Atciiafalaya  myself  one  or  two  days,  to  hurry  forward  the 
boats.  Three  of  them  have  joined  the  admiral.  Two  others  will  join 
him  at  the  close  of  the  week,  giving  him  a force  sufficient  for  his  pur- 
pose, we  believe.  But  I still  have  hopes  that  some  of  Admiral  Porter’s 
boats  will  join  him  in  the  expedition. 

He  anticipates,  as  you  will  see  by  copies  of  the  dispatches  inclosed, 
that  Kirby  Smith,  with  a force  of  15,000  men,  will  go  down  the  Black 
River  in  transports.  He  will  send  his  boats  to  the  mouth  of  Red  River 
to  intercept  them  should  they  reach  him  in  time.  It  is  quite  possible, 
however,  for  Smith  to  leave  the  Washita  at  Monroe  and  march  to  Shreve- 
port or  Copenhagen  or  Harrisonburg  on  the  same  stream,  and  march 
to  Alexandria,  avoiding  thus  the  mouth  of  Black  River.  Could  we  be 
joined  by  the  force  from  General  Grant  of  20,000,  which  he  could  well 
spare  if  he  had  transportation  for  them,  and  the  boats  .we  have  had  all 
passed  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg,  we  could  permanently  hold  and  con- 
trol the  entire  territory  west  of  the  Mississippi ; the  ultimate  and  not 
distant  evacuation  of  Port  Hudson  and  Vicksburg  would  be  certain, 
and  the  capture  of  the  whole  or  a part  of  the  force  of  each  fortress  be 
most  probable.  I still  hope  we  may  adopt  the  policy  of  concentrating 
®ur  forces, 


Chap.  XXVII. ] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


307 


A dispatch  received  this  morning  from  Baton  Rouge  announces  the 
fact  that  two  regiments  of  Illinois  cavalry  (the  Sixth  and  Seventh),  900 
strong,  with  a battery  of  artillery,  under  command  of  Colonels  Grier- 
son and  Prince,  left  La  Grange,  near  Memphis,  Tenn.,  and  arrived  on 
the  2d  instant  at  Baton  Rouge,  after  a march  of  seventeen  days,  with 
the  loss  of  only  4 men,  destroying  large  quantities  of  provisions,  burn- 
ing many  bridges,  cars,  and  engines  on  the  Jackson  road,  and  captur- 
ing and  paroling  1,600  prisoners.  If  the  colonel  would  join  us  at  Alex- 
andria we  could  capture  the  Legislature  that  commences  its  session  this 
month  at  Shreveport  or  compel  their  adjournment  to  Texas.  1 shall 
invite  him  to  do  so,  assuring  him  in  that  event  he  may  return,  by  the 
way  of  Black  River,  through  Arkansas,  Illinois,  and  Kentucky,  to  Ten- 
nessee. 

My  command  moves  this  morning  in  the  direction  of  Alexandria,  Gen- 
eral Dwight’s  brigade,  of  Grover’s  division,  being  in  the  advance.  The 
other  divisions  will  move  forward  to  morrow.  The  proposed  movement 
is  to  ascertain  definitely  the  strength  and  purpose  of  the  enemy  at 
Alexandria,  and  to  occupy  that  place  or  not,  as  events  shall  justify.  I 
will  report  to  you  regularly  our  progress  and  results.  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Emory  leaves  his  division  this  day,  on  account  of  severe  illness* 
and  goes  to  New  Orleans  for  twenty  days.  His  division  is  placed  tem- 
porarily under  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Weitzel,  whose  bri- 
gade in  the  mean  time  has  been  ordered  to  report  to  General  Dwight, 
in  the  advance. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commander -in- Chief  of  the  Army  of  the  United  States. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Flag- Ship  Hartford, 

, Off  Bed  River , May  1,  1863. 

Major-General  Banks  : 

Dear  General:  Two  hours  before  the  arrival  of  the  Arizona  I sent 
the  Switzerland  up  to  Grand  Gulf  to  communicate  with  General  Grant 
and  Admiral  Porter.  They  are  very  busy  at  work  on  Vicksburg.  He 
has  sent  1,500  cavalry  to  break  up  the  railroad  leading  to  Jackson.  I 
heard  of  the  gunboats  at  Grand  Gulf,  and  so  sent  to  beg  for  two  iron- 
clads to  co-operate  with  you,  and  hope  to  have  them,  but  if  my  gunboats 
come  up  I will  be  with  you  at  Alexandria.  They  have  deserted  Fort 
De  Russy  and  taken  the  guns  to  Alexandria,  and  say  they  will  make 
their  stand  there.  The  guns  are  all  removed  from  Fort  De  Russy.  We 
saw  a man  who  saw  the  guns  on  the  boat  taking  them  up;  but  there  is 
a general  stampede,  and  we  ought  to  press  on.  I will  send  the  gun- 
boats to  the  mouth  of  Black  River,  where  Kirby  Smith  is  said  to  be 
gone  up  to  Arkansas  for  re-enforcements,  and  we  can  capture  them  if 
we  get  there  in  time.  You  say  truly,  general,  that  everything  is  de- 
pendent upon  time;  that  is,  celerity  of  movement  will  keep  up  the 
panic,  although  I believe  that  General  Grant  is  about  to  attack  the  city 
of  Vicksburg.  Still  I hope  to  get  'one  or  two  iron  clads.  Alexandria 
is  their  great  machine-shop;  break  them  up  and  they  are  more  injured 
than  in  any  other  way.  If  they  have  time  the  Webb  and  other  steamers 
will  get  above  the  falls.  I was  going  down  to  communicate  with  Aldep 


308 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,_ S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

to-morrow,  but  will  wait  for  the  gunboats  to  know  that  they  are  going 
up  to  Black  River. 

Wishing  you  every  success,  I remain,  very  truly,  yours, 

s D.  G.  FARRAGUT, 

Rear-Admiral. 


[Sub-inclosure.] 


United  States  Flag-Ship  Hartford, 

Off  Red  River , May  1,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee: 

Dear  General  : 1 herewith  inclose  to  you  a communication  brought 
from  General  Banks  by  my  secretary,  who  went  down  past  Port  Hudson 
in  a skiff,  carrying  my  dispatches  to  General  Banks  and  the  fleet  below. 
Its  soiled  condition  is  owing  to  the  secretary’s  being  compelled  to  carry 
it  in  his  mouth  when  pursued  by  the  enemy’s  pickets  on  his  return  to 
this  ship  across  the  peninsula. 

General  Banks  has  defeated  General  Taylor  at  Pattersonville,  on 
the  Teche,  capturing  2,000  prisoners.  Our  gunboats  captured  the 
Queen  of  the  West,  Diana,  and  one  other.  The  Queen  was  burned,  but 
we  got  her  guns. 

The  enemy  was  fleeing  before  General  Banks,  who  when  last  heard 
from  was  at  Holmesville,  within  30  miles  of  Alexandria.  Kirby  Smith 
has  gone  up  to  Arkansas  for  re-enforcements  for  Taylor,  and  if  I had 
one  or  two  of  Admiral  Porter’s  vessels  to  send  up  to  the  mouth  of 
Black  River  I could  capture  Kirby  Smith’s  whole  fleet.  By  remaining 
here  I prevent  them  from  sending  re-enforcements  from  Port  Hudson 

to  Alexandria.  , , „ , . ~ 

General  Banks,  learning  that  the  gunboats  had  passed  Vicksburg,  had 
calculated  on  my  being  able  to  meet  him  at  Alexandria,  and  so  I will  if 
the  boats  come  down  to  me.  I have  written  a most  imploring  appeal 
to  the  admiral  for  them;  otherwise,  my  time  and  fuel  being  nearly  ex- 
pended, I shall  soon  have  to  abandon  my  post  and  return  to  New  Orleans. 
The  enemy  have  sent  every  man  that  they  can  spare  to  Johnston,  in 
anticipation  of  the  coming"  battle  between  him  and  Rosecrans.  If  I 
had  obtained  the  two  iron  clads  I asked  for  I would  have  been,  I think, 
this  day  with  General  Banks  in  Alexandria.  How  it  will  be  now  I can- 
not tell.  . „ ^ ^ r> 

The  enemy  has  removed  the  guns  of  the  lndianola  from  Fort  De  Bossy, 
Red  River  (where  the  Queen  of  the  West  was  captured  from  us),  to 
Alexandria  to  defend  that  city.  There  are  no  guns  between  this  and 
Alexandria,  but  this  ship  draws  too  much  water,  and  the  two  small 
boats  would  be  captured  by  the  enemy’s* fleet  of  gunboats  and  trans- 


ports by  boarding.  . 

I can  get  no  news  of  General  Banks  since  Monday  last.  We  learn 
through  rebel  sources  that  your  cavalry  has  made  a raid  on  the  Jack- 
son  Railroad.  I sincerely  hope  it  is  true. 

Very  truly  and  respectfully, 

J J D.  G.  FARRAGUT, 

J?enr-  A dmiral,. 


[Incloaure  No.  2.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  Army  Corps, 
Opelousas , Xu.,  May  3,  1863 — 12  noon. 

Admiral  Farragut  : 

Dear  Sir  : Your  dispatch,  with  copy  of  that  to  General  Grant,  was 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


309 


received  yesterday  at  5 p.  m.  Captain  Dunham  left  at  1 o’clock  to  urge 
forward  the  Reliance  and  Sachem.  Commodore  Morris  promised  mo 
these  boats  should  be  dispatched  immediately  to  Berwick  Bay  on  April 
28.  They  must  be  there.  If  so,  they  will  join  you  to-morrow  ; if  not, 
Captain  Dunham  will  find  them  and  push  them  forward.  Commodore 
Morris  promised  me  to  send  you  a coal  transport  at  once.  It  is  of  \ ital 
importance  that  we  occupy  the  Red  River  exclusively  to  Alexandria. 
Your  boats  and  those  at  Grand  Gulf  will  accomplish  it  beyond  possi 
bility  of  failure.  I pray  God  they  will  send  them  to  you.  I cannot 
hold  this  country  alone.  Appeal  to  the  boats  at  Grand  Gulf  again  to 
assist  us.  If  we  hold  the  country  west  of  the  Mississippi,  as  we  now 
can,  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson  must  fall.  We  want  but  the  corps 
that  General  Grant  promised  to  co-operate  with  us  to  do  this  effect- 


ually. 

Butte-a-la-Rose  was  captured  on  April  20.  Communication  with  you 
was  not  opened  till  May  2.  There  has  been  criminal  delay  in  this.  I 
spent  twenty-four  hours  on  the  Atchafalaya  myself  to  effect  it  at  last. 

I shall  move  a portion  of  my  corps  to  Alexandria  to-morrow  (Monday) 
to  ascertain  the  force  and  prospects  of  the  enemy,  following  up  with  my 
whole  force,  ready  to  co-operate  with  you  if  you  ascend  the  Red  River, 
keeping  in  communication  with  you  by  the  Atchafalaya  and  Opelousas. 
Send  me  report  of  what  you  can  or  hope  to  do  by  the  Cornie,  that  takes 
this  dispatch.  It  is  not  necessary  for  Kirby  Smith  to  come  down  to 
the  mouth  of  the  Black  River.  He  can  cross  from  the  Washita  by  a 
road  from  Monroe,  another  at  Copenhagen,  another  at  Harrisonburg. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


flnclosure  No.  3.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  Army  Corps, 
Opelousas , Xa.,  May  3,  1863 — 12  noon. 

Major-General  Grant  : 

Dear  Sir  : If  you  can  forward  by  the  Black  River  the  corps  men 
tioned  in  your  dispatches  we  can  expel  the  enemy  from  Louisiana  ; and 
holding  between  us  the  country  west  of  the  Mississippi — you  by  the 
Tensas  and  Black  and  I by  the  Atchafalaya — Vicksburg  and  Port 
Hudson  must  fall.  Both  depend  upon  the  country  west.  Can  you  not 
forward  these  troops  now  ? It  is  of  the  most  vital  importance  that  we 
should  be  strong  here  now,  when  the  enemy  is  panic-stricken. 

I send  information  received  here  of  the  movements  of  Kirby  Smith. 
Can  you  inform  me  of  the  forces  in  Arkansas  1 I shall  move  in  the 
direction  of  Alexandria  to-morrow  morning,  to  ascertain  the  jenemy’s 
force  and  intentions  in  that  quarter.  This  will  determine  my  immedi- 
ate movements. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


No.  17.]  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  Army  Corps, 

Opelousas , La .,  May  4,  1863. 

General:  In  the  progress  of  this  army  I have  deemed  it  expedient, 
in  order  to  prevent  the  reorganization  of  the  rebel  army  and  to  deprive 


310  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  tCHAP.  xxvrL 

the  rebel  Goverhment  of  all  possible  means  of  support,  to  take  posses- 
sion of  mules,  horses,  cattle,  and  the  staple  products  of  the  country — 
cotton,  sugar,  and  tobacco.  I have  given  the  people  to  understand 
that  those  who  are  well-disposed  and  entitled  to  the  favor  of  the  Gov- 
ernment will  receive  compensation  for  this  property  according  to  its 
value  in  this  country  at  the  time  of  our  arrival,  with  its  restricted  mar- 
kets and  liability  to  destruction  by  guerrillas  or  confiscation  by  the 
Confederate  Government.  In  round  numbers,  I may  say  that  20,000 
beeves,  mules,  and  horses  have  been  forwarded  to  Brashear  City,  with 
5,000  bales  of  cotton  and  many  hogsheads  of  sugar. 

Some  protests  have  been  received  from  those  assuming  to  be  French 
or  English  subjects  against  the  possession  of  this  property  by  the  Gov- 
ernment of  the  United  States  ; but  I have  regarded  it  as  a war  measure, 
and  placed  the  protests  upon  file  without  other  response  than  that  I 
have  stated  above,  verbally  given  to  all  these  parties. 

In  the  progress  of  the  army  I believe  it  will  be  expedient  to  adopt  a 
different  principle;  and  should  we  reach  Alexandria  under  circum- 
stances that  will  justify  our  holding  that  point  for  any  length  of  time, 
I propose  to  announce  to  the  people  that  the  Government  of  the  United 
States  will  levy  a contribution  of  50  per  cent,  upon  all  the  staple  prod- 
ucts of  the  country — cotton,  sugar,  and  tobacco ; and  that,  subject  to 
this  contribution,  they  will  be  permitted,  without  discrimination  of  per- 
sons, to  transport  their  products  to  the  market  of  New  Orleans,  where 
they  may  be  sold  under  the  supervision  of  the  United  States,  they  re- 
ceiving, in  the  Federal  currency,  their  proportion  of  the  proceeds  of 
sale.  I believe  that  this  policy  would  loosen  from  50,000  to  150,000 
bales  of  cotton,  had  we  force  enough  to  hold  this  country  for  any  length 
of  time.  The  revenue  received  by  the  Government  of  the  United  States 
would  be  enormous,  the  advantage  to  the  people  immediate  and  im- 
portant,  enabling  them  to  protect  themselves  from  starvation,  which 
will  inevitably  be  upon  them  within  the  coming  year,  and  at  the  same 
time  relieve  the  domestic  and  foreign  manufactories  in  a great  degree 
of  the  cotton  starvation  under  which  they  suffer.  I am  aware  that  at 
first  thought  this  may  seem  to  be  in  conflict  with  the  act  of  confiscation ; 
but  upon  full  consideration  1 am  satisfied  that  it  does  not  interfere 
with  the  policy  of  the  Government.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  applicable 
<only  to  perishable  property.  None  of  that  property  can  be  appropri- 
ated to  the  Government  without  the  consent  of  the  parties  in  interest, 
as  it  is  possible  for  them  in  every  instance  to  destroy  it  if  they  will. 
A large  portion  of  it  is  hidden.  Its  discovery  and  transportation  re- 
quire much  valuable  time,  which  the  army  can  illy  afford.  To  prevent 
its  destruction,  and  to  avoid  the  difficulties  entailed  by  appropriating 
our  transportation  to  this  purpose,  it  will  be  necessary  to  give  to  the 
people  possessing  it  some  interest  in  its  preservation  and  sale;  and  this, 
I am  confident,  will  secure  both  objects. 

A hundred  thousand  bales  would  yield  to  the  Government  a revenue 
of  ten  or  twelve  million  dollars  at  present  prices.  If  it  will  yield  to 
the  people  a larger  interest  than  they  can  obtain  from  the  Confederate 
Government  and  circulate  throughout  the  State  the  Federal  currency 
and  make  them  dependent  upon  our  markets  for  the  necessaries  of  life, 
it  will  go  far  toward  reconciling  all  parties,  even  the  most  hostile,  to 
the  restoration  of  the  Government.  It  is  problematical,  of  course, 
whether  such  a policy  can  be  initiated,  and,  if  initiated,  whether  it  will 
be  successful.  If  opportunity  offers  I shall  try  the  experiment,  and 
ask  the  instructions  of  the  Government,  if  it  be  thought  to  be  inconsist- 
ent with  its  policy. 


Chap  XX  VII.  ] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


311 


I desire  to  say  that  thus  far  in  the  progress  of  the  army  every  dol- 
lar’s worth  of  property,  except  that  which  has  been  taken  by  individual 
robbers  in  money  and  jewelry,  who  have  been  punished  summarily 
therefor,  has  been  scrupulously  appropriated  to  the  use  of  the  Govern- 
ment. Not  a speculator  nor  a plunderer  follows  the  trail  of  the  army 
and  none  will  be  permitted  in  this  campaign. 

I have  the  gratification  of  representing  in  the  most  unqualified  man- 
ner the  general  desire  of  the  people  for  the  restoration  of  the  Union. 
Many  thousands  would  gladly  at  once  renew  their  obligations  to  its  sup- 
port did  I encourage  it.  Four  hundred  of  our  prisoners  of  war  have 
voluntarily  taken  the  oath  of  allegiance,  and  there  are  manifestations 
of  various  kinds  which  show  that  the  spirit  of  the  rebellion  and  the 
supremacy  of  the  Confederacy  has  passed  from  the  minds  of  this  people. 
There  is  an  excellent  opportunity,  by  a wise  and  conciliatory  policy,  to 
realize,  in  this  quarter  at  least,  the  most  sanguine  expectations  ot  the 

President.  _ _ ,, 

On  the  march  to  this  point  I ordered  the  arrest  of  ex-Governor  Mou- 
ton  who  occupied  the  gubernatorial  chair  in  1845  and  subsequently . 
He  is  a man  of  large  influence  and  intelligence,  and  has  wielded  with 
an  iron  hand  his  power  over  the  masses  of  the  people  in  this  part  of 
the  country.  He  was  president  of  the  Convention  that  declared  Louis- 
iana to  have  separated  from  the  Union.  His  influence  is  still  impor- 
tant, and  at  a time  when  the  sentiment  of  the  people  was  in  transition 
from  acquiescence  in  the  Confederate  Government  to  a recognition  and 
renewal  of  their  obligations  to  the  Union  it  seemed  important  that  such 
a man  should  at  least  be  quiet.  I have  therefore  ordered  him  to  New 
Orleans  in  the  custody  of  the  provost-marshal-general,  with  instruc- 
tions to  that  officer  to  provide  him  comfortable  quarters,  but  not  allow 
general  intercourse  with  the  people  of  the  city,  where  he  will  remain 
until  further  orders  from  the  Government  of  the  United  States.  This 
is  the  only  arrest  made,  except  for  crime. 

The  inclosed  dispatch  to  the  Secretary  of  State  1 beg  may  be  trans- 
mitted to  his  Department.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commander -in-  Chief  of  the  Army  of  the  United  States. 


No.  18.1  Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Opelousas , La.,  May  5,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  First  Lieut.  0.  S.  Sargent,  act- 
ing aide  de-camp  of  my  stall',  whom  I sent  up  on  the  Cornie,  on  the 
afternoon  of  the  3d  instant,  to  communicate  with  Admiral  Farragut, 
returned  early  this  morning,  bringing  dispatches  from  Admiral  Porter, 
and  the  gratifying  intelligence  that  he  had  captured  Grand  Gulf;  had 
then  joined  Admiral  Farragut  with  four  iron-clads,  and  was  then  about 
to  start  with  his  iron-clads  and  ours  to  Alexandria.  Grant  was  on  the 
Mississippi  side,  above  Grand  Gulf,  with  36,000  men  ; had  had  a suc- 
cessful engagement  with  the  enemy,  and  was  expecting  to  be  re-enforced 
by  Sherman  (W.  T.)  to  50,000. 

Admiral  Porter  brought  with  him  to  the  Red  River  the  iron-clads 
Benton,  Pittsburg,  Price,  and  La  Fayette.  Admiral  Farragut  has 

* See  of  same  date,  and  Chase  to  Stanton,  May  28, 1863,  in  Series  III. 


312 


VV.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

already  the  flag-ship  Hartford,  the  gunboat  Albatross,  and  the  ram 
Switzerland.  Two  of  our  gunboats — the  Estrella  and  Arizona,  which 
I sent  up  the  Atchafalaya — are  also  with  the  admiral. 

Our  advance  marched  on  Alexandria  yesterday  morning  and  the 
main  body  moved  this  morning.  I had  previously  given  orders  to 
break  up  our  depots  on  the  Teche  and  Gourtableau,  expecting  to  have 
our  communications  by  the  Atchafalaya  and  Red  River.  I anticipate 
but  little  serious  resistance  to  our  advance.  Our  naval  force  is  suffi- 
cient to  destroy  that  of  the  enemy,  who,  inferior  in  numbers  and  broken 
down  in  morale , will  not,  I think,  attempt  to  make  a stand  against  us. 
If  he  does. we  shall  beat  him.  Providence  once  more  smiles  upon  our 
arms. 

I have  the  painful  duty  of  reporting  the  murder  of  Capt.  Howard 
Dwight,  assistant  adjutant- general,  serving  at  these  headquarters,  by 
a party  of  guerrillas  yesterday  afternoon,  while  riding  to  the  front  to 
join  the  advance.  1 have  ordered  Brigadier- General  Dwight,  com- 
manding the  advance,  to  arrest  100  of  the  white  male  persons  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  scene  of  the  murder  and  to  send  them  to  New  Orleans, 
there  to  be  kept  in  close  confinement  as  hostages  for  the  delivery  of 
the  assassins  into  the  hands  of  the  military  authorities  of  the  United 
States.  The  people  of  the  neighborhood  who  harbor  and  feed  these 
lawless  men  are  even  more  directly  responsible  for  the  crimes  which 
they  commit,  and  it  is  by  punishing  them  that  this  detestable  practice 
will  be  stopped.  Retaliation  by  executing  great  numbers  of  our  pris- 
oners does  not  meet  the  case,  for,  aside  from  graver  objections,  these 
are,  in  our  case,  men  tired  of  war  and  anxious,  at  the  first  opportunity, 
to  lay  down  their  arms,  and  in  many  cases  even  by  taking  the  oath  of 
allegiance,  to  escape  from  further  service.  To  retaliate  upon  them 
would  be  a greater  injury  to  us  than  to  the  enemy,  who,  indeed,  is  in 
the  habit  of  holding  out  the  prospect  of  maltreatment  by  us  as  an  in- 
ducement to  his  men  not  to  desert. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief \ Washington , I).  C. 

[Inclosure.] 

El ag- Ship  Benton,  May  4,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen:  N.  P.  Banks, 

Comdg.  Nineteenth  Corps.,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf : 

General  : I shall  start  from  here  in  an  hour  for  Alexandria,  and 
will  co-operate  with  you  with  a large  force  of  gunboats.  I have  just 
left  Grand  Gulf.  The  batteries  there  (very  heavy  ones)  fell  into  our 
hands  after  a hard  fight  with  the  gunboats  of  five  and  a half  hours. 

General  Grant  was  on  the  Mississippi  side  with  36,000  men  and  much 
artillery.  He  was  driving  the  rebels  before  him  when  I left ; had  sent 
in  400  prisoners  and  captured  six  guns.  He  had  a fight,  in  which  the 
rebels  lost  many  killed  and  wounded. 

Sherman  will  pass  over  into  Mississippi  in  a day  or  two,  and  our 
effective  force  is  or  will  be  50,000  men.  The  taking  of  Vicksburg  is  a 
mere  matter  of  time.  They  will  likely  evacuate  it. 

I remain,  respect-full v, 

DAVID  D.  PORTER, 

Acting  Bear- Admiral. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


313 


ILdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  Armv  Corps, 
Alexandria , La .,  May  8,  1863. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  our  advance,  consist- 
ing of  Dwight’s  and  Weitzel’s  brigades,  preceded  by  cavalry,  arrived  at 
tins  place  yesterday  afternoon  and  evening,  two  days  before  I had  prom- 
ised Admiral  Farragut  to  be  here.  Dwight’s  brigade  inarched  from 
Washington  on  the  4th  instant,  making  the  march  of  about  84  miles 


Grover’s  division  marched  from  Barre’s  Landing,  about  11  miles  from 
Washington  and  95  miles  from  Alexandria,  at  1 o’clock  on  the  after- 
noon of  the  5th,  and  encamped  on  the  evening  of  the  6th  35  miles  from 

Barre’s  Landing.  . „ ^ ^ , 

1 left  Opelousas  at  6 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  6th,  made  my 
headquarters  with  Grover’s  division  that  night,  and  arrived  here  at  7 
o’clock  last  evening,  just  before  the  infantry  entered  the  town. 

la  celerity  and  unity  of  movement  the  march  left  nothing  to  be  de- 
sired. Moving  after  the  column  and  passing  it,  I had  ample  opportunity , 
personally  and  through  my  staff  officers,  to  observe  the  rear  of  each 
division,  and  am  happy  to  say  that  there  was  not  the  least  appearance 
of  straggling  or  disorder  in  any  portion  of  the  command. 

Admiral  Porter  arrived  off  the  town  yesterday  morning  with  his  four 
iron -clads,  the  ram  Switzerland,  and  our  gunboats— the  Estrella  and 

Arizona.  ^ . 

No  opposition  was  made  to  our  movement.  Before  leaving  Opelousas 
I communicated  with  Major-General  Grant,  who  is  now  concentrating 
his  forces  at  Grand  Gulf,  and  informed  him,  in  answer  to  his  inquiries, 
that  I would  meet  him  at  Bayou  Sara  probably  on  the  25th  instant, 
but  certainly  by  the  1st  proximo. 

The  enemy  has  withdrawn  his  broken  forces  to  Shreveport.  I should 
be  glad  to  follow  him  to  that  point  and  complete  his  entire  destruction  j 
but,  tempting  as  this!  movement  is,  it  would  occupy  too  much  time, 
which  can  be  more  advantageously  used  in  another  enterprise  nearer 
at  hand  and  more  decisive  in  its  results.  The  destruction  of  his  trans- 
ports and  his  only  remaining  gunboats— the  Wrebb,  Mary  T.,  and  Grand 
Duke— can  be  accomplished  hereafter.  They  are  now  so  hemlned  in 
that  they  cannot  escape  us.  The  Bed  Biver  is  now  falling,  and  will  be 
soon  so  low  that  they  cannot  descend  it.*  Admiral  Porter  says  the 
Webb  is  much  injured  in  consequence  of  her  fight  with  the  Indianola, 
and  that  the  Grand  Duke  and  Mary  T.  are  cotton-clads. 

Very  respectfully,  general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

J N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief, \ Washington , J).  C. 


No.  20.]  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  Army  Corps, 

Alexandria , Xa.,  May  11,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  annex,  for  your  information,  the  copy  of  a 
cipher  message  which  I received  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  instant 
from  Major-General  Grant,  but  which,  not  having  the  key,  1 was  com- 


314 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

pelled  to  send  to  the  superintendent  of  telegraphs  at  New  Iberia  for 
translation.  I did  not  ascertain  the  purport  of  it  untd  late  that  night: 

[April  14.] 

To  Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks: 

Am  concentrating  my  forces  at  Grand  Gulf.  Will  send  an  army  corps  to  Bayou 
Sara  by  the  25th  to  co-operate  with  you  on  Port  Hudson.  Can  you  aid  me  and  send 
troops  after  the  reduction  of  Port  Hudson  to  assist  me  at  Vicksburg? 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-  General. 

This  was  without  date.  I replied  early  on  the  following  morning 
(May  6),  having  no  means  of  putting  my  dispatch  in  cipher,  as  follows: 

By  the  25th,  probably ; by  the  1st,  certainly,  I will  be  there. 

This  dispatch  I forwarded  by  steamer  to  Admiral  Farragut,  who 
immediately  sent  it  to  General  Grant.  I inferred  from  this  dispatch  of 
General  Grant7s  that  he  would  postpone  his  attack  upon,  Vicksburg 
until  after  the  fall  of  Port  Hudson,  but  Admirals  Farragut  and  Porter 
are  both  decided  in  the  opinion  that  he  is  already  moving  upon  Vicks- 
burg ; but  upon  re-examination  of  the  general’s  dispatch  I do  not  think 
this  possible.  If  it  is  the  case,  the  co-operation  which  I had  counted 
upon  may  fail.  However  that  may  be,  I shall  move  from  this  point 
upon  Port  Hudson  as  soon  as  our  transportation  and  supplies,  which 
must  be  already  on  the  way,  reach  us  through  the  Atchafalaya. 

The  choice  is  between  following  the  enemy  to  Shreveport  and  operat-  s 
ing  upon  Port  Hudson.  I regard  the  latter  as  offering  in  all  respects 
the  most  decided  advantage,  and  as  within  the  line  of  my  instructions. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major - General , Commanding . 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  8.  Army . 


No.  21.]  Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Alexandria , May  12,  1863. 

General  : First  Lieutenant  Crosby,  of  my  staff,  whom  I have  sent 
to  communicate  with  the  Hartford  and  General  Grant,  returned  this 
morning  with  one  of  General  Grant’s  aides,  whom  he  met  near  Natchez, 
bearing  the  dispatch  of  which  I inclose  a copy.  I also  inclose  a copy 
of  a dispatch,  received  at  the  same  time,  from  Captain  Palmer,  of  the 
Navy,  commanding  the  Hartford. 

From  this  dispatch  of  General  Grant  it  is  plain  that  he  has  abandoned 
all  idea  of  co-operating  with  me  upon  Port  Hudson  until  after  the  fall 
of  Vicksburg.  In  the  cipher  dispatch  received  from  him  at  Opelousas, 
a copy  of  which  you  will  find  in  No.  20,  he  said : 

Will  send  an  army  corps  to  Bayon  Sara  by  the  25th  to  co-operate  with  you  on  Port 
Hudson. 

I replied : 

By  the  25th,  probably  ; by  the  1st,  certainly,  I will  be  them. 

In  his  dispatch  of  the  10th  instant  the  general  says : 

It  was  my  intention,  on  gaining  a foothold  at  Grand  Gulf,  to  have  sent  a sufficient 
force  to  Port  Hudson  to  have  insured  the  fall  of  that  place  with  your  co-operation,  or 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


315 


rather  to  have  co-operated  with  you  to  secure  that  end.  Meeting  the  enemy  how- 
ever as  I did,  south  of  Port  Gibson,  I followed  him  to  the  Big  Black,  and  could  not 
afford  to  retrace  my  steps.  * * * Many  days  cannot  elapse  before  the  battle  will 

begin  which  is  to  decide  the  fate  of  Vicksburg,  but  it  is  impossible  to  predict  how 
lon«-  it  may  last.  I would  urgently  request  therefore  that  you  join  me  or  send  all 
the  iorce  you  can  spare  to  co-operate  in  the  great  struggle  for  opening  the  Mississippi 
River. 


It  would  be  utterly  impossible  for  me  to  join  General  Grant  before 
Vicksburg.  I have  not  the  transportation  to  do  so,  and  if  I had,  to 
take  my  men  to  him  would  involve,  besides  the  abandonment  of  our 
trains  and  all  of  the  negroes,  horses,  mules,  cotton,  and  supplies  that 
we  have  collected  in  this  country,  the  probable  loss  of  New  Orleans  in 
any  event,  and  its  certain  fall  in  case  of  disaster  to  us  above.  I cannot 
leave  Port  Hudson  and  Mobile  in  my  rear. 

Had  General  Grant  aided  me  to  take  Port  Hudson,  our  forces  united 
could  have  compelled  the  fall  of  Vicksburg  sooner  than  I think  he  will 
be  able  to  do  it  alone,  and  an  operation  which  is  now  uncertain  would 
have  been  rendered  certain. 

As  Grant’s  troops  are  not  to  be  at  Bayou  Sara  I cannot  get  transpor- 
tation enough  to  cross  my  trains  at  that  point.  After  reaching  the 
Mississippi  opposite  Bayou  Sara  with  a force  which,  reduced  by  the 
immense  and  incessant  marches  we  have  made  and  would  have  still  to 
make,  would  then  be  inferior  to  that  of  the  enemy,  my  only  chance 
would  be  to  cross  the  river  with  five  days’  rations,  .and  endeavor  to 
establish  communications  with  Baton  Bouge.  We  should  have  to  place 
everything  upon  remote  contingencies,  which  failing  would  destroy  us. 

I am  reluctantly  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  now  only  one 
thing  left  us— to  retrace  our  steps  to  Baton  Bouge  over  the  400  miles 
that  we  have  come  and  to  operate  upon  Port  Hudson  unaided.  I shall 


do  that  at  once. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 


servant, 


N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major  - General , Commanding. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief , Washington , D.  C. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 
Rocky  Springs,  Miss.,  May  10,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

General:  My  advance  will  occupy  to-day  Utica,  Auburn,  and  a 
point  equally  advanced  toward  the  Mississippi  Southern  Bailroad  be- 
tween the  latter  place  and  the  Big  Black.  It  was  my  intention,  on 
gaining  a foothold  at  Grand  Gulf,  to  have  sent  a sufficient  force  to  Port 
Hudson  to  have  insured  the  fall  of  that  place  with  your  co-operation 
or  rather  to  have  co-operated  with  you  to  secure  that  end. 

Meeting  the  enemy,  however,  as  I did,  south  of  Port  Gibson,  I fol- 
lowed him  to  the  Big  Black,  and  could  not  afford  to  retrace  my  steps. 
I also  learned,  and  believe  the  information  to  be  reliable,  that  Port 
Hudson  is  almost  entirely  evacuated.  This  may  not  be  true,  but  it  is 
the  concurrent  testimony  of  deserters  and  contrabands. 

Many  days  cannot  elapse'  before  the  battle  will  begin  which  is  to 
decide  the  fate  of  Vicksburg,  but  it  is  impossible  to  predict  how  long 
it  may  last.  I would  urgently  request  therefore  that  you  join  me  or 


31 G 


W.  FLA.,  8.  ALA.,  S.  MISSV  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII 

send  all  the  force  you  can  spare  to  co-operate  in  the  great  struggle  for 
opening  the  Mississippi  River. 

My  means  of  gaining  information  from  Port  Hudson  are  not  good,  but 
I shall  hope,  even  before  this  reaches  Baton  Rouge,  to  hear  of  your 
forces  being  on  the  way  here. 

Grierson’s  cavalry  would  be  of  immense  service  to  me  now,  and  if  at 
all  practicable  for  him  to  join  me  I would  like  to  have  him  do  it  at 
once. 

For  fear  of  this  accidentally  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  I 
will  not  communicate  to  you  my  force. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major - General. 


[ Inclosure  No.  2.] 


United  States  Steamer  Hartford, 

Off  Bed  River , May  11,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf: 


.My  Dear  General:  The  admiral,  as  you  are  aware,  has  left  me  in 
command  here  and  gone  down  to  New  Orleans.  1 have  also  four  gun- 
boats with  me  ; two  of  them,  the  Arizona  and  Switzerland,  are  up  the 
river,  and  the  Albatross  and  Estrella  are  with  me.  Your  aide,  Lieu- 
tenant Crosby,  will  tell  you  of  our  affairs  here.  It  is  very  certain  that 
there  are  not  over  10.000  men  at  Port  Hudson,  and  from  many  sources 
we  hear  that  they  are  about  to  evacuate ; that  they  have  already,  we 
hear,  sent  away  two  of  their  heaviest  guns  and  are  very  much  strait- 
ened in  provisions.  A demonstration  upon  them  would,  I think,  insure 
their  evacuation. 

It  seems  now  that  General  Grant  can  send  you  no  re -enforcements. 
If  you  intend  coming  down,  and  I can  be  of  any  assistance,  I will  cheer- 
fully remain  to  assist  in  the  attack  upon  Port  Hudson ; but  if  this  be 
not  your  intention  for  the  present,  I shall  within  the  coming  fort- 
night run  the  blockade  some  favorable  night  and  join  the  fleet  below, 
as  the  admiral  is  very  anxious  for  me  to  come  down. 

I send  you  seven  refugees,  who  are  very  anxious  to  join  your  army. 
They  are  very  violent  Union  men,  and  may  be  of  some  service  to  you 
as  pioneers. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  S.  PALMER, 

Commodore. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  Of  the  Gulf,  10th  Army  Corps, 
Alexandria , La .,  May  12,  1863. 


General  : A dispatch  received  this  morning  from  Major-General 
Grant,  dated  at  Auburn,  May  10,  requests  me  to  join  him  at  Vicksburg. 
I regret  to  say  it  is  out  of  my  power  to  do  so.  I have  neither  land  nor 
water  transportation  which  will  enable  me  to  move  my  command  up 
the  river,  or  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  in  time  or  in  force  to  be  of 
service  to  him.  This  movement,  if  it  were  practicable,  would  leave  all 
my  trains  and  stores  to  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  the  entire  fruits  of  this 
campaign,  and  uncover  New  Orleans  to  the  enemy  in  case  of  disaster. 
But  I would  hazard  all  risks  if  it  were  within  human  power  to  accom- 


Chap.  XXVII.  1 OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA.  317 

plisli  the  junction  of  forces  at  that  point,  for  I am  perishing  to  see  a con- 
centration of  our  armies  against  the  strong  places  of  the  enemy. 

I inclose  a copy  of  my  answer  to  General  Grant  upon  this  subject.  I 
have  also  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  a letter  addressed  to  the  Sec- 
retary of  State,*  which  it  was  my  intention  should  pass  through  your 
office,  but  which  possibly  may  have  been  sent  direct  by  mail  to  its 
address. 

I believe  the  enemy  to  be  concentrating  a force  from  Arkansas  of 
some  6,000  or  7,000  men  and  a small  column  from  Texas  at  Shreveport 
to  strengthen  General  Taylor.  The  troops  from  Arkansas  will  move 
from  the  Arkansas  River,  by  the  way  of  Monroe,  to  Shreveport,  possibly 
to  follow  the  Red  River  down  to  Grand  Ecore,  4 miles  above  Natchi- 
toches, where  they  propose  to  fortify. 

My  advance  is  nearly  60  miles  above  Alexandria  at  this  time.  The 
truth  of  this  report  we  shall  very  soon  know.  It  is  not  practicable  for 
me  to  follow  the  retreating  enemy  to  Shreveport.  I do  not  know  that 
anything  is  left  me  but  to  direct  my  forces  against  Port  Hudson  with 
what  success  I may  have.  1 hope  to  be  able  to  communicate  my  move- 
ments by  the  next  steamer. 

Captain  Palmer,  commanding  the  ship  Hartford,  has  notified  me  that 
the  admiral  directs  him  to  remove  his  fleet  below  Port  Hudson,  which 
would  add  to  the  difficulty  of  any  effort  I might  make  to  join  General 
Grant  at  Vicksburg.  I have  urged  the  admiral  to  countermand  this 
order  for  the  present,  and  hope  it  may  be  done. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  with  sincere  respect,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding . 

Major-General  Halle ck, 

Commander-in-Cliief  IT.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C. 


[Inclosure.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  Army  Corps, 
Alexandria , La.j  May  12,  1863 — 8 a.  m. 

Major-General  Grant, 

Commanding  Forces  before  Vicksburg  : 

General  : Your  dispatch  of  the  10th  instant  I received  by  the  hand  of 
Captain  [H.  A.]  Ulffers  this  morning  at  6.30.  I regret  to  say  that  it  is 
impossible  for  me  to  join  you  at  Vicksburg  in  time  or  with  force  to  be  of 
service  to  you  in  any  immediate  attack.  I have  neither  water  nor  land 
transportation  to  make  the  movement  by  the  river  or  by  laud.  The 
utmost  I can  accomplish  is  to  cross  for  the  purpose  of  operating  with 
you  against  Port  Hudson.  I could  cross  my  infantry  and  artillery 
without  transportation,  receiving  supplies  from  Baton  Rouge,  in  the 
rear  of  Port  Hudson.  That  is  the  utmost  I can  accomplish  on  the 
other  side  of  the  Mississippi  above  Port  Hudson.  Were  it  within  the 
range  of  human  power  I should  join  you,  for  I am  dying  with  a kind 
of  vanishing  hope  to  see  two  armies  acting  together  against  the  strong 
places  of  the  enemy.  But  I must  say,  without  qualifications,  that  the 
means  at  my  disposal  do  not  leave  me  a shadow  of  a chance  to  accom- 
plish it.  I have  been  making  preparations  to  join  your  corps  at  Bayou 
Sara,  and  though  this  would  have  laid  all  my  trains  and  supplies  open 
to  the  enemy’s  cavalry  I should  have  risked  it. 


Probably  that  of  May  4. 


318 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

We  believe  that  a force  of  about  7,000  of  the  enemy  has  left  Arkansas 
Eiver  to  join  Kirby  Smith  at  Shreveport,  leaving  the  Washita  at  Pine 
Bluff,  near  Monroe;  then  to  come  down  the  Bed  Biver  to  Grand  Ecore, 
above  Natchitoches,  where  they  are  fortifying  in  strong  position.  There 
is  undoubtedly  a Texan  column  on  the  road  to  join  them.  My  advance 
is  now  60  miles  above  Alexandria.  The  only  course  for  me,  failing  in 
co-operation  with  you,  is  to  regain  the  Mississippi  and  attack  Port 
Hudson  or  to  move  against  the  enemy  at  Shreveport.  Port  Hudson 
is  reduced  in  force,  but  not  as  you  are  informed.  It  has  now  10,000 
men  and  is  very  strongly  fortified.  This  is  the  report  of  Admiral  Far- 
ragut,  whose  fleet  is  above  and  below  the  works. 

I regret  very  much  my  inability  to  join  you.  I have  written  Colonel 
Grierson  that  you  desire  him  to  join  you,  and  have  added  my  own 
request  to  yours.  Captain  Ulffers  goes  to  Baton  Bouge  to  communicate 
with  him. 

Wishing  you  all  possible  success,  and  feeling  that  you  have  all  the 
prayers  of  our  people,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  sincere  respect, 
your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Alexandria , La .,  May  13,  1863. 

Contrary  to  my  dispatches  of  yesterday,  thorough  reconnaissances 
made  by  Major  Houston  and  Lieutenant  Harwood  satisfy  me  that  it  is 
possible  for  my  command  to  loin  General  Grant  at  Vicksburg.*  I shall 
make  every  sacrifice  and  hazard  everything  to  accomplish  this  object 
with  the  least  possible  delay,  believing  that  the  concentration  of  our 
armies  is  the  vital  point  necessary  for  the  success  of  our  cause. 

My  command  will  move  to  Simmesport  to-day,  making  that  the  basis 
of  our  operations,  and  hope  to  reach  Grand  Gulf  by  the  aid  of  such 
transports  as  we  can  command  and  the  naval  vessels  now  in  the  Mis- 
sissippi. 

Brigadier- General  Weitzel,  in  command  of  the  division  on  the  Shreve- 
port road  (nearly  70  miles  above  Alexandria),  reports  that  the  retreat- 
ing forces  of  the  enemy  is  reduced  to  about  1,200  men  and  that  the 
expectation  of  an  increase  of  their  forces  from  Arkansas  and  Texas 
has  no  substantial  foundation.  This  relieves  our  apprehension  hitherto 
entertained  from  that  quarter.  I send  this  by  telegraph  to  reach  the 
mail  steamer.  $ 

We  hear  reports  that  the  force  from  General  Hunter’s  command  is 
on  its  way  and  hope-  it  is  true.  It  will  relieve  our  fears  as  to  New 
Orleans. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Major-General  Halleck,  Washington , D.  C. 


■ -A 

[For  General  Banks’  report,  covering  operations  December  16,  1862- 
J uly  8,  1863,  see  Series  I,  Vol.  XXVI.]  • 

* Bee  also  Banks  to  Farragut  and  Grant  same  date  in  “ Correspondence,  etc yost% 


Chap.  XXVII.]  OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA.  3 1 9 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  at  Fort  Bisland  ( Bethel  Place  or  Bayou 
Teche),  La,,  April  12-13,  1863. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Command. 


12th  Connecticut  Infantry 

1st  Indiana  Heavy  Artillery 

1st  Louisiana  Cavalry 

Maine  Light  Artillery,  1st  Battery 

Massachusetts  Light  Artillery,  6th  Battery. 

31st  Massachusetts  Infantry . . . 

38th  Massachusetts  Infantry 

53d  Massachusetts  Infantry 

8lh  New  Hampshire  Infantry 

New  York  Light  Artillery,  18th  Battery. . . 

75th  New  York  Infantry 

l]4th  New  York  Infantry  

133d  New  York  Infantry 

156th  New  York  Infantry 

160th  New  York  Infantry 

173d  New  York  Infantry 

175th  New  York  Infantry 

8th  Vermont  Infantry 

4th  Wisconsin  Infantry 

1st  IJ.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  A 

1st  TJ.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  F 


Total. 


Killed. 


37 


Wounded. 


8 176 


224 


Officers  killed.— Capt.  Samuel  Gault,  Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts  ; Lieut.  George  G.  Nutting,  Fifty- 
third  Massachusetts ; Lieut.  John  T.  Freer,  One  hundred  and  Fifty-sixth  New  York. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  at  Irish  Bend,  La.,  April  14,  1863. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  <fcc.] 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

1 Officers. 

1 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

13th  Connecticut  Infantry 

7 

4 

43 

54 

25th  Connecticut  Infantry 

2 

7 

5 

72 

10 

66 

22d  Maine  Infantry 

1 

1 

26th  Maine  Infantry 

11 

2 

48 

61 

91st  New  York  Infantrv 

2 

1 

10 

13 

131st  New  York  Infantry 

3 

3 

159th  New  York  Infantry 

4 

15 

5 

73 

20 

117 

2d  TJ.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  C 

1 

7 

8 

Total 

6 

43 

17 

257 

30 

353 

Officers  killed. — Capt.  Samuel  S.  Hayden  and  Liont.  Daniel  P.  Dewey,  Twenty-fifth  Connecticut; 
Lieut.  Col.  Gilbert  A.  Draper,  Li euts.  Robert  D.  Lathrop,  John  W.  Manley,  and  Byron  F.  Lockwood, 
One  hundred  and  fifty-ninth  New  York. 


320 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Richard  Arnold , U.  S.  Army , Chief  of  Artillery 
Nineteenth  Army  Corps,  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

Office  Chief  of  Arty.,  Hdqrs.  19th  Army  Corps, 

Opelousas , La.,  April  23,  1863. 

Colonel:  In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  100,  from  Head- 
quarters of  the  Department,  of  fhe  21st  instant,  I have  the  honor  to 
present  the  following  report  of  the  operations  of  the  artillery  of  this 
command,  which  came  directly  under  my  observation,  from  the  time  of 
its  departure  from  Brash  ear  City  up  to  its  arrival  at  this  place,  but 
more  especially  the  part  it  performed  in  the  engagement  of  the  12th 
and  13th  instant  at  Fort  Bisland  and  the  enemy’s  intrenchments: 

The  main  column,  consisting  of  General  Emory’s  division,  to  which 
Captain  Duryea’s  battery,  Company  F,  First  IT.  S.  Artillery,  and  Brad- 
bury’s First  Maine,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Haley,  were  attached, 
and  General  Weitzel’s  brigade,  with  Captain  Bainbridge’s  company  (A), 
First  U.  S.  Artillery,  Carruth’s  Sixth  Massachusetts  Battery,  and  a re- 
serve of  heavy  artillery,  of  four  30-pounder  and  four  20-pounder  Par- 
rotts, and  two  12-pounder  rifled  guns,  manned  by  the  Twenty-first  In- 
diana Artillery,  under  Col.  J,  W.  McMillan,  and  the  Eighteenth  New 
York  Battery,  of  four  20-pounder  Parrotts,  under  Captain  Mack,  crossed 
Berwick  Bay  on  the  10th  instant. 

General  Grover’s  division,  to  which  Captain  Closson’s  company  (L), 
First  U.  S.  Artillery,  Nims’  Second  Massachusetts  Battery,  and  Lieu- 
tenant lloilgers’  company  (C),  Second  U.  S.  Artillery,  were  attached, 
formed  an  independent  command,  and  moved  by  water  from  Brashear 
City  to  Grand  Lake  and  disembarked  at  Indian  Bend. 

The  inclosed  report  of  each  commander  will  show  the  part  performed 
by  each  battery  of- this  command  until  their  arrival  at  New  Iberia,  as 
also  the  report  of  the  division  commander. 

The  main  column  moved  from  Berwick  City  on  the  11th  instant,  and, 
with  the  exception  of  skirmishing  with  the  enemy,  nothing  of  impor- 
tance occurred  until  4 p.  m.  on  the  12th  instant,  when  Captain  Bain- 
bridge’s battery,  in  advance,  became  seriously  engaged  near  the  enemy’s 
line  of  intrenchments,  and,  although  exposed  to  a severe  fire  from  their 
batteries,  nobly  maintained  his  position  until  near  dark,  but  not  without 
considerable  loss. 

On  the  following  morning,  the  13th  instant,  the  heavy, artillery  were 
disposed  for  the  attack  as  follows : Two  30-pounder  Parrotts  were  posted 
on  our  extreme  left,  having  a direct  fire  on  the  general  line  of  intrench- 
ments, an  oblique  fire  on  what  appeared  to  me  to  be  the  key  of  their 
position,  and  a bearing  on  the  gunboat  Diana,  just  visible* in  position 
along  the  bank  of  the  river,  with  her  guns  trained  to  command  the  right 
flank  of  our  approach.  The  third  and  fourth  shots  from  this  battery, 
at  a distance  of  over  2,000  yards,  completely  disabled  the  Diana  and 
forced  her  to  retire  up  the  river  out  of  range,  and  she  was  not  engaged 
again  during  the  day. 

Two  12-pounder  rifled  guns,  under  command  of  Captain  Cox,  Twenty- 
first  Indiana  Artillery,  were  placed  in  the  left  center  until  late  in  the 
afternoon,  when  they  were  advanced  to  the  front  and  attached  to  Gen- 
eral Weitzel’s  brigade  and  performed  most  excellent  service. 

The  Eighteenth  New  York  Battery,  under  Captain  Mack,  was  first 
posted  in  the  right  center,  but  subsequently  moved  to  the  front  and 
attached  to  Paine’s  brigade  at  the  request  of  General  Emory.  In  this 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


321 


last  position  it  performed  most  admirable  service,  and  delivered  its  fire 
with  astonishing  accuracy  and  effect  under  a galling,  direct,  and  cross- 
fire from  the  enemy,  silencing  the  battery  in  its  front  in  a very  short 
time.  Too  much  praise  cannot  be  bestowed  upon  this  command  in  this 
their  first  engagement. 

Two  20-pounder  Parrott  guns  were  also  placed  on  the  right,  and  did 
good  service  against  the  enemy’s  heavy  gun  in  front  and  a battery  on 
the  opposite  bank  of  the  bayou. 

There  were  also  held  in  reserve,  and  placed  in  the  most  advanta- 
geous position  on  the  river  bank,  two  30-pounder  and  two  20-pounder 
Parrotts,  to  watch  the  movements  of  the  Diana  and  to  protect  the 
flanks,  resting  on  both  banks  of  the  river. 

For  the  conduct  of  the  First  Maine  Battery,  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  river,  I must  refer  you  to  Colonel  Gooding’s  report  and  the  accom- 
panying report  of  the  battery  commander. 

At  10  a.  m.  the  fire  of  the  heavy  artillery  became  general  throughout 
the  line  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  directed  at  all  parts  of  the 
enemy’s  line,  and  continued,  with  slight  intermission,  owing  to  a cessa- 
tion on  the  part  of  the  enemy  and  the  frequent  changes  of  the  light 
batteries,  for  seven  hours  with  accuracy  and  effect,  as  the  number  of 
dead  horses,  dismantled  guns,  in  the  rear  of  the  enemy’s  works  and 
the  number  of  wounded  with  cannon  shot  in  the  hospital  at  Franklin 
attest. 

All  of  the  light  batteries  were  attached  to  the  columns  of  attack  and 
under  the  direct  orders  of  their  respective  commanders.  To  them  and 
the  accompanying  reports  of  each  captain  would  I respectfully  refer  for 
the  conduct  of  their  commands  and  the  effect  of  their  fire. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  expressing  my  great  acknowledg- 
ments to  First  Lieut.  J . S.  Crosby,  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  my  assistant, 
for  his  invaluable  services  in  posting  and  superintending  the  heavy 
batteries  on  the  left  and  right.  To  him  also  must  be  attributed  in 
great  part  the  creditable  conduct  of  the  Eighteenth  New  York  Bat- 
tery, under  whose  untiring  zeal  and  industry  it  has  in  the  short  period 
of  three  months  been  brought  to  so  high  a state  of  efficiency. 

Herewith  I inclose  a list  of  the  casualties  in  the  artillery  up  to  the 
present  time.* 


Wounded:  Officers,  1;  privates,  26;  total,  27.  Killed : Privates,  6.  Grand  total,  33. 


Battery. 

Horses. 

Carriages. 

Remarks. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Injured. 

Lost. 

A,  1st  Light  Artillery 

5 

10 

2 

6th  Massachusetts 

5 

1st  Maine 

J 

1 

TJpset  in  crossing  river. 

F,  1st  Artillery 

2 

1 

18th  New  York 

1 

1 

L,  1st  Artillery.. 

2 

1 



I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

• RICHAED  ARNOLD, 

T . Brigadier-  General , Chief  of  Staff, 

Lieut.  Col.  Bichard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps . 


* Nominal  list  omitted. 


21  R R — VOL  XV 


322 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chap.  XXVIL 


No.  3. 


Revort  of  Cant.  William  W.  Carruth,  Sixth  Massachusetts  Battery,  of 
engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 


Headquarters  Sixth  Massachusetts  Battery, 

Camp,  near  Opelousas,  La.,  April  21, 1863. 

Sir  • I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Saturday,  April  11,  this  bat- 

tery  under  my  command,  in  the  brigade  of  General  Godfrey  Weiteel 
commenced  its  march  from  Berwick  City.  One  sectmn  of  ^e  battery 

th?  intrenched  guns  of  the  enemy  and  the  gunboat  Diana.  Having 

were6  killed^  and  one  caisson,  afterward  repaired,  was  put  hors  de 
C0Mondav  I again  moved  to  the  front,  and  after  some  firing  about  the 


svrs’.b.  sus*  rss 


as*I  could  Tudge,  quite'  accurate  and  effective.  We  remained  in  this 
position  till  near  the  close  of  the  day,  when,  for  want  of  ammunition,  I 

W During  the  night  the  ammunition-chests  were  replenished,  and  carly 
Tuesday  morning  I moved,  in  company  with  Captain  Bainbndge  to 
flip  head  of  the  column,  in  pursuit  ot  the  retreating  enemy.  Since 
then^there  have  been  one  or  more  guns  daily  with  the  advance  guard, 
enjoying  an  occasional  shot  at  the  rear  guard  the  enemy. 

The  following  are  the  losses  of  the  battery:  Killed,  Private  John  B. 
^/r  ulni  Artril  IS-  wounded.  Privates  Prank  A.  Gusliee  (slightly), 
[FerSdf Buchler  (slightly),  and  Stanley  (slightly).  Three  horses 

ki  Credit  is  due  to  First  Lieut.  John  F.  Phelps  and  Second  Lieut.  Frank 

in6  charge^of  f Son  "during  the 

aCS— and  men  was  merito- 

rious  in  the  extreme.  . 1 , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  respect, ^ ^ CABRUTH, 

Captain  Sixth  Massachusetts  Battery . 

Brig.  Gen.  Richard  Arnold,  Chief  of  Artillery. 


1 


Ko.  4. 

Report  of  Capt.  Albert  O.  Mach,  Eighteenth  New  Torh  Battery,  of  engage- 
^ ment  at  Fort  Bisland. 

“iCi -“3  fl  »• «...  April  12,  b,  Brigadier-Geueral  Arnold. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


323: 


chief  of  artillery,  to  take  a position  on  the  right  of  the  road,  which  was 
our  line  of  march,  and  shell  a sugar-house  and  the  wood  in  rear,  situ- 
ated on  the  banks  of  the  Teche,  to  protect  a pontoon  bridge  that  was 
being  thrown  across  this  bayou  at  that  point.  I opened  fire  and  fired 
several  shots  without  obtaining  any  reply  from  the  enemy,  but  dislodged 
some  guerrillas  stationed  in  a small  building,  from  whence  they  were 
annoying  the  troops  at  work  on  the  bridge.  I was  then  ordered  by 
Brigadier- General  Arnold  to  come  into  position  at  a point  about  150 
yards  nearer  the  main  road  and  in  rear  of  my  former  position,  which  I 
did,  but  did  not  come  into  action.  I was  soon  after  ordered  from  the 
field  to  resume  line  of  march. 

About  4 p.  m.  I was  ordered  by  Brigadier-General  Arnold  to  take  a 
position  between  the  bank  of  the  bayou  and  the  main  road  and  about 
1,800  yards  from  the  enemy’s  earthworks.  As  soon  as  in  position  I 
was  ordered  with  one  piece  to  a position  about  400  yards  farther  to 
the  front  to  engage  the  Diana,  and  remained  in  action  until  the  army 
retired  for  the  night. 

I was  ordered  on  the  13th,  at  about  7.30  a.  m.,  by  Brigadier-General 
Arnold  to  report  to  Brigadier- General  Paine  and  occupy  a position  to 
be  designated  by  him.  I was  ordered  by  him  to  come  into  battery,  my 
right  piece  resting  in  the  road  about  250  yards  below  the  house  burned 
by  the  enemy,  opposite  the  sugar-house,  on  the  right  of  the  road.  I 
was  here  ordered  by  General  Paine  to  open  fire  on  the  enemy  directly 
in  front,  and  I drew  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  battery  in  front,  the  gun- 
boat Diana,  and  of  a battery  of  the  enemy  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
bayou.  1 remained  in  action  about  two  hours,  when  the  enemy  ceased 
firing.  I was  then  ordered  to  the  rear  to  replenish  ammunition,  having 
expended  about  400  rounds.  Was  next  ordered  by  General  Emory  to 
again  report  to  General  Paine,  and  he  ordered  me  to  a position  just 
through  the  grove  and  about  500  yards  in  front  of  my  former  position 
and  nearer  the  enemy’s  earthworks.  I here  opened  on  the  enemy  and 
drew  their  fire  from  a battery  in  front  behind  the  earthworks,  a bat- 
tery on  the  left  near  the  wood,  and  a battery  situated  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  bayou  to  the  right.  I remained  in  action  about  one  hour, 
when  I was  ordered  by  General  Paine  to  retire.  Was  again  ordered 
by  General  Arnold  to  send  one  section  back  to  the  same  position,  whicht 

I did,  under  the  command  of  Sergeant  , Company  F,  Regular 

Army.  They  remained  in  action  about  fifteen  minutes,  when  they  were 
again  ordered  to  retire  by  General  Paine.  Was  then  ordered  to  a 
position  for  the  night  on  the  left  of  the  battle-field  and  near  the  wood, 
about  500  yards  in  rear  of  the  position  occupied  by  Bainbridge’s  bat- 
tery during  the  day. 

The  casualties  of  the  day  are  as  follows : Private  Daniel  W.  Bunnell, 
slightly  wounded  in  shoulder;  Private  Edward  D.  Mann,  severely 
wounded  in  leg,  and  a private  (name  unknown)  of  the  One  hundred 
and  fourteenth  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers  mortally  wounded 
while  carrying  ammunition  for  my  guns.  One  horse  killed  and  one 
wounded. 

My  whole  command  behaved  nobly;  not  a man  left  his  post  during 
the  day.  I have  67  rounds  of  ammunition  per  piece  and  my  battery  is 
now  ready  and  properly  equipped  for  service. 

I am,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  G.  MACK, 

Captain  Eighteenth  New  York  Battery. 

Captain  Duryea, 

Chief  of  Arty.,  Maj.  Gen „ Emory’s  l)iv.)  Vdtli  Army  Corps . 


324 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 


No.  5. 


Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Godfrey  Weitzel , U.  S.  Army , commanding  Second 
Brigade , First  Division , 0/  operations  April  2-May  11. 

Hdqes.  2d  Beig.,  1st  Div.,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf, 

Above  Opelousas , La .,  ApWZ  23,  1863. 

Sie:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  a report  of  the  recent  operations  of 

m I left  Bayou  Bceuff  on  the  night  of  the  2d  instant  for  Brashear  City 
and  encamped  until  the  9th,  when  I crossed  Berwick  Bay.  There  I 
bivouacked  in  line  of  battle  until  Saturday,  the  11th. 

Immediately  after  crossing  I sent  a reconnaissance,  under  Captain 
Hubbard,  my  assistant  adjutant- general,  consisting  of  Perkins7  and 
Williamson’s  cavalry  and  a section  of  Bainbridge’s  battery . The  enemy 
was  discovered  with  artillery  about  4 miles  off,  with  pickets  to  within 
about  1 mile  of  my  position. 

On  Saturday,  April  11,  at  12  in.,  I moved,  by  order,  skirmishing  with 
the  enemy  all  the  way,  and  bivouacked  in  line  of  battle  above  Patter- 

B°On1Sunday,  the  12th,  at  about  11  a.  m.,  moved  forward  against  the 
enemy’s  position,  skirmishing  all  the  way.  I arrived  within  range  of 
their  guns  at  about  4 p.  m.  They  opened  a little  later  from  their  works 
and  the  gunboat  Diana.  I immediately  replied  with  my  artillery,  Bain- 
bridge’s battery  on  my  right  in  the  road  and  Carruth’s  battery  near 
my  left.  I directed  my  infantry  to  lie  down  for  protection.  The  enemy’s 
fire  was  quite  severe.  My  artillery  replied  with  fine  effect.  At  about 
dusk  I fell  back  out  of  range  by  order,  and  bivouacked  in  two  lines  on 
the  left  of  Paine’s  brigade,  of  Emory’s  division. 

On  Monday,  April  13,  again  advanced  to  within  rifle  range  ot  the 
enemy’s  works,  and  engaged  him  with  my  artillery  and  skirmishers  m 
front,  and  at  the  same  time  endeavored  to  turn  his  right  flank  with  the 
Seventy-fifth  New  York,  supported  by  One  hundred  and  fourteenth 
New  York.  This  attempt  failed  in  consequence  of  the  impassable 
nature  of  the  wood.  I therefore  ordered  these  two  regiments  to  tall 
back  to  the  edge  of  the  wood  in  line  perpendicular  to  my  front,  to 
prevent  any  movement  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  to  turn  my  left  flank. 
He  was,  however,  splendidly  repulsed  by  the  Seventy-fifth  and  One 
hundred  and  fourteenth.  My  artillery  and  skirmishers  in  front  did 
splendid  execution,  and  compelled  the  enemy  not  only  to  expose  his 
whole  force  of  infantry,  but  also  to  work  his  guns  with  caution.  About 
dusk  I was  ordered  to  fall  back  a slight  distance  and  bivouac  for  the 

night.  I did  this.  „ , , 

Next  morning  at  daylight  advanced,  by  order,  on  the  enemy  s works, 
and  found  them  deserted.  Pushed  on  ahead,  and  soon  came  upon  the 
enemy’s  rear  guard,  which  consisted  of  two  or  three  pieces  of  artillery 
and  a few  cavalry.  Passed  through  Franklin  and  bivouacked  for  the 

night  about  1 mile  beyond.  . 

Marched  the  next  morning  at  6 o’clock  on  New  Iberia,  skirmishing 
all  the  way,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night  about  1 mile  below  Jeane- 
rette 

Marched  again  the  next  morning  at  6 o’clock,  skirmishing  all  the  way, 
and  bivouacked  about  2 miles  above  New  Iberia. 

Moved  on  again  the  next  morning  at  6 o’clock  without  any  skirmish- 
ing, passed  through  Saint  Martinville,  and  bivouacked  about  5 miles 
from  Vermillion  Bayou. 


Chap.  XXvn.]  OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA.  325 


Started  next  morning  and  marched  to  within  about  1 mile  of  Vermill- 
ion Bridge,  and  rested  for  the  day. 

Next  morning  at  6 o’clock  moved  on  Opelousas;  passed  through 
Vermillion  ville,  skirmishing  nearly  all  the  way,  and  bivouacked  for  the 
night  just  beyond  Carrion  Crow  Bayou. 

Next  morning,  Monday,  the  20th,  moved  on  again  at  6 o’clock ; 
passed  through  Opelousas,  and  encamped  in  my  present  position. 

Throughout  the  whole  expedition  all  of  my  officers  and  men  behaved 
in  the  most  meritorious  manner.  I did  not  see  a single  case  of  shirking. 
A portion  of  my  command  being  a distance  off  on  detached  duty  I will 
make  a supplementary  report,  mentioning  those  officers  and  men  who 
are  reported,  and  who  I think  deserve  special  mention. 

I send  herewith  a full  list  of  killed  and  wounded.* 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General,  TJ.  S.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Brigade. 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General , Department  of  the  Gulf. 


Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Forty -one  miles  beyond  Alexandria , at  Dawson’s  Ferry , 

May  11,  1863—12  m. 

Sir  : Our  cavalry  is  at  this  point.  We  have  captured  the  rear  guard 
of  the  enemy — 2 officers  and  25  men.  The  ferry  is  broken  down,  but 
we  are  using  all  efforts  to  construct  a bridge  at  this  point  250  feet  long. 
If  we  accomplish  this,  in  fourteen  hours  we  shall  cross  this  force  and 
attack  the  enemy,  who  is  at  this  moment  attempting  to  cross  another 
ferry,  about  18  miles  from  this  point,  with  a train  of  over  300  wagons. 
We  shall  march  all  night  if  necessary  to  accomplish  this  result.  Our 
information  justifies  this.  We  have  sent  a reconnaissance  with  a staff 
officer  to  the  second  ferry,  that  we  may  positively  ascertain  the  facts. 
This  reconnoitering  force  crossed  the  ferry  in  a flat-boat. 

I have  the  honor  to'  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  TJ.  8.  Forces. 


P.  S. — Why  did  not  the  gunboats  come  up  and  communicate  with 
me  ? In  that  case  we  probably  could  have  captured  all  their  artillery 
and  wagon  train. 

Very  respectfully, 

G.  WEITZEL, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Lieutenant-Colonel  Irwin,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Edmund  H.  Russell,  Ninth  Pennsylvania  Infantry  (Penn- 
sylvania  Reserve  Corps),  Acting  Signal  Officer. 

Headquarters  Signal  Corps, 

New  Orleans,  La.,  July  28,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  orders,  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  signal 

* Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  319.  Loss  of  the  brigade  aggregated  12  killed 
and  58  wounded. 


326 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA., 


duty  performed  by  me  during  the  operations  of  the  Army  of  the  Gulf 
upon  the  Bayou  Teche,  Western  Louisiana,  in  the  month  of  April, 
1863.  On  the  8th  of  April,  1863,  I was  ordered  to'  Brashear  City  by 

Capt.  W.  W.  Rowley,  acting  chief  signal  officer.  _ . 

On  the  9th  of  April,  1863,  I reported  to  Brigadier- General  Weitzel, 
upon  the  gunboat  Calhoun,  whence  I communicated  with  Second  Lieut. 
R.  D.  Butterfield,  acting  signal  officer  (upon  the  depot  of  the  Opelousas 
Railroad  at  Brashear  City),  and  Second  Lieut.  John  W.  Dana,  acting 
signal  officer,  stationed  on  the  gunboat  Clifton. 

The  Calhoun  immediately  crossed  Berwick  Bay  to  Berwick  City. 
While  on  the  passage  I sent  the  following  messages: 


To  Lieutenant  Butterfield. 


All  right. 


WEITZEL. 


To  Lieutenant  Dana. 


Follow  with  the  Laurel  Hill. 


To  Lieutenant  Butterfield. 
Hurry  up  the  Clifton  and  Laurel  Hill. 


WEITZEL. 


WEITZEL. 


The  troops  disembarked  at  Berwick  City,  whence  I communicated 
with  Lieutenant  Butterfield,  acting  signal  officer,  across  Berwick  Bay, 
the  distance  between  the  stations  being  nearly  a mile. 

To  General  Weitzel. 

Detach  a company  of  cavalry  to  return  here  and  report  to 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

To  Colonel  Irwin. 

Have  no  cavalry  here.  WEITZEL. 

To  General  WeitzeL 

Send  it  back  as  soon  as  it  returns.  ^ g.  IRWIN, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


To  Colonel  Irwin. 


What  does  it  mean  t 


WEITZEL. 


To  General  Weitzel. 


Cavalry;  hut  it  has  reported. 


R.  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


To  General  Weitzel. 


Send  Clifton  over  if  possible. 


R.  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Chap.  XXVII.l 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


327 


To  Colonel  Irwin. 

All  right ; soon  as  unloaded. 


To  Colonel  Irwin. 

Send  a boat  to  carry  a regiment  over  the  bayou. 

To  General  Weitzel. 

What  stream  or  bayou  ? 


To  Colonel  Irwin. 


WEITZEL. 
April  10,  1863. 


WEITZEL. 


R.  B.  IRWIN. 


General  Emory  desires  orders  for  Major  Robinson  and  his  cavalry. 

To  Colonel  Irwin. 

Head  of  column  has  passed. 


EMORY. 


On  tbe  11th  of  April  I received  orders  to  report  to  Brigadier-General 
Emory,  whose  division  was  then  on  the  march  to  Patterson ville,  La. 
On  the  afternoon  of  April  12  oar  forces  attacked  the  enemy,  who  were 
behind  intrenchments  at  Camp  Bisland,  a few  miles  above  Patterson- 
ville,  La.  These  fortifications  extended  on  both  sides  of  the  Bayou  Teche. 

On  the  morning  of  April  13  I was  ordered  to  report  to  Col.  O.  P. 
Gooding,  who  commanded  the  forces  upon  the  northern  bank,  and  at 
once  opened  communication  with  Lieut.  John  A.  Vance,  acting  signal 
officer,  who  was  stationed  with  the  forces  upon  the  southern  bank.  We 
remained  in  almost  constant  communication  until  dark,  when  the  en- 
gagement closed. 

My  records  of  the  messages  transmitted  were  lost  during  the  subse- 
quent march  of  the  Army  of  the  Gulf  to  Alexandria,  La.  We  main- 
tained communication  between  the  troops  on  both  sides  of  the  Bayou 
Teche,  directed  certain  artillery  fire  from  guns  which  poured  a heavy 
stream  of  shot  and  shell  from  the  south  bank  of  the  bayou  into  the 
enemy’s  works  upon  the  north  bank,  and  transmitted  orders  for  the 
disposition  of  troops,  with  information  as  to  the  support  which  was 
afforded  them.  It  was  of  the  utmost  importance  that  Colonel  Gooding 
should  be  informed  of  the  movements  of  the  commanding  officer  upon 
the  south  bank,  and  this  duty  was  successfully  discharged.  Lieut. 
John  A.  Vance,  acting  signal  officer,  was  much  exposed  during  this 
battle  to  a murderous  fire  of  grape,  which  the  enemy  threw  at  the  bat- 
tery with  which  he  was  stationed.  He  rendered  brave  and  valuable 
service.  Private  James  E.  Shidle,  Company  G,  Ninth  Pennsylvania, 
Reserve  Corps,  and  Private  George  N.  Simmons,  Company  I,  Second 
Rhode  Island  Volunteers,  deserve  official  mention  for  the  courage  and 
steadiness  with  which  they  carried  my  flag  under  fire. 

I remained  with  Colonel  Gooding’s  command  until  the  27th  of  April, 
when  I reported  to  Lieut.  John  A.  Vance,  at  headquarters  Major-Gen- 
eral Banks,  at  Opelousas,  La.  No  more  signal  duty  was  done  by  me 
upon  that  march. 

I was  ordered  to  proceed  to  New  Orleans  on  the  15th  of  May,  where 
I remained  until  the  23d  of  May.  On  that  day  I left  New  Orleans  for 
Port  Hudson,  La. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  H.  RUSSELL, 

First  Lieut .,  Ninth  Pa .,  lies.  Corps,  and  Acting  /Signal  Officer. 

Lieut.  George  R.  Herbert,  Adjutant , Signal  Corps. 


328 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Gapt.  Edmund  G.  Bainbridge , Fifth  U . S.  Artillery , command- 
ing Battery  A,  First  TJ.  8.  Artillery , of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

Artillery  Camp,  near  Opelousas,  La., 

April  22,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  4 o’clock  on  the  evening  of 
April  12  Light  Battery  A,  First  Artillery,  was,  by  direction  of  Briga- 
dier-General Weitzel,  placed  in  position  on  the  right  of  the  line,  and 
opened  fire  upon  one  of  the  enemy’s  batteries,  at  a distance  of  about 
800  yards,  with  good  effect.  About  fifteen  minutes  after  the  firing 
commenced  we  received  the  fire  of  a portion  of  a battery  on  the  left 
bank  of-  the  Teche,  the  steamer  Diana,  and  one  24-pounder  directly  in 
front.  By  this  fire  one  limber  was  dismounted  and  the  drivers  and 
horses  of  another  disabled.  The  battery  remained  in  this  position 
until  the  line  fell  back  for  the  night.  In  order  to  save  my  pieces  two 
caisson  bodies  were  left  on  the  field,  but  were  afterward  recovered  and 
repaired. 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th  the  battery  moved  forward  on  the  right 
of  the  brigade  and  engaged  the  enemy’s  batteries  on  their  left  and  cen- 
ter. That  on  the  left  was  soon  silenced,  and  our  fire  was  directed  to 
their  right.  The  fire  of  our  guns  appeared  to  be  effective.  After  dark 
the  battery  was  ordered  to  the  rear  for  ammunition. 

Early  Tuesday  morning,  the  ammunition-boxes  having  been  refilled, 
the  battery  joined  the  brigade,  which  was  marching  in  pursuit  of  the 
enemy.  One  section  was  placed  in  advance,  and  kept  up  a continual 
fire  upon  the  rear  guard  of  the  enemy  until  we  reached  the  town  of 
Franklin. 

The  losses  in  the  battery  were  as  follows.* 

Lieutenants  Duer  and  Humphrey  and  First  Sergeant  [John  J.J  Dris- 
coll were  in  command  of  sections,  and  were  active  in  the  discharge  of 
their  duties.  The  officers,  non-commissioned  officers,  and  men  acted 
with  the  greatest  coolness  and  performed  their  duties  well. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  0.  BAINBRIDGE, 

Captain,  Fifth  Artillery , Commanding  Company. 

Brig.  Gen.  Richard  Arnold, 

Chief  of  Artillery. 


No.  8. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Frank  H.  Peck , Twelfth  Connecticut  Infantry , of 
engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

Hdqrs.  Twelfth  Regiment  Connecticut  Vols., 

In  the  Field , near  Opelousas , La.,  April  22,  1863. 
Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  present  the  following  report  of  the  opera- 
tions of  the  Twelfth  Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers  during  the 
recent  expedition  to  this  point : 

We  left  Brashear  City,  La.,  on  the  . 9th  of  April,  1863,  and  proceeded 

* List  of  casualties  shows  4 men  killed  and  5 wounded,  and  a loss  in  horses  of  5 
killed  and  10  wounded. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


329 


to  Berwick,  where  we  remained  until  the  11th,  when  we  marched  to  a 
point  1 mile  above  Pattersonville,  Company  B being  thrown  forward 
as  skirmishers. 

We  bivouacked  for  the  night,  and  on  the  12th  marched  forward  on 
the  left  of  the  brigade,  in  support  of  Carruth’s  Sixth  Massachusetts 
Battery,  on  our  right,  our  front  being  covered  by  Company  A,  thrown 
forward  as  skirmishers.  During  the  day  our  skirmishers  were  con- 
stantly engaged  with  those  of  the  enemy,  but  sustained  no  loss.  Dur- 
ing the  afternoon  we  came  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  artillery,  when 
an  engagement  ensued  which  lasted  until  night.  At  dark  we  withdrew 
out  of  range  of  the  enemy’s  guns  and  bivouacked  in  line  of  battle  upon 
the  left  of  the  brigade  line. 

On  the  13th,  soon  after  daylight,  the  regiment  was  formed  in  support 
of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  Battery,  which  opened  upon  the  ememy’s 
fortifications  and  the  gunboat  Diana,  which  had  taken  position  upon 
their  left.  After  the  silencing  and  withdrawal  of  the  Diana  the  regi- 
ment was  advanced  to  the  front  of  the  enemy’s  works,  and  successively 
duriugthe  day  supported  Carruth’s,  Mack’s,  Duryea’s,  and  Bainbridge’s 
batteries.  Companies  E,  F,  and  G were  advanced  as  skirmishers,  and 
approached  to  speaking  distance  of  the  enemy’s  intrenchments.  They 
were  actively  engaged  during  the  whole  afternoon,  with  very  apparent 
effect.  All  our  casualties  occurred  during  this  engagement.  The  battle 
was  continued  till  some  time  after  dark,  when  we  bivouacked  upon  the 
field  in  line  of  battle.  During  the  night  the  enemy’s  works  were  evac- 
uated. On  the  14th  we  marched  in  pursuit  through  Franklin. 

On  the  15th,  16th,  and  17th  we  marched  through  Jeanerette,  New 
Iberia,  and  Saint  Martinville  without  special  incident.  On  the  18th 
we  rested  near  Yermillionville;  on  the  19th  renewed  our  march  to 
Opelousas,  where  we  arrived  on  Monday  evening,  the  20th. 

We  are  distant  from  New  Orleans  180  miles,  and  from  Alexandria,  on 
the  Bed  Biver,  about  75  miles.  The  patient  endurance  by  the  men  of 
the  regiment  of  the  fatigue  and  privations  of  the  long  march  in  their 
eagerness  to  overtake  and  again  engage  the  routed  enemy  deserves  the 
highest  praise.  Captains  Granniss  and  Brennan,  with  their  companies 
as  skirmishers  on  the  11th  and  12th,  did  most  creditable  service. 

The  coolness  and  pertinacity  with  which  the  companies  of  Captains 
Braley  and  Bixbee  annoyed  the  gunners  of  the  enemy  during  the  entire 
afternoon  of  the  13th,  under  a fire  of  grape  and  canister  and  repeated 
volleys  of  musketry,  reflect  the  highest  credit  upon  the  courage  and 
skill  of  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  those  companies  present. 

I take  pleasure  in  mentioning  the  efficient  support  of  Major  Lewis 
during  the  progress  of  the  expedition. 

Our  wounded  were  promptly  cared  for  by  Dr.  Cummings,  assistant 
surgeon.  Chaplain  Bradford  is  deserving  of  great  praise  for  the  fearless 
activity  with  which  he  ministered  to  the  suffering  during  the  battle 
and  the  night  following. 

I inclose  a list  of  the  killed  and  wounded.* 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

FBANK  H.  PECK, 

Lieutenant- Colonel , Comdg.  Twelfth  Connecticut  Voh. 

J.  D.  Williams,  Adjutant- General. 

P.  S. — Lieutenant  Francis,  who  was  wounded  and  captured  on  the 
Diana  on  the  28th  of  March,  was  recaptured  at  Franklin,  where  he  now 
remains  in  hospital,  receiving  all  possible  attention. 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  319. 


330 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVEL 


No.  9. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  H.  Emory , JJ.  8.  A rmy , commanding  Third 
Division , of  operations  March  13-May  2. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Division,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 
Camp , near  Opelousas , Xa.,  AjmZ  21,  1863. 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  instructions  from  headquarters  to  send  in 
reports  of  the  recent  operations  and  engagement,  including  the  move- 
ment from  Baton  Rouge,  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  we  marched 
from  Baton  Rouge  on  Port  Hudson  on  Friday,  March  13,  and  returned 
to  Baton  Rouge  on  the  20th. 

On  April  1 the  division  moved  to  Algiers.  On  the  8th  moved  to 
Brashear  City.  On  the  9th  the  division  crossed  to  Berwick  City.  On 
the  11th  it  marched  on  Fort  Bisland.  On  the  12th,  at  the  bend  of  the 
river  and  3 or  4 miles  from  Fort  Bisland,  the  First  Brigade,  one  regi- 
ment of  which  was  left  to  garrison  Brashear  City,  was  thrown  forward 
on  the  left,  near  the  point  of  woods,  occupied  a half-finished  lunette, 
and  drove  in  the  enemy’s  pickets.  As  we  approached  the  fort,  from  the 
nature  of  the  ground  it  was  convenient  to  retire  this  brigade,  and  the 
Second  Brigade  (Paine’s),  consisting  of  the  Fourth  Wisconsin,  Eighth 
New  Hampshire,  One  hundred  and  thirty-third  and  One  hundred  and 
seventy-third  New  York  Regiments,  was  thrown  forward  to  take  its 
place  on  the  right  of  Weitzel’s  brigade.  These  two  brigades,  forming 
the  first  line,  advanced  in  line  of  battle  upon  the  works.  Ingraham’s 
brigade,  comprising  the  Fourth  Massachusetts,  One  hundred  and  tenth 
and  One  hundred  and  sixty-second  New  York  Regiments,  formed  the 
second  line ; and  Gooding’s  brigade,  consisting  of  the  Thirty-first,  Thirty- 
eighth,  and  Fifty-third  Massachusetts  and  One  hundred  and  fifty-sixth 
New  York  Regiments,  the  third  line;  and  in  this  order  the  enemy’s  lines 
were  approached  until,  at  5.30  o’clock  in  the  evening,  he  opened  fire,  and 
his  first  shot  all  fell  between  the  second  and  third  lines.  A brisk  can- 
nonading was  kept  up  until  dark,  when  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  was  moved 
forward,  in  advance  of  the  first  line,  to  hold  the  grove  in  front  of  the 
sugar-house,  which  it  did  through  the  night,  occasionally  skirmishing 
with  the  enemy. 

On  the  same  day,  by  order  of  General  Banks,  I detached  the  One 
hundred  and  seventy-fifth  New  York  and  a section  of  Haley’s  (First 
Maine)  battery  across  the  Teche,  which  advanced  upon  that  side  on  the 
enemy’s  works  and  engaged  them  until  night-fall.  At  dark  all  the  lines 
of  this  division,  except  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  and  the  pickets,  were  with- 
drawn out  of  the  range  of  the  enemy’s  grape  and  canister  and  allowed 
to  take  a good  night’s  rest. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  two  regiments  of  Paine’s  brigade 
were  ordered  to  support  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  in  the  grove.  By  order 
of  General  Banks,  Colonel  Gooding’s  brigade,  with  the  remainder  of 
Haley’s  battery,  crossed  the  Teche,  with  orders  to  attack.  Mack’s  bat- 
tery was  ordered  forward  to  engage  the  rebel  gunboat  Diana  and  a 
battery  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  bayou.  About  this  time  the  enemy 
made  a sortie  from  his  works  to  attack  Paine’s  brigade.  For  a short 
time  the  engagement  was  very  warm,  but  in  a short  time  the  enemy 
was  driven  to  his  intrenched  works,  the  gunboat  was  withdrawn,  and 
the  battery  silenced. 

About  12  m.  the  engagement  became  general  along  the  whole  line, 
and  Battery  F,  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  under  Captain  Duryea,  chief  of 
artillery  of  my  division,  first  one  section  and  then  the  whole  battery, 


■HAi’ . xxvn.i 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


331 


vas  ordered  forward  to  support  General  Weitzel,  within  the  ordinary 
•ange  of  grape  and  canister,  and  engaged  the  enemy  with  effect.  Mack’s 
jattery  was  also  restocked  with  ammunition  and  ordered  to  an  advanced 
josition,  where  it  took  part  in  the  engagement  with  the  same  marked 
effect,  dismounting  one  of  the  enemy’s  guns  across  the  bayou  and 
lilling  the  horses  of  his  battery,  so  that  the  enemy  had  to  pull  it  off  by 
land.  Hearing  a fusilade  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  line,  supposing  it 
vas  an  attempt  to  turn  our  left,  I sent  Lieutenant-Colonel  [O.  W.]  Lull 
to  order  up  the  reserve,  or  such  portion  of  it  as  might  be  necessary  to 
ffieck  that  movement. 

At  several  times  during  this  engagement,  when  the  fire  slackened, 
.he  officers  and  men  of  my  division  showed  a gallant  desire  to  storm 
die  enemy’s  works,  but  the  fall  of  the  works  now  being  certain,  and 
no  useful  object  to  be  accomplished  by  it,  as  the  force  to  catch  the 
retreating  enemy  was  not  yet  in  position,  no  assault  was  ordered. 

About  3 o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  14th  the  pickets  of  Paine’s  and 
Gooding’s  brigades  both  thought  they  heard  the  enemy  in  motion,  and 
[ immediately  ordered  Paine’s  brigade  forward  into  the  works  and 
communicated  to  General  Banks,  who  ordered  the  whole  army  to  ad- 
vance. Paine’s  brigade  got  into  full  possession  of  the  works  on  the 
right  bank  about  daylight,  and  Mack’s  battery  was  sent  for  by  me  and 
arrived  in  time  to  shell  the  enemy’s  rear.  From  that  day  to  this  my 
division,  which  was  ordered  to  follow  and  support  General  Weitzel’s 
brigade,  has  been  continually  on  the  march,  in  hot  pursuit  of  the 
enemy,  several  regiments  being  detached,  by  order  from  the  headquar- 
ters, in  different  directions;  among  them  the  One  hundred  and  sev- 
enty-third New  York,  Major  Gallway  commanding,  with  a section  of 
Battery  F,  First  U.  8.  Artillery,  under  Lieutenant  Norris,  was  sent 
along  the  Bayou  Teche,  to  follow  up  the  enemy’s  transports,  which  he 
has  accomplished  successfully,  compelling  the  enemy  to  burn  all  the 
transports  (four  or  five  in  number)  he  had  upon  the  Teche.  His  report 
of  this  transaction,  and  also  the  reports  of  the  brigade  commanders  and 
chief*  of  artillery  are  herewith  inclosed. 

I have  made  no  record  of  the  number  of  prisoners  turned  in  by  my 
division,  but  should  suppose  between  400  and  500.  A list  of  the  eas 
ualties  and  the  names  of  the  killed  have  already  been  sent  in,  with  the 
exception  of  those  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  New  York, 
which  is  detached  on  provost  duty  at  Franklin. 

I cannot  too  strongly  eulogize  the  conduct  of  these  new  troops — 
marching  to  the  attack  of  the  enemy,  strongly  intrenched  in  earthworks, 
and  throughout  the  whole  day  standing  under  a sharp,  and  at  times 
a destructive,  fire  of  the  enemy,  and  then,  when  the  enemy’s  works 
were  carried,  in  making  long  and  rapid  marches  in  pursuit  without  a 
murmur. 

I should  like  very  much  to  particularize  many  acts  of  gallantry  in 
the  officers  and  men,  but  I must  refer  to  the  special  reports,  herewith 
inclosed,  for  that  purpose.  I must,  however,  be  allowed  to  mention 
the  names  of  Brigade  Commanders  Paine  and  Gooding,  Chief  of  Artil- 
lery Duryea,  and  Captain  Carter,  Fourth  Wisconsin,  Captain  Mack  and 
Lieutenant  Haley,  commanding  batteries,  and  Sergeant  [J.  P.]  Capron, 
Battery  F,  First  U.  S.  Artillery  (who  was  wounded  in  the  neck  by  a shell, 
and  ordered  by  my  medical  director  to  remain  in  the  hospital,  but  the 
moment  his  wound  was  dressed  returned  to  his  battery  and  fought  with 
it  during  the  day),  and  Patrick  Smith,  Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts, 
mentioned  in  the  report  of  his  brigade  commander. 

I also  must  be  allowed  to  mention  my  staff,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lull, 


332 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

Lieutenant  French,  acting  assistant  adjutant  general  5 Lieutenant 
Loring  and  Lieutenant  [ J.  C.]  Cooley,  aides-de-camp,  who  took  my  orders 
with  coolness  and  precision,  regardless  of  the  enemy’s  fire. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  my  aide-de-camp,  Lieutenant  Loring, 
went  beyond  the  pickets  to  the  enemy’s  earthworks,  to  reconnoiter, 
before  his  infantry  had  evacuated. 

I also  mention  the  admirable  disposition  made  for  the  care  of  the 
wounded  by  Medical  Director  Hartwell. 

I also  ask  attention  to  the  gallant  conduct  of  Colonels  Fearing,  Cur- 
rie, and  Bean,  and  Major  Gallway,  and  their  respective  regiments,  the 
Eighth  New  Hampshire,  One  hundred  and  thirty-third  New  York, 
Fourth  Wisconsin,  and  One  hundred  and  seventy- third  New  York,  and 
Captain  Moore,  of  the  Fourth  Wisconsin,  as  set  forth  in  the  report  of 
Brigadier-General  Paine,  herewith  inclosed.  These  regiments  held  thei 
bayou  road,  upon  which  the  enemy’s  fire  was  concentrated. 

It  was  evident  to  me  from  the  beginning  that  the  enemy’s  plan  of 
defense  was  to  make  sorties  down  the  bayou  road,  supported  by  the 
gunboat  Diana,  and  this  plan  was  not  relinquished  by  him  until  the 
Diana  received  several  fatal  shots. 

From  the  list  of  killed  and  wounded  I have  no  doubt  that  the  regi-' 
ments,  and  the  colonels  commanding  them,  of  Gooding’s  brigade,  viz, 
the  Thirty-first,  Thirty-eighth,  and  Fifty-third  Massachusetts,  the  One 
hundred  and  fifty-sixth  and  One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  New  York, 
deserve  the  same  notice,  but  their  attack  was  made  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  bayou,  and  mostly  out  of  my  view. 

I have  said  nothing  of  the  guns  and  ammunition  found  in  the  works 
by  my  division,  as  we  pushed  on  immediately  in  pursuit. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  EMORY, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding . 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Gulf. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces  at  Opelousas, 

April  26,  1863. 

Major-General  Banks: 

I have  obtained  the  following  information  from  the  enemy’s  camp, 
and  I think  from  a reliable  person : 

The  enemy,  4,500  strong,  are  intrenching  at  Lecompte  and  at  the 
Lamourie  Bayou,  16  miles  from  Alexandria.  My  informant  has  seen  a 
letter  from  Colonel  Ives,  on  the  staff  of  President  Davis,  promising  that 
Kirby  Smith,  with  15,000  men,  should  re-enforce  General  Taylor  in  ten 
days  from  the  15th  instant.  Generals  Taylor,  Mouton,  and  Blanchard 
are  at  Alexandria.  General  Green,  with  1,500  Texans,  is  now  on  our 
flank  and  rear  trying  to  make  the  circuit  of  the  Federal  army  and  at- 
tack our  baggage  train.  Magruder  is  reported  to  be  moving  toward 
our  rear  by  Niblett’s  Bluff  road,  intending  to  attack  our  rear,  while 
Kirby  Smith  attacks  us  in  front.  It  is  reported  also  among  the  rebels 
that  Farragut  has  taken  Fort  De  Russy,  40  miles  below  Alexandria. 

I have  sent  a strong  force  to  meet  the  wagon  train  and  to  threaten 
the  Texas  cavalry.  If  Smith  or  Magruder  either  move  against  this 
army  it  should  take  position  at  Iberia  and  not  stay  at  this  place.  Our 
communication  from  here  is  too  long  by  the  Teche  and  too  uncertain 


Chap.  XXVIL] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


333 


by  the  Courtableau;  if  overpowered  we  can  by  no  possibility  retreat  by 
this  line.  No  steamer  has  reached  Barre’s  Landing  since  you  left.  I do 
not,  however,  consider  myself  at  liberty  to  make  any  change  until  I 
hear  from  you. 

W.  H.  EMORY, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding . 


Colonel  Irwin  : 


April  28,  1863. 


Telegraph  this  to  General  Banks  : 

Paine’s  brigade  bas  returned.  The  main  body  of  the  Texans  have  retreated  across 
Mermenton  River. 

General  Smith  is  in  Alexandria,  but  I cannot  learn  positively  that  any  part  of  his 
Arkansas  re-enforcements  have  arrived. 

W.  H.  EMORY, 
Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 


Also  give  an  order  to  the  commanding  officer  at  Iberia  to  repair  the 
telegraph  line. 

W.  H.  EMORY. 

Lieutenant  Emerson  will  send  the  above  immediately  by  two  orderlies, 
traveling  together. 

R.  B.  IRWIN. 


Headquarters  Third  Division, 

Opelousas , La.,  May  2,  1863. 

Colonel:  In  compliance  with  instructions  this  day  received,  to 
make  out  a full  report  of  movements  taken  place  during  the  period  of 
my  being  in  command  of  all  the  forces  about  this  place,  I have  the 
honor  to  state  that  on  the  26th,  the  day  after  General  Banks  left,  I sent 
Paine’s  brigade,  including  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  Mounted  Infantry,  to 
go  out  two  days’  march  on  the  Texas  road  toward  Niblett’s  Bluff,  to 
drive  off  or  disperse  a large  force  of  rebel  cavalry  known  to  be  on  our 
flank  and  rear.  This  cavalry  retreated  across  the  Mermenton  River,  35 
miles  distant  from  here,  as  Paine  advanced,  and  it  has  not  since  been 
heard  of.  General  Paine  returned  to  camp  on  the  morning  of  the  29th, 
and  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  went  out  to  guard  the  wagon  train  at  Ver- 
millionville.  Believing  from  the  reports  that  General  Dwight’s  rear 
was  'seriously  threatened  I directed  him,  if  he  had  accomplished  all  the 
objects  for  which  he  was  sent  (leaving,  however,  large  discretionary 
power  with  him),  to  lessen  the  space  between  himself  and  the  main  army, 
and  to  fall  back  on  Washington,  which  he  did  on  the  30th.  The  report 
of  his  operations  will  be  found  in  your  office. 

Onothe  29th,  hearing  various  conflicting  rumors  of  the  enemy’s  having 
received  re-enforcements,  that  he  was  retracing  his  steps  on  the  Cheney  - 
ville  road,  I sent  forward  Colonel  Corliss,  of  the  Second  Rhode  Island 
Cavalry,  on  the  Chicotville  road,  accompanied  by  Colonel  Abert,  of  Gen- 
eral Banks’  staff,  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  the  movements  of  the  enemy, 
and  to  attack  and  disperse  any  cavalry  he  might  find  on  the  road.  His 
advance  went  as  far  as  the  bayou  beyond  Chicotville,  where  the  bridge 
was  found  burned  and  the  bayou  impassable.  He  found  no  force  of  any 
importance  on  the  road,  but  a few  of  the  enemy’s  pickets,  which  he  cap- 
tured. 


334 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


On  the  30th  I ordered  all  the  cavalry  then  available  forward,  under 
Major  [H.]  Robinson,  to  disperse  the  rebel  cavalry,  reported  on  the  left 
bank  of  the  Bayou  Boeuff.  He  found  his  force  inadequate  to  the  purpose. 
Yesterday  all  the  cavalry,  including  the  Fourth  Wisconsin,  which  had 
now  arrived  from  its  excursion  on  the  plains  to  the  west,  was  ordered 
forward,  under  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Dwight,  with  orders 
to  attack,  and,  if  possible,  disperse  this  same  cavalry  of  the  enemy. 
Brigadier-General  Dwight’s  report  lias  already  been  sent  you. 

Grave  disorders  in  our  rear  by  bands  of  robbers,  sometimes  headed 
by  stragglers  from  the  ranks,  which  threatened  for  a moment  to  inter- 
rupt our  communication,  and  even  to  disband  and  disperse  into  a band  i 
of  robbers  and  thieves  some  of  our  less  disciplined  regiments,  induced 
me  to  publish  a short  notice,  which  I have  the  honor  to  show  you.  In 
this  same  connection  I think  proper  to  state  that  1 sent  ten  men  of  the 
Fourth  Wisconsin  to  the  village  of  Grand  Coteau  to  arrest  and  drive  in 
stragglers  and  to  preserve  order.  The  inducements  for  plunder  in  this 
country  are  so  great  that  unless  high-handed  measures  are  taken  many 
men  will  be  lost  to  the  ranks  on  the  day  of  battle. 

When  I received  the  reports  of  the  enemy’s  being  re-enforced  by  Gen-  j 
erals  Smith  and  Magruder,  as  a precautionary  measure  I ordered  the 
two  regiments  sent  with  cattle  to  Brashear  City  to  return  from  that 
place  as  soon  as  they  had  delivered  their  cattle  and  re-enforce  the  gar- 
rison at  New  Iberia. 

The  staff  of  the  general  commanding  having  been  left  behind,  every 
order  issued  has  been  through  them,  and  you  will  find  at  the  head- 
quarters of  the  Nineteenth  Army  Corps  the  record  of  every  movement 
and  transaction  since  you  left  here. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully-,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  EMORY, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin. 

p#  s. — I have  omitted  to  mention  that  on  April  30  Brigadier-General 
Grover  was  directed  to  send  an  infantry  force  in  skiffs  to  search  the 
creeks  leading  into  the  Bayou  Courtableau.  No  report  is  yet  received 
from  him. 


No.  10. 


Report  of  Capt.  Richard  C.  Bur  yea,  First  V.  8.  Artillery , Chief  of  Artil- 
lery, of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland  and  skirmish  at  Jeanerette. 


Camp  at  Opelo 


Sir  : In  compliance  with  instructions  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the 
following  report  of  the  operations  of  the  batteries  of  the  Third  Division 
during  the  12th,  13th,  and  14th  instant: 

On  the  12th  instant  a section  of  the  First  Maine  Battery,  under  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant  Morton,  was  sent  across  the  Bayou  Teche,  engaging 
a rebel  battery  until  ordered  to  withdraw. 

On  the  following  morning  the  other  two  sections  of  same  battery  were 
sent  across  with  Colonel  Gooding’s  brigade,  and,  having  joiued  Lieu- 
tenant Morton,  engaged  a rebel  battery  in  the  open  field,  and  after  an 
hour’s  contest  drove  them  behind  their  breastworks.  Lieutenant  Haley 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


335 


Chap.  XXVII.] 

then  moved  his  battery  forward  and  continued  the  engagement  until 
our  troops  withdrew  for  the  night. 

Captain  Mack’s  Eighteenth  New  York  Battery,  20-pounder  Parrotts, 
was  directed  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  to  engage  the  rebel  gunboat 
Diana  and  a battery  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  bayou.  The  gunboat 
was  soon  withdrawn  and  the  battery  silenced.  These  guns  were  soon 
after  directed  upon  the  enemy’s  earthworks,  with  apparently  considera- 

About  12  m.  on  the  same  day  a section  of  Battery  F,  First  Artillery, 
under  Lieutenant  Norris,  was  ordered  forward  to  protect  the  right  flank 
of  General  Paine’s  brigade  from  the  galling  fire  of  a battery  ^n  the  op- 
posite side  of  the  Teche,  and  a heavy  gun  in  position  immediately  in 
front  of  that  flank.  This  section  was  soon  after  joined  by  the  Eighteenth 

New  York  Battery.  . , - , 

At  12.30  p.  m.  Battery  F,  First  Artillery,  was  ordered  to  the  front, 
and  took  position  in  advance  of  General  Paine’s  line,  and  engaged  all 
the  batteries  from  the  roads  on  the  enemy’s  right  to  the  Teche,  on  his 
left.  The  battery  retained  its  position  within  the  ordinary  range  of 
grape,  canister,  and  musketry  until  after  dark  and  our  troops  had  with- 
drawn. During  the  afternoon  all  the  rebel  guns  were  silenced  one  after 
another,  and  at  sunset  no  reply  was  made  to  our  fire. 

On  the  14th  Battery  F,  First  Artillery,  took  the  advance  with  Gen- 
eral Weitzel’s  brigade,  and  was  engaged  in  driving  a section  of  artillery 

from  Jeanerette.  . ..  , , 

I would  further  state  that  the  conduct  of  officers  and  men  on  all  these 
occasions  was  such  as  it  should  be,  and  deserving  of  the  highest  praise, 
Captain  Mack  and  Lieutenant  Haley  commanding  their  batteries  with 
skill  and  coolness,  while  I was  most  ably  assisted  by  my  subalterns, 
Lieutenants  Norris,  Haskin,  and  Garvin. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  C.  DUBYEA, 

Captain , Chief  of  Artillery , Third  Division . 

Lieut.  Peter  French, 

Acting  AssisWht  Adjutant- General,  Third  Division. 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Men  1).  Haley,  First  Battery  Maine  Light  Artillery,  of' 
engagenunt  at  Fort  Bisland. 

Headquarters  First  Maine  Battery, 

In  the  Field,  April  20,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  battle  of  the  13th  instant : 

By  your  order  crossed  the  Bayou  Teche  on  pontoon  bridge  near  the 
obstructions  at  12  m.  with  two  sections  of  this  battery.  Joined  the  left 
section,  in  command  of  Lieutenant  Morton,  which  had  been  sent  over 
the  night  before.  After  advancing  about  half  a mile  came  upon  the 
rebel  battery  which  had  come  out  in  front  of  their  breastworks  to  meet 
us.  I opened  fire  upon  the  rebel  battery  about  3 p.  m.  with  shell.  After 
sharp  firing  on  both  sides  for  about  one  hour  the  rebels  retreated  behind 
their  breastworks,  apparently  somewhat  disabled.  I advanced  with  the 
battery  about  1,000  yards,  and  again  opened  fire  with  shell ; kept  up 
sharp  firing  until  dark.  By  order  of  Colonel  Gooding,  commanding 
Third  Brigade,  retired,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night. 


336 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA  , S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap  XXVIL 

Casualties : Lieut.  J.  E.  Morton  wounded  in  the  neck,  slightly,  and 
Private  George  Clifford  wounded  in  the  thigh,  slightly. 

Lost  one  caisson  crossing  pontoon  bridge,  by  sinking  of  one  of  the 
boats  supporting  the  bridge,  with  117  rounds  of  ammunition.  One  gun 
was  disabled  by  piece  of  a shell  striking  the  axle ; since  repaired.  Cap- 
tured one  caisson  from  the  enemy. 

E.  D.  HALEY, 

First  Lieutenant , Commanding  First  Maine  Battery. 

Captain  Duryea, 

Chief  of  Artillery , Emortfs  Division. 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Lieut . John  E.  Morton , First  Battery  Maine  Light  Artillery,  of 
engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

Headquarters  First  Maine  Battery, 

In  the  Field , April  15,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  compliance  with 
your  order  of  the  12th  instant  I moved  the  left  section  of  this  battery 
forward  to  a pontoon  bridge  thrown  across  the  Bayou  Teche  below  the 
obstructions.  I there  received  orders  to  cross  the  bayou  and  report  to 
Colonel  Bryan.  We  moved  up  the  bayou  about  2 miles,  when  I re- 
ceived orders  to  move  to  the  front  and  engage  the  enemy’s  battery, 
which  had  opened  fire  upon  our  pickets  or  skirmishers.  I moved  for- 
ward at  a gallop,  and  came  in  battery  opposite  the  sugar-house  under 
a very  heavy  fire  from  the  enemy.  I engaged  them  for  about  an  hour, 
and  retreated  behind  the  sugar-house  to  refill  my  limbers  and  cool  my 
guns.  Shortly  after  I received  orders  to  retreat  and  bivouac  for  the 
night. 

The  next  morning,  the  13th,  Colonel  Gooding  crossed  and  assumed 
command,  and  I was  ordered  forward  to  support  his  skirmishers.  Noth- 
ing of  note  occurred  during  the  morning.  I was  relieved  by  you  about 
12.30  p.  m. 

I beg  leave  to  mention  my  men  in  the  highest  terms  of  praise.  None 
could  have  done  better. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* J.  E.  MORTON, 

First  Lieutenant , First  Maine  Battery. 

First  Lieut.  E.  D.  Haley, 

Commanding  First  Maine  Battery. 


No.  13. 

Report  of  Capt.  Richard  C.  Duryea , Battery  F,  First  TJ.  8.  Artillery , of 
engagement  at  Fort  Bisland  and  skirmish  at  leaner ette. 

Camp  at  Opelousas,  April  21, 1863. 
Sir  : In  compliance  with  your  instructions  I have  the  honor  to  sub- 
mit the  following  report  of  the  operations  of  Battery  F,  First  Artillery, 
during  the  recent  engagements  near  Centreville: 

About  12  m.  on  the  13th  instant  a section  of  the  battery,  under  Lieu- 


Chap.  ZXVtt.) 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


33? 


tenant  Norris,  was  ordered  forward  on  the  main  road  to  within  600 
yards  of  the  enemy’s  works,  to  engage  a rebel  battery  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  Teche  and  a heavy  gun  in  position  in  front,  both  of  which 
were  pouring  a galling  fire  upon  the  right  flank  of  Colonel  Paine’s  bri- 
gade. At  12.30  p.  m.  the  battery  was  ordered  to  the  front  and  took 
position  in  front  of  the  left  of  Colonel  Paine’s  brigade,  nearly  opposite 
the  center  of  the  line  of  the  enemy’s  works,  about  500  yards  from  them, 
and  engaged  all  the  enemy’s  guns  from  the  wood  on  right  to  the  Teche 
on  his  left.  The  battery  retained  this  position  within  ordinary  range 
of  grape,  canister,  and  musketry  until  after  dark,  and  the  troops  had 
withdrawn  for  the  night.  During  the  afternoon  all  the  enemy’s  guns 
were  silenced,  one  after  another,  and  at  sunset  no  reply  was  made  to 
our  fire. 

On  the  14th  the  battery  took  the  advance,  with  General  Weitzel’s  bri- 
gade, and  was  engaged  for  a short  time  in  driving  a section  of  artillery 
from  Jeanerette.  The  battery  soon  after  crossed  the  Teche  and  that 
night  encamped  opposite  Franklin. 

The  casualties  were : One  mortally  wounded  (since  died)  and  4 slightly 
bounded ; 2 horses  killed  ; wheel,  stock,  and  pole  of  a caisson  broken 
(since  repaired).  The  battery  is  now  in  perfect  condition  for  immediate 
service. 

In  conclusion  I would  state  that  the  conduct  of  officers,  non-commis- 
sioned officers,  and  men  was  such  as  it  should  be,  and  deserving  of  the 
highest  praise.  I was  most  ably  assisted  by  my  subalterns,  Lieuten- 
ants Norris,  Haskin,  and  Garvin ; and  the  chiefs  of  pieces,  in  their 
responsible  positions,  Sergeants  [Edward]  Mahon,  Capron,  [James] 
Cronin,  [Henry]  Harris,  and  [Charles]  Riley,  exhibited  much  coolness 
and  accuracy  iu  directing  the  fire  of  their  respective  guns. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  C.  DURYEA, 

Captain , First  United  States  Artillery . 

Brig.  Gen.  Richard  Arnold, 

Chief  of  Artillery , Nineteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Col.  Timothy  Ingraham , Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts  Infantry , 
commanding  First  Brigade , of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brigade,  Third  Division  (Emory’s), 

Franklin , La .,  April  14,  1863. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  orders  from  the  general  commanding  I have 
the  honor  to  make  the  following  report: 

Sunday  morning  (April  12)  my  brigade  moved  in  the  direction  of  the 
enemy’s  works— three  regiments,  one  having  been  left  on  detached  duty 
at  Brashear  City — one  regiment  marching  on  the  river  road  and  two 
through  the  plantations  for  about  2 miles,  when  my  brigade  was  formed 
on  the  left  of  General  Paine’s  brigade  near  a strip  of  wood,  one  regi- 
ment being  thrown  out  as  skirmishers  in  front  of  the  wood,  two  being 
held  as  reserve  at  the  rear  of  the  wood. 

At  about  1 p.  m.  I moved  my  brigade  on  in  line  of  battle  in  the  rear 
of  General  Paine’s  brigade.  Just  before  dark  we  fell  back  a short  dis- 

22  R r — vol  xv 


338  w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

tance,  the  right  of  our  line  resting  on  the  river  road.  The  regiment  on 
the  right  of  my  brigade  was  detailed  to  support  two  sections  of  Cap- 
tain Mack’s  battery,  stationed  on  the  bank  of  the  river  at  the  right  of 

m Monda^morning  (April  13)  my  brigade  again  moved  forward  and 
was  held  as  reserve.  At  night  two  regiments  were  ordered  to  the  front 

on  picket  duty.  , _ , A. 

Tuesday  (April  14)  I was  ordered  to  report  to  General  Weitzel.  At 
the  ferry,  about  3 miles  from  Franklin,  two  regiments  of  my  brigade 
were  ordered  to  cross  to  the  other  side  of  the  bayou,  and  have  not  yet 
come  up. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  INGRAHAM, 

Colonel , Commanding  First  Brigade , Third  Division . 

Lieut.  Petek.  French, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  15. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Justus  W.  Blanchard,  One  hundred  and  sixty -second 
New  York  Infantry , of  expedition  to  Barrels  Landing , &e. 

Hdqrs.  162d  Regt.,  New  York  State  Volunteers, 

, Opelousas , La.,  April  28, 1863. 

Sir:  In  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No.  77,  from  Headquarters 
Third  Division,  dated  April  21,  1863,  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-sec- 
ond Regiment,  a section  of  the  First  Maine  Artillery,  and  a company  ot 
cavalry  proceeded  to  Barre’s  Landing,  which  place  it  reached  at  2 p.  m. 

Information  having  been  received  that  there  was  a small  stern-wheel 
steamboat  a few  miles  below,  a detachment  of  12  men  was  sent,  under 
Lieutenant  Neville,  Company  I,  One  hundred  and  sixty-second  Regi- 
ment New  York  Volunteers,  in  search  of  it.  Lieutenant  Neville  pro- 
ceeded down  Bayou  Courtableau  about  4 miles  and  turned  into  a creek, 
up  which  he  went  about  5 miles  before  finding  it.  The  boat  was  re- 
paired as  far  as  possible  by  the  regiment,  and  is  now  in  serviceable 
condition,  with  the  exception  of  the  smoke-stack,  which  is  broken.  I he 
boat  is  called  the  Ellen.  Two  rebels  were  made  prisoners,  who  said 
they  belonged  to  Fournet’s  battalion,  and  were  m the  late  action  at 
Fort  Bisland.  They  were  taken  in  a farm-house  about  2 miles  Rom 
Barre’s  Landing.  Four  rifles  and  two  fowling-pieces  were  found  in 
another  farm-house  and  taken  possession  of.  About  100  horses  an 
mules  were  taken  and  turned  over  to  Captain  Dunham,  of  General 
Banks’  staff;  also  about  300  bales  of  cotton  were  taken,  which  were 
sent  to  Brashear  City,  on  the  Laurel  Hill. 

On  April  25  an  order  was  received  that  General  Grover  would  re- 
lieve on  the  following  day  the  force  under  my  command.  As  General 
Grover  was  crossing  the  Bayou  Teche  the  bridge  broke,  and  as  it  was 
night  before  it  was  repaired  I deferred  my  departure  from  Barres 
Landing  until  the  morning  of  April  27 . 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

v J.  W.  BLANCHARD, 

Lieutenant-Colonel , Commanding. 


Lieutenant  French. 


Chap.  XXYTT.l 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


339 


NTo.  16. 

Report  of  Col.  Halbert  E.  Paine , Fourth  Wisconsin  Infantry , commanding 
Second  Brigade , of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

Hdqrs.  2d  Brio.,  3d  Diy.,  19th  Army  Corps, 

Opelousas , La .,  April  21,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : In  obedience  to  the  order  of  the  brigadier- general  com- 
manding the  division  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report 
of  the  operations  of  my  brigade  on  the  12th,  13th,  and  14th  days  of  this 
month : 

As  our  army  approached  the  enemy’s  works  near  Centreville  on  the 
12th  instant  my  brigade,  which  was  next  to  General  Weitzel’s,  marched 
in  line  of  battle,  and  so  formed  the  second  line  when  the  enemy’s  fire 
opened  on  us  in  the  afternoon.  At  the  end  of  the  demonstration,  by 
which  the  position  and  character  of  the  enemy’s  works  and  batteries 
were  ascertained,  three  of  my  regiments  (the  Eighth  New  Hampshire, 
Colonel  Fearing ; One  hundred  and  thirty-third  New  York,  Colonel 
Currie,  and  One  hundred  and  seventy-third  New  York,  Major  Gallway) 
went  into  position  for  the  night,  with  the  right  of  the  line  resting  on 
the  bayou  road  and  the  left  extending  to  General  Weitzel’s  right.  They 
lay  on  their  arms,  without  fires.  The  Fourth  Wisconsin,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Bean,  went  forward  to  hold  the  sugar-house,  in  front  of  my 
right.  The  sugar-house,  with  the  negro-cabins  and  grove  of  shade  trees 
near  it,  covered  a position  the  occupation  of  which  by  one  party  or  the 
other  in  the  morning  promised  to  be  of  great  moment. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Bean  was  also  ordered  to  deploy  a line  of  sharp- 
shooters along  the  bayou  to  attack  the  gunboat  Diana  in  the  event  of 
an  attempt  to  bring  her  down.  Soon  after  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bean  had 
reached  his  position  he  was  re-enforced  by  three  companies  of  infantry 
and  30  cavalry.  He  posted  the  infantry  in  line  on  the  left  of  the  road 
and  opposite  the  sugar-house,  deployed  five  companies  200  yards  in 
advance,  and  posted  40  picked  men  on  the  bank  of  the  bayou. 

During  the  night  the  cavalry  pickets  of  the  enemy  approached  very 
near  to  his  first  line  and  repeatedly  fired  on  his  men,  wounding  a few, 
but  killing  none.  A dense  fog  enveloped  us  during  the  night  and  re- 
mained until  8 o’clock  the  next  morning. 

At  1 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  a communication  from  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Bean  informed  me  that  the  enemy  were  actively  at  work 
near  his  position.  Apprehending  that  they  might  be  engaged  in  prep- 
aration for  an  attack  at  daybreak,  I forwarded  the  note  to  General 
Emory. 

In  the  morning  the  cavalry  of  the  enemy  attempted  to  force  back  our 
skirmishers,  but  were  gallantly  repulsed  by  Captain  Moore,  command- 
ing Company  E,  Fourth  Wisconsin.  Captain  Moore  and  his  company 
distinguished  themselves  by  the  firmness  and  courage  with  which  they 
maintained  their  hazardous  position.  Afterward  200  of  the  enemy’s 
infantry  attacked  our  advance  post  in  the  grove.  After  half  an  hour’s 
contest  they  were  repulsed. 

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  awarded  for  the  bravery  with  which  Cap- 
tain Carter,  Company  B,  Fourth  Wisconsin,  with  only  40  of  his  men, 
sustained  this  attack  of  a greatly  superior  force,  and  for  the  courage, 
coolness,  and  sagacity  with  which  he  discharged  his  difficult  duties 
during  the  night.  Much  of  the  time  he  was  hardly  20  yards  distant 
from  the  enemy,  but  they  never  succeeded  in  forcing  his  lines  or  discov- 
ering our  position.  He  remained  until  noon  in  this  grove,  which  was 


340 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  X.  ME*.  TChap.XXVTL 


constantly  swept  by  the  fire  of  both  armies  during  the  engagement  of 
the  forenoon,  and  not  a man  of  his  company  flinched.  Before  the  tog 
lifted  the  Eighth  New  Hampshire  was  moved  up,  in  obedience  to  an 
order  from  General  Emory,  to  support  the  Fourth  Wisconsin. 

The  area  in  front  of  the  intrenchments,  which  eventually  became  the 
battle-field,  was  crossed  by  deep  plantation  ditches  nearly  parallel  with 
the  line  of  the  works.  These  ditches  were  of  the  greatest  utility  to  us, 
enabling  us  to  place  our  batteries  within  short  range  of  the  enemy,  with 
the  infantry  supports  entirely  protected,  except  as  against  shells  ex- 
ploding in  the  air.  The  Fourth  Wisconsin  and  Eighth  New  Hampshire 
took  their  positions  in  these  ditches,  the  former  in  front,  the  front  being 
still  covered  by  the  skirmishers  of  the  Fourth  Wisconsin.  Afterward 
the  One  hundred  and  thirty-third  New  York,  and,  later  still,  the  One 
hundred  and  seventy-third  New  York,  came  up  and  were  posted,  the 
former  on  the  left  and  the  latter  in  the  rear  of  the  Eighth  New  Hamp- 
shire. The  Diana  and  the  enemy’s  force  and  works  were  masked  by 
the  grove  and  negro-cabins.  The  cabins  were  fired,  so  that  the  smoke 
might  cover  and  conceal  the  puffs  of  our  guns  and  impair  the  accuracy 

of  the  enemy’s  fire.  ,.  „ , , ,, 

At  7 o’clock  I visited  the  picket  line  and  became  satisfied  that  the 
Diana  and  light  batteries  would  open  on  us  as  soon  as  the  fog  lifted. 
Soon  afterward  I discovered  her  flag  and  hull  through  the  log,  and 
forthwith  sent  a request  that  the  heavy  guns  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana 
might  be  sent  up  to  destroy  her.  These  were  not  sent ; but _at  length 
Captain  Mack  reported  to  me  with  two  sections  of  his  splendid  Black 
Horse  Battery  of  20-pounder  Parrotts.  Before  they  arrived,  however, 
the  enemy  opened  on  us  a brisk  fire  of  shot,  shell,  grape,  and  canister 
from  their  works  from  the  light  batteries  in  front  and  from  the  Diana. 
To  this  was  afterward  added  a fire,  at  short  range,  from  a battery  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  bayou.  Before  this  cannonade  commenced, 
information  having  been  received  that  the  movements  on  the  Diana 
indicated  a speedy  change  of  position,  four  companies  of  the  kourth 
Wisconsin  and  five  companies  of  the  Eighth  New  Hampshire  were 
rapidly  deployed  along  the  bayou  to  fire  on  her  men,  and,  if  possible, 
capture  the  boat.  But  she  did  not  appear,  and  the  companies  soon 
reioined  their  regiments.  The  artillery  subsequently  drove  her  crip- 
pled up  the  river.  Officers  and  men  of  my  pickets,  who  were  near  her, 

observed  the  effect  of  the  shots.  . 

As  soon  as  Captain  Mack  arrived  his  guns  were  posted  on  my  right, 
in  and  near  the  bayou  road,  and  opened  fire  on  the  Diana,  the  enemy  s 
works,  the  light  batteries,  and  also  the  battery  on  the  opposite  side  ot 
the  bayou.  The  rapidity,  precision,  and  effect  of  his  fire  were  most 
admirable.  A communication  from  the  pickets  having  reached  me  to 
the  effect  that  an  infantry  force  was  approaching  on  the  bank  ot  the 
bayou,  the  right  wing  of  the  Eighth  New  Hampshire  was  thrown  out 
under  Major  Smith  to  the  right  of  Mack’s  guns,  to  repel  any  possible 
assault  upon  them.  But  no  assault  was  attempted.  The  fire  of  the 
enemy  having  considerably  slackened,  and  Mack  s ammunition  being 
nearly  expended,  Lieutenant  Norris,  with  two  sections  of  Huryeas 
battery,  and  Lieutenant  Haley,  with  one  section  of  the  First  Maine 
battery,  reported  to  me  and  relieved  Mack’s  battery.  The  former  took 
the  position  which  had  been  occupied  by  Mack’s  guns  on  the  right,  and 
the  latter  was  posted  on  the  left  of  the  Fourth  Wisconsin.  They  fired 
slowly  and  with  great  accuracy  and  effect  until  the  termination  of  the 

engagement^.  ^ ^ fire  of  the  enemy  having  entirely  ceased,  I was 


Chap.  XX VTL] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


341 


ordered  to  move  forward  skirmishers  to  ascertain  whether  the  enemy- 
had  not  evacuated  their  works,  and  sent  forward  a detachment  of  cav- 
alry. But  their  appearance  in  front  immediately  drew  the  fire  of  several 
of  the  enemy’s  guns  and  they  retired,  when  the  contest  was  renewed  on 
both  sides ; but  before  noon  the  enemy  abandoned  his  attempt  to  dis- 
lodge my  command,  and  the  firing  ceased,  excepting  an  occasional 
discharge  from  our  guns. 

With  the  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  of  my  own  brigade  I was 
entirely  satisfied,  and  cannot  withhold  an  expression  of  admiration  for 
the  behavior  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  artillery  detachments  which 
were  under  my  command. 

After  noon  General  Emory  ordered  me  to  move  forward  against  the 
intrenchments  in  conjunction  with  General  Weitzel.  I disposed  of  my 
brigade  in  two  lines  in  front  of  the  left  of  the  intrenchments,  and  Gen- 
eral Weitzel  took  the  same  lines  in  front  of  the  right  of  the  works. 
The  first  line  of  battle,  being  thus  composed  of  regiments  of  each  bri- 
gade, was  500  yards  from  the  enemy.  The  artillery  of  the  division  was 
posted  in  the  center  and  on  my  right,  which  rested  on  the  bayou  road. 
My  first  line  was  composed  of  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  on  the  right  and 
the  Eighth  New  Hampshire  on  the  left.  My  second,  of  the  One  hun- 
dred and  thirty-third  New  York  on  the  right  and  the  One  hundred  and 
seventy-third  New  York  on  the  left.  Company  D,  Fourth  Wisconsin, 
Lieutenant  Herron  commanding,  covered  my  front  as  skirmishers,  and 
most  bravely  fought  the  sharpshooters  of  the  enemy.  The  contest 
raged  during  the  whole  afternoon.  My  brigade  was  constantly  swept 
by  the  enemy’s  projectiles,  which,  but  for  the  shelter  afforded  by  the 
ditches,  would  have  inflicted  upon  me  a fearful  loss.  Sharpshooters  of 
the  enemy  seemed  to  be  posted  in  a sugar-house  within  the  intrench- 
ments. Captain  Duryea  directed  his  fire  upon  it  and  completely  rid- 
dled it.  It  was  left  discretionary  with  General  Weitzel  and  myself  to 
determine  when  an  assault  should  be  made,  if  at  all.  My  ignorance 
respecting  the  number  of  troops  within  the  intrenchments,  and  the 
nature  of  the  ground  over  which  the  assaulting  force  would  be  com- 
pelled to  pass,  prompted  me  to  leave  the  decision  with  General  Weit- 
zel, whose  judgment,  eminent  ability,  and  great  experience  have  gained 
so  much  weight.  In  reply  to  a communication  from  him  he  was  in- 
formed that  my  movements  would  be  guided  by  his  judgment.  After 
two  personal  interviews  on  the  field  he  sent  me  word  that  if  I would 
advance  to  the  assault  he  would  conform  his  own  movements  to  mine. 
I immediately  admonished  my  troops  to  move  steadily  and  together, 
especially  in  that  part  of  the  charge  which  was  to  be  made  at  double- 
quick.  To  do  so  I was  comp*elled  by  the  uproar  of  the  battle  to  address 
each  regiment  separately.  In  response  they  promised  with  loud  hur- 
ras to  go  over  the  breastworks  or  perish  in  the  attempt.  All  being- 
ready  the  command  was  given  and  the  march  commenced.  We  had 
proceeded  but  a short  distance  when  one  of  General  Weitzel’s  staff 
officers  overtook  me  and  requested  me  to  delay  the  attack  until  he 
could  obtain  an  answer  to  a communication  which  he  had  sent  to  Gen- 
eral Banks.  I accordingly  moved  my  brigade  back  to  its  position,  and 
soon  afterwarc^he  following  order  was  received,  viz : 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

April  13,  1863. 

General  Emory  : 

If  the  commanders  in  the  front  line  are  not  prepared  to  make  an  assault,  under  the 
discretionary  power  already  given  them,  the  front  line  will,  under  cover  of  darkness, 
fall  hack  to  a line  having  the  right  on  the  point  of  wood  in  front  of  the  position  of 


342 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 


Ingraham’s  brigade,  near  the  sugar-house.  Strong  pickets  will  hold  the  ground  we 
now  have  during  the  night.  The  retrograde  movement  will  not  be  made  in  any  event 
until  after  dark,  and  then  silently.  The  commanding  general  desires  to  express  to 
the  troops  his  satisfaction  with  the  events  of  the  day,  and  his  unqualified  admiration 
of  the  manner  in  which  the  several  commanders  and  the  officers  and  men  of  all  arms 
have  done  their  duty.  He  gives  them  the  assurance  that  the  morning  will  witness 
our  complete  triumph. 

By  command  of  General  Banks : 

R.  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

Soon  afterward  a rapid  firing  of  musketry  occurred  in  the  wood  on 
WeitzePs  left,  accompanied  by  repeated  cheers.  The  One  hundred  and 
seventy-third  New  York  took  a position  to  meet  a possible  flank  attack, 
but  it  was  soon  ascertained  that  the  success  was  with  General  Weitzel, 
and  the  regiment  resumed  its  position. 

General  Emory  sent  up  a fresh  regiment,  the  Fourth  Massachusetts, 
Colonel  Colby,  to  picket  my  front  during  the  night.  The  picket  line 
was  established  in  the  ditch,  which  fixed  my  first  line  of  battle,  and  the 
reserve  on  the  second  line.  Soon  after  dark  the  arrangements  required 
by  the  order  of  General  Banks  were  completed.  The  Eighth  New 
Hampshire  and  One  hundred  and  thirty-third  New  York  occupied  the 
first  line.  We  lay  on  our  arms  without  fires. 

At  1 o’clock  in  the  morning  I was  awakened  by  the  rumbling  of 
artillery.  A messenger,  on  his  way  from  Colonel  Colby  to  General 
Emory,  soon  called  with  information  that  this  had  been  heard  by  the 
pickets.  He  returned  with  me  to  the  picket  line,  but  a careful  inquiry 
failed  to  satisfy  me  whether  an  entire  evacuation  was  in  progress.  The 
messenger  proceeded  to  General  Emory’s  headquarters,  and  before  day- 
light he  ordered  me  to  ascertain  whether  the  enemy  had  evacuated, 
and  get  into  the  works  if  I could.  I sent  forward  Captain  Allaire  with 
his  company  (E,  One  hundred  and  thirty-third  New  York),  to  skirmish 
into  the  intrenchments,  if  possible,  and  report  his  discoveries  at  short 
intervals. 

While  I was  forming  my  brigade  an  order  came  from  General  Banks 
to  enter  the  intrenchments,  if  practicable.  The  left  wing  of  the  Eighth 
New  Hampshire  being  deployed  as  skirmishers  over  my  entire  front, 
we  marched  into  the  intrenchments.  Captain  Allaire’s  company  en- 
tered first.  Then  came  the  Eighth  New  Hampshire,  and  as  I planted 
their  flag  on  the  breastworks  they  bounded  in  with  three  loud  cheers, 
the  gallant  One  hundred  and  thirty-third  on  their  left.  The  other 
regiments  followed. 

The  beh,avior  of  all  the  officers  and  men  of  my  regiments  was  most 
admirable.  For  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  ^nd  Eighth  New  Hampshire  to 
be  brave  was  only  to  b6  true  to  their  hard-earned  tame.  The  One 
hundred  and  thirty-third  and  One  hundred  and  seventy-third  New 
York  Regiments,  for  the  first  time  under  fire,  exhibited  the  courage 
and  steadiness  of  veterans.  Colonel  Currie,  One  hundred  and  thirty- 
third  New  York,  Major  Gallway,  One  hundred  and  seventy-third  New 
York,  Lieutenant  Wooster,  brigade  quartermaster,  Lieutenant  Pierce, 
aide-de-camp,  and  Private  Fitzpatrick,  Company  H,  Fourth  Wisconsin 
Regiment,  by  their  gallantry  in  the  field ; Lieutenant-Colonel  Bean, 
as  commander  of  the  force  at  the  sugar-house  dining  the  night,  and 
Lieutenant  Herron,  as  commander  of  the  skirmishers,  deserve  special 
mention. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HALBERT  E.  PAINE, 

Colonel  Fourth  Wisconsin  Regiment , Commanding  Brigade. 

Lieut.  Peter  French,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXVIL]  OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA.  343 

No.  17. 

Report  of  Maj.  A.  Power  Gallway , One  hundred  and  seventy-third  New 
York  Infantry , 0/  expedition  from  Saint  Martinville  to  Breaux  Bridge 
and  Opelousas. 

Hdqrs.  173d  Regiment  New  York  Yols., 

Second  Brigade,  Emory’s  Division, 

Opelousas , La .,  April  21,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  afternoon  of  the  17th 
instant,  in  obedience  to  an  order  from  Headquarters  Department  of  the 
Gulf,  I left  the  main  column  of  General  Emory’s  division,  while  on  the 
march  through  Saint  Martinville,  with  my  regiment  and  a section  of 
Batterv  F,  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Norris,  and 
proceeded  by  the  road  along  and  close  to  Bayou  Teche  to  Breaux  Bridge. 
When  within  5 miles  of  the  bridge  10  of  my  men,  whom  I had  mounted, 
under  command  of  Captain  Conrady,  encountered  the  pickets  of  the 
enemy,  whom  they  drove  in,  taking  2 prisoners  and  3 horses.  Shortly 
afterward  I discovered  a heavy  smoke  above  the  town  of  Breaux,  and 
on  reaching  the  town  found  the  bridge  from  its  main  street  across  the 
Bayou  Teche  in  flames.  I was  there  informed  that  the  steamboats 
Darby,  Louise,  Blue  Hammock,  and  Uncle  Tommy  had  passed  up  the 
bayou  the  day  before — that  is,  the  evening  of  the  16th  instant — and 
having  valuable  stores  belonging  to  the  enemy.  The  enemy  had,  until 
within  an  hour  of  our  arrival  there,  a force  of  500  cavalry  in  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Breaux  Bridge.  This  body,  with  the  exception  of  one  com- 
pany, crossed  to  the  opposite  (the  left)  bank  of  Bayou  Teche  before 
burning  the  bridge. 

The  march  of  my  command  having  been  long,  and  from  Saint  Martin- 
ville rapid,  and  it  being,  besides,  past  5 o’clock  when  I reached  Breaux 
Bridge,  I determined  to  bivouac  for  the  night  in  a wood  close  to  the  town, 
and  push  on  next  morning  to  the  junction  of  Bayous  Teche  and  Fusilier, 
where  I was  informed  the  boats  would  probably  get  aground.  I sent 
forward  a man  up  the  Bayou  Teche  to  ascertain  the  position  and  con- 
dition of  the  boats.  He  reported  next  morning  that  all  of  tl^em  had 
been  burned  at  the  junction  as  soon  as  the  enemy  learned  of  the  arrival 
of  my  command  at  Breaux  Bridge.  From  him  and  from  other  parties  I 
learned  that  the  Darby  had  three  guns  on  board  when  she  was  burned, 
and  that  they  could  be  seen  above  water  when  the  fire  had  died  out. 
One  gun  was  a 32-pounder  and  the  others  small  brass  guns.  An  order 
from  Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf  prevented  my  moving  for- 
ward, as  I had  intended,  on  the  morning  of  the  18th  instant. 

At  3 o’clock  on  the  afternoon  of  the  19th,  not  having  received  an 
order  from  Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf,  I marched  with  my 
command  on  Opelousas,  by  way  of  the  junction  and  bayou  roads.  I 
reached  the  junction  of  Bayous  Teche  and  Fusilier  between  9 and  10 
o’clock  on  the  night  of  the  19th  instant,  and  found  that  the  enemy  had 
burned  the  bridge  across  Bayou  Fusilier  on  the  route  I was  to  follow. 
I halted  at  the  bridge  for  the  night  and  got  a gun  of  Lieut.  Norris’ 
section  in  position  to  command  a pile  of  planks  on  the  opposite  bank 
of  the  bayou,  with  which  I intended  building  a bridge  in  the  morning. 

On  the  "morning  of  the  20th  instant  I took  from  the  neighboring  plan- 
tations 50  negroes  and  made  a bridge  at  the  base  of  the  pillars  of  the 
one  destroyed,  over  which  I crossed  my  command  at  3 o’clock  in  the 
afternoon  of  that  day.  On  the  left  bank  of  Bayou  Fusilier  I found  a 
hospital  with  20  sick  and  wounded  soldiers  of  the  enemy.  Six  of  them 


344 


Wi-  FLA./  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chaf.  XXYH. 


were  well  enougli  and  anxious  to  accompany  me  to  Opelousas,  and  I 
have  brought  them  here.  The  remaining  14  I have  paroled.  Alto- 
gether I made  24  prisoners,  not  including  the  captain  ot  the  Uncle 
Tommy.  Before  leaving  the  junction  I examined  the  wreck  ot  tour 
steamboats.  The  water  having  risen  after  the  rains  of  Saturday  night 
and  Sunday  morning,  18th  and  19th  instant,  I was  unable  to  see>  any 
names  on  the  boats,  or  the  guns  reported  to  have  been  left  on  the  Darby. 
Their  smoke-stacks  and  part  of  their  machinery  only  were  above  water. 
From  all  the  information  I received  I have  no  doubt  of  their  being  the 
Darby,  Louise,  Blue  Hammock,  and  the  Crocket.  The  Hncle  Tommy 
is  burned  higher  up  in  the  Bayou  Teche,  and  the  wreck  of  this  boat  is 
high  enough  out  of  water  to  see  her  name.  Cargoes  of  beef,  rum, 
sugar,  and  commissary  stores,  cloth,  uniforms,  and  large  quantities  of 
arms  and  ammunition  were  destroyed  in  these  boats.  Some  barges 
took  off  portions  of  the  cargoes  of  ammunition  and  arms  from  these 
steamboats  before  they  were  set  on  fire.  I passed  the  charred  remains 
of  two  or  three  barges  in  the  Bayou  Teche  and  I found  by  the  roadside 
emptv  musket  boxes  and  large  quantities  of  shot,  salt,  some  new  cavalry 
sabers,  and  a few  barrels  of  oil.  I think  there  must  be  a valuable  por- 
tion of  the  cargoes  of  the  destroyed  steamboats  in  the  houses  and 
woods  along  the  banks  of  the  Teche  and  in  the  vicinity  of  the  junction, 
and  possibly  some  barge  hidden  in  the  Teche.  At  the  Junction  there 
are  a thousand  barrels  of  salt,  which  I left  uninjured.  They  are  close 
to  the  bayou  and  might  easily  be  sent  down  the  Teche.  On  the  march 
from  Breaux  Bridge  to  the  junction  I seized  a thousand  barrels  of  com 
in  husk  belonging  to  the  enemy,  it  having  been  brought  there  for  his 
cavalry.  Being  unable  to  delay  to  procure  wagons  for  it,  and  haying 
no  particular  instructions  how  to  act  under  the  circumstances,  I took 
the  responsibility  of  returning  to  the  poorer  parties,  from  whom  I took 
forage  for  the  horses  of  the  regiment  and  battery,  the  quantity  they 
merited.  I gave  300  barrels  to  Rev.  M.  Bernard,  cure  of  the  parish,  for 
the  poor  of  the  surrounding  country,  who  are  suffering  greatly.  The 
balance  (about  400  barrels)  I ordered  stored  m a crib  on  M.  Camean  s 

plantation,  awaiting  disposition.  • ..  « 

I halted  on  the  evening  of  the  20th  instant  within  i miles  of  Ope- 
lousas and  bivouacked  for  the  night.  I passed  bridge  on  the  Teche 
about  midway  between  Opelousas  and  the  junction.  It  had  not  been 
destroyed.  The  bridge  over  the  Teche  at  the  junction  is  destroyed.  I 
arrived  at  camp,  beyond  Opelousas,  and  rejoined  my  brigade  at  1 p.  m. 
on  the  21st  instant.  The  section  rejoined  its  battery. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

A.  POWER  GALLWAY, 

Major , Gomdg.  One  hundred  and  seventy  third  N.  Y.  State  Yols. 

Lieut.  Petek  French,  A.  A.  A.  #.,  Third  Division. 




Ho.  18. 


Bevorts  of  Lieut.  Col.  Sidney  A.  Bean , Fourth  Wisconsin  Infantry , of 
expeditions  to  Plaquemine  and  Boyce's  Plantation. 


Hdqrs.  Fourth  Wisconsin  Volunteers, 

On  the  Plaquemine  Brule  Bayou , 12  miles  out , April  22,  1863. 
General  : The  guide,  Drexel,  thinks  the  information  I have  gathered 
of  great  importance,  and  insists  that  the  enemy  cannot  make  his  escape 
from  his  present  position. 


Chat.  XXVTL] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


345 


I found  the  enemy’s  pickets  at  this  place,  where  there  is  a bridge  over 
the  bayou.  The  bayou  is  fordable.  I sent  a reconnoitering  party  9 
miles  farther  to  another  branch  of  the  Plaquemine  Bayou,  and  they 
ascertained  that  the  enemy  camped  yesterday  on  Emile  Mouton’s 
plantation,  just  across  the  branch  of  the  bayou  mentioned,  their 
numbers  from  1,500  to  2,000,  so  the  negroes  and  citizens  report.  They 
came  there  Monday,  directly  from  Carrion  Crow  Bayou  (where  we 
formed  line  of  battle),  and  have  not  passed  through  Opelousas  or  by 
this  road.  The  negroes  say  that  General  Mouton  was  with  them. 
They  describe  the  appearance  of  Mouton  correctly,  according  to  Drexel. 
But"  they  all  say  that  there  was  no  infantry ; and  the  whites  say  they 
don’t  know  where  the  infantry  went.  They  report  that  300  passed  over 
this  bridge  this  forenoon ; had  been  burning  cotton  and  scouting. 
Drexel  says  they  cannot  get  away  except  by  crossing  the  Mermenton 
Biver,  which  is  difficult  crossing— only  poor  ferries — and  thinks  they 
could  be  overtaken.  I think  proper  to  make  the  report  to  you  of  his 
opinion.  He  incloses  a map.  I shall  return  in  the  morning. 

There  are  very  few  horses,  mules,  or  negroes  left.  The  rebels  have 
taken  everything. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  A.  BEAN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Detachment* 

General  Andrews,  Chief  of  Staff, 

Headquarters  Detachment, 

Bayou  Plaquemine  Brule , April  23,  1863 — 8 a.  m. 

General  : The  enemy’s  force  is  estimated  at  over  2,000  by  the  mosfe 
intelligent  witnesses  I find.  There  are  2,000  cavalry,  and  some  say  the 
infantry  went  before  them,  but  others  that  they  have  not  seen  any 
infantry.  General  Mouton  is  with  them.  Yesterday  morning  they 
were  4 miles  from  here;  were  collecting  transportation  and  burning 
cotton.  When  we  drove  in  their  pickets  they  retreated  hurriedly,, 
leaving  a good  deal  of  cotton  unburned.  But  I have  only  500  men, 
and  cannot  follow  them  up.  I have  only  this  day’s  rations,  and  there; 
is  nothing  in  the  country.  My  orders  were  to  return  to-day. 

The  enemy  are  now  on  the  Mermenton  Biver,  crossing.  They  have 
to  cross  on  ferries.  After  they  are  over  the  river  and  have  gone  30 
miles  they  come  to  the  Calcasieu,  over  which  there  is  no  bridge,  but 
two  ferries,  4 or  6 miles  apart.  Now,  Drexel,  the  guide,  says  a force 
may  be  sent  so  as  entirely  to  cut  them  off,  or  that  they  can  be  over- 
taken before  they  can  get  over  the  Calcasieu. 

I have  not  force  enough  to  act  against  them — only  30  cavalry  and 
no  rations.  I report  the  facts  and  wait  for  orders.  Unless  ordered  to 
the  contrary,  I shall  have  to  return  this  evening.  They  (the  enemy} 
are  now  about  20  miles  from  this  point.  There  is  cotton  here,  but  no 
transportation — no  mules,  carts,  or  harness. 

Whatever  is  done,  be  pleased  to  send  me  a map,  if  convenient. 

Drexel  says  that  a force  should  be  sent  on  the  road  to  Bayou  Canne, 
and  one  on  this  road,  in  order  to  cut  them  off.  A man  just  reports  that 
there  were  yesterday  1,000  men  at  Bellevue,  wherever  that  is,  about  6 
miles  from  here. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  A.  BEAN, 

Lieut.  Col.  Fourth  Wisconsin  Vols .,  Commanding. 

General  Andrews,  Chief  of  Staff. 


346 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap  XXVn.i 

Headquarters  Fourth  Wisconsin  Volunteers, 

Near  Alexandria , La .,  May  14,  1863 — 10  p.  m. 

General  : The  reconnoitering  party  has  returned.  They  found  the 
enemy  at  Judge  Boyce’s,  behind  a breastwork  of  cotton  bales  thrown 
across  the  road  and  bridge,  their  numbers  variously  estimated  from 
100  to  300.  Our  men  fell  back  a few  miles,  when  the  infantry  dis- 
mounted and  drove  them  back  and  the  cavalry  followed  them  to  the 
bridge. 

We  lost  three  horses,  but  no  men,  and  took  one  prisoner.  The  pris-ii 
oner  belonged  to  Colonel  Lane’s  Texas  regiment,  which  left  Texas  fifteen: 
days  ago.  The  regiment  crossed  the  Cane  Biver  day  before  yesterday,! 
and  yesterday  was  in  the  Piney  Woods.  Captain  Semmes’  battery  was 
following  it.  There  was  one  piece  of  artillery  at  the  bridge  this  even- 
ing— perhaps  more. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  A.  BEAN, 

Colonel , Commanding  Detachment. 

General  Weitzel. 


No.  19. 

Report  of  Col.  Oliver  P.  Gooding , Thirty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry , t 
commanding  Third  Brigade , of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Third  Division, 

Opelousas , La.,  April  21,  1863.  1 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  accordance  with  orders  from 
General  Emory  on  the  12th  instant,  my  brigade,  excepting  the  One! 
hundred  and  seventy-fifth  New  York  Volunteers,  marched  with  oui  ; 
army  from  Pattersonville  toward  the  enemy’s  works  on  Bayou  Teche.  ' 
some  4 or  5 miles  distant,  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-sixth  New  York  ' 
Volunteers,  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sharpe,  follow 
ing  the  line  of  the  railroad. 

A short  distance  from  Pattersonville,  pursuant  to  orders  from  Gen  )! 
eral  Emory,  1 sent  the  Fifty- third  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Colonel  i 
Kimball,  to  re-enforce  Colonel  Ingraham’s  brigade.  A short  time  sub  i 
sequent  I sent  the  Thirty  first  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Lieutenant  i 
Colonel  Hopkins,  to  the  left  bank  of  the  Bayou  Teche  to  re-enforce  the 
One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  New  York  Volunteers,  Colonel  Bryan, 
which  was  skirmishing  with  the  enemy’s  pickets  on  that  bank  of  the 
bayou  $ the  Fifty-third  Massachusetts  Volunteers  and  the  One  hun 
dred  and  fifty-sixth  New  York  Volunteers  afterward  rejoined  the  bri 
gade.  On  arriving  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works  an  artillery  due! 
ens.ued.  Seeing  that  my  brigade  was  exposed  to  the  shots  and  sheik  1 
of  the  enemy,  I marched  it  200  or  300  yards  to  the  rear  and  caused  the  ; 
men  to  lie  down.  In  the  mean  time  the  One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  i 
New  York  Volunteers,  supported  by  the  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  Vol 
unteers,  carried  on  a brisk  skirmish  with  the  enemy  on  the  left  bank  oi 
the  bayou,  gallantly  driving  him  before  them. 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th  I was  ordered  to  take  my  best  regimenl 
and  proceed  to  the  left  bank  of  the  Bayou  Teche,  assume  command  oi 
all  the  forces  there,  and  hold  at  all  hazards  the  pontoon  bridge  which 
had  been  thrown  across  the  bayou,  which  I did.  I had  been  there  but 
a short  time  when  I received  an  order  from  General  Emory  to  attack  8 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


347 


light  battery  of  the  enemy,  which  was  throwing  grape  into  General 
Paine’s  brigade  on  the  opposite  shore,  and  which  was  supposed  to  be  in 
position  outside  of  the  enemy’s  works  on  the  left  bank  of  the  bayou, 
just  above  a sugar-house,  but  was  ordered  not  to  storm  the  enemy’s 
works.  I made  my  disposition  for  the  attack,  advanced  my  skirmishers 
beyond  the  sugar-house  in  plain  view  of  the  works,  and  discovered 
that  there  was  no  light  battery  outside  the  same.  The  Thirty-first 
Massachusetts  Volunteers  composed  my  line  of  skirmishers,  supported 
by  the  Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Bodman.  The  advance  of  my  skirmishers  was  hotly  contested  by  the 
enemy,  who  were  driven  before  them.  A skirmish  fight  on  the  right  of 
my  line,  in  and  near  the  wood,  was  kept  up  till  about  2.30  p.  m.  The 
ammunition  of  the  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  being  expended,  it  was 
relieved  by  the  Thirty -eighth  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

About  this  time  my  brigade  was  re-enforced  by  the  Fifty-third  Mas- 
sachusetts Volunteers,  One  hundred  and  fifty-sixth  New  York  Volun- 
teers, and  the  two  remaining  sections  of  the  First  Maine  Battery.  In 
accordance  with  orders  from  Generals  Banks  and  Emory,  I made  my 
dispositions  and  immediately  moved  on  the  enemy’s  works.  My  dis- 
positions were  as  follows The  Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts  in  advance, 
deployed  as  skirmishers  ; Fifty-third  Massachusetts  about  150  yards  in 
rear  of  the  Thirty-eighth,  and  deployed  as  skirmishers ; two  sections  of 
the  First  Maine  Battery,  one  under  command  of  Lieutenants  Haley  and 
Morton,  on  parallel  plantation  roads  leading  to  the  enemy’s  works,  and 
immediately  in  the  rear  .of  the  second  line  of  skirmishers;  the  remaining 
section  was  held  in  reserve;  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteers 
immediately  to  the  right  and  rear  of  the  right  section  of  the  battery; 
One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  New  York  immediately  to  the  left  and 
rear  of  the  left  section  of  the  battery;  One  hundred  and  fifty-sixth  New 
York  in  the  wood  on  the  extreme  right,  having  been  sent  to  turn  the 
enemy’s  left  flank ; detachment  of  Louisiana  Cavalry,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant  Ives,  posted  in  reserve,  some  distance  in  rear  of 
my  right. 

These  dispositions  being  made,  at  3.15  p.  m.  I ordered  an  advance  of 
the  whole.  My  advance  was  met  by  a brisk  fire  from  the  artillery  and 
musketry  of  the  enemy,  who  was  driven  into  his  works. 

About  5 p.  m.,  the  ammunition  of  the  Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts 
having  been  expended,  it  was  relieved  by  the  Fifty-third  Massachu- 
setts. At  about  the  same  time,  having,  learned  that  the  One  hundred 
and  fifty-sixth  New  York  had  a superior  force  to  contend  with  on  the 
right,  I ordered  the  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  to  go  to  its  support.  The 
Thirty-first  Massachusetts  having  arrived  to  its  support,  a short  time 
afterward  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-sixth  New  York,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Sharpe  commanding,  supported  by  the  Thirty-first  Massachu- 
setts, Lieutenant-Colonel  Hopkins,  charged  and  carried  a breastwork  of 
the  enemy  in  the  wood  in  front  of  our  right,  killing  many  of  the  enemy 
and  capturing  86  prisoners,  among  the  latter  two  lieutenants,  one  of  the 
Seventh  Texas  Cavalry  and  one  of  the  Eighteenth  Louisiana  Infantry. 
The  fight  was  continued  in  front  of  the  Fifty-third  Massachusetts  and 
the  artillery,  and  by  the  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  and  One  hundred 
and  fifty-sixth  New  York,  in  the  wood  on  the  right,  until  darkness  put 
a close  to  it,  my  troops  having  advanced  to  within  200  yards  of  the 
enemy’s  works,  which  line  they  held,  notwithstanding  repeated  efforts 
of  the  enemy  to  drive  them  back.  This  line  was  held  during  the  night. 
In  my  judgment  two  hours  more  of  daylight  would  have  enabled  me 
to  turn  the  enemy’s  left  flank  and  witnessed  the  triumphal  entry  of  my 
troops  into  his  works. 


348 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA., 


S.  MISS. 


At  5.30  a.  m.  of  the  14th  the  Fifty-third  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Kim 
ball  commanding,  entered  the  enemy’s  works,  and  at  the  same  timj 
Company  D,  Thirty-first  Massachusetts,  commanded  by  Capt.  W.  I 
Allen,  who  had  deployed  his  company  as  skirmishres  in  the  wood,  en, 
tered  the  fort  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  enemy’s  position,  they  having 
been  evacuated  by  the  enemy  during  the  night. 

The  loss  in  my  brigade  during  the  entire  engagement  was  15  kille< 
and  57  wounded.  Among  the  killed  were  the  gallant  Captain  Gault] 
Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts,  and  Lieutenants  Nutting  and  Freer,  Fifty 
third  Massachusetts  and  One  hundred  and  fifty-sixth  New  York,  wh<- 
lost  their  lives  while  nobly  battling  for  their  country.. 

About  130  prisoners  were  captured,  150  stands  of  small-arms,  and  3y 
cavalry  horses,  with  all  their  equipments. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Eodman,  Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts  Volunteers 
mentions  a case  of  marked  coolness  and  gallantry  on  the  part  of  Privat] 
Patrick  Smith,  Company  D,  Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts  Volunteer^ 
who,  coming  suddenly  upon  three  rebels  in  the  wood  upon  the  right 
shot  one  of  them  and  compelled  the  other  two  to  surrender,  and  brough 
them  both  in  as  prisoners. 

My  entire  command,  officers  and  men,  behaved  with  marked  coolnes, 
and  courage  throughout  the  entire  engagement,  proving  themselve 
true  men  and  brave  soldiers.  I have  to  speak  in  the  highest  praise  qj 
all  the  members  of  my  staff,  who  were  necessarily  mounted  and  unde 
fire  during  the  entire  engagement. 


I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.  P.  GOODING, 

Colonel , Commanding  Third  Brigade , Third  Division. 
Lieut.  Peter  French, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Third  Division , Nineteenth  Corps. 


No.  20. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  W.  8.  B.  Hopkins,  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  In 
fantry , of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 


Hdqrs.  Thirty-pirst  Regiment  Massachusetts  Vols., 

Near  Vermillionville , La.,  April  18,  1863.  ( 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  th; 
part  taken  by  my  command  in  the  events  of  the  12th,  13th,  and  14tj 
instant : 

When  the  army  in  its  advance  from  Patterson ville  on  the  12th  hat 
reached  the  pontoon  bridge  which  had  been  thrown  across  Bayou  Tech 
by  order  of  General  Emory,  I crossed  the  bridge  with  my  battalion  ant 
one  section  of  artillery,  to  report  to  Colonel  Bryan,  One  hundred  ant 
seventy-fifth  New  York,  who  was  moving  up  on  the  east  side  of  th 
Teche,  abreast  with  General  Weitzel’s  advance. 

With  Colonel  Bryan  I advanced  to  within  sight  of  the  rebel  earth 
works  on  each  side  of  the  river.  Colonel  Bryan’s  regiment  skirmishet 
in  the  cane  as  far  as  a sugar-house,  situated  about  a third  of  the  wa; 
toward  the  earthworks,  when  a fire  of  shot  and  shells  was  opened  fron 
a field  battery  in  the  earthworks  on  our  forces,  which  was  returned  ty 
our  artillery.  The  fire  continued  some  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  wliei 
our  forces  were  withdrawn  into  the  field  below,  where  we  bivouacke( 


■T.  XXVTL] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


349 


the  night  on  the  bayou,  just  out  of  range  of  the  eheiny*s  guns,  and 
ere  an  old  bridge  was  being  repaired  to  give  us  communication  with 
3 other  side. 

[ picketed  the  ground  this  night,  and  the  officer  commanding  the 
iket  reports  that  frequently  during  the  night  the  enemy’s  scouts 
proached  within  very  short  distance  of  our  pickets,  but  a shot  or  two 
>ve  them  back.  Our  position  was  covered  by  a long  row  of  catalpa 
es,  which  divided  the  fields. 

At  4 a.  m.  the  whole  command  was  quietly  called  to  arms,  in  antici- 
fcion  of  an  attack,  under  cover  of  the  morning  fog;  but  nothing  oc- 
rred  until  the  arrival  of  Colonel  Gooding,  Thirty-first  Massachusetts 
>lunt.eers,  commanding  Third  Brigade,  with  the  Thirty-eighth  Mas- 
diusetts  Volunteers,  Lieutenant- Colonel  Bodman.  Immediately  upon 
serving  the  ground,  Colonel  Gooding  ordered  two  companies  of  my 
ttalion  into  the  field  of  action  to  skirmish  along  the  edge  of  the  woods 
our  right,  which  extended  to  the  left  and  around  the  rear  of  the' 
emy’s  works. 

[ detailed  Companies  A and  K,  Captains  Hollister  and  Hovey,  under 
nmand  of  Captain  Hollister.  A sharp  skirmish  along  the  woods  fol- 
ded this  movement,  and  I was  immediately  ordered  by  Colonel  Good- 
r to  deploy  the  remainder  of  my  battalion  as  skirmishers  from  the 
•ods  to  the  bayou,  and  advanced  through  the  cane  as  far  as  the  sugar- 
use  on  the  bank  of  the  bayou,  to  discover  any  enemy  there  secreted, 
d also  a field  battery,  supposed  to  be  stationed  on  the  banks  of  the 
you  above  the  sugar-house. 

this  advance  having  been  made,  but  no  enemy  being  discovered  out- 
le  the  works,  the  left  of  my  line  of  skirmishers  was  advanced  to  just 
thin  musket  range  of  the  enemy’s  works,  while  the  right  fought  its 
y along  the  woods  and  the  center  kept  the  line  complete.  In  this 
inner  my  battalion  was  engaged  some  three  hours,  when  we  were 
ieved  by  the  Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  and  fell  back 
the  rear  to  replenish  ammunition. 

During  this  skirmish,  being  the  only  field  officer  with  the  battalion, 
called  upon  my  senior  captain  (Capt.  E.  P.  Hollister)  to  act  as  lieu- 
lant-colonel,  in  which  position  he  as  well  as  my  adjutant,  First  Lieut. 
C.  Howell,  both  being  mounted  and  riding,  of  necessity,  along  the 
lole  line  (ft  skirmishers,  behaved  with  commendable  energy  and  in- 
spidity. 

In  the  disposition  of  the  brigade  made  by  Colonel  Gooding,  command- 
?,  for  the  final  attack  of  the  day  upon  the  enemy’s  works,  the  position 
dgned  my  battalion  was  that  of  reserve  to  the  One  hundred  and  fifty - 
th  New  York  Volunteers,  Lieut.  Col.  Jacob  Sharpe,  which  was  or- 
red  to  proceed  along  the  edge  of  the  woods  to  flank  the  left  of  the 
amy’s  works. 

The  two  regiments  advanced,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sharpe  driving  the 
amy  back  by  sharp  firing  until  he  reached  a point  some  50  yards 
m the  wood,  where  I protected  my  reserve  battalion  from  the  fire  by 
aping  the  men  lying  down  in  the  ditch,  about  five  rods  in  the  rear  of 
* One  hundred  and  fifty-sixth  New  York  Volunteers. 

[n  this  position  I remained  until  ordered  by  Lieutenant-Colonel 
arpe  to  support  him,  if  it  should  become  necessary,  in  a charge  on 
3 wood,  and  not  otherwise.  The  gallantry  of  his  charge  left  nothing 
done,  and  I followed,  only  to  receive  some  of  the  last  shots  of  the 
creating  enemy.  Together  the  two  regiments  slept  upon  the  field 
dch  they  had  won. 

Colonel  Sharpe  picketed  the  wood  toward  the  enemy’s  works  until 


350 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chap.  XXVTL 


4 a.  m.  of  the  14th,  when  I relieved  his  pickets  by  four  companies  of  ; 
my  battalion — A,  Lieutenant  Stewart;  K,  Captain  Hovey;  D,  Captain 
Allen,  and  E,  Captain  Nettleton,  all  under  command  of  Captain  Hol- 
lister. The  two  battalions  were  then  withdrawn  to  a new  position,  in 
anticipation  of  the  old  positions  being  shelled  at  daybreak.  No  attack, 
however,  being  made  either  upon  our  forces  or  our  pickets,  Colonel 
Gooding  shortly  ordered  that  my  picket  force  advance  and  ascertain  } 
the  situation  in  the  enemy’s  works.  Capt.  W.  I.  Allen,  Company  D,  i 
advancing  through  the  wood,  which  was  charged,  entered  a redoubt,  i 
palisaded  in  rear,  capable  of  mounting  three  guns,  with  a ditch  of  five 
feet  of  water  in  front,  and  from  which  some  of  the  best  sharpshooting  | 
against  us  was  done  on  the  previous  day.  This  advance  disclosed  the 
evacuation  of  the  enemy’s  works  during  the  night.  This  was  the  left 
of  the  enemy’s  works. 

In  the  rifle-pits,  redoubt,  and  the  immediate  wood  were  found  about 
25  bodies  of  the  enemy’s  dead  and  1 wounded,  some  20  dead  horses, 
and  40  pieces  of  smali-arms.  The  latter  were  collected,  but  for  total 
want  of  transportation  were  left  in  the  works  by  the  picket.  In  the 
immediate  vicinity  the  pickets  captured  some  20  serviceable  horses, 
and  on  the  ensuing  march  some  20  mules,  all  of  which  were  informally  i 
turned  over  by  order  of  Major-General  Banks.  The  prisoners  taken  j 
by  the  pickets  and  those  who  were  brought  in  to  the  battalion  on  the 
march  Amounted  in  all  to  33,  besides  about  6 wounded,  who  were  re- 
turned to  the  hospital.  These  were  turned  over — a few  to  General  < 
Emory  and  the  remainder  to  the  provost-marshal  at  Franklin. 

On  the  14th  the  battalion  marched  with  the  brigade  to  the  city  of 
Franklin. 

My  battalion,  during  the  time  reported  on,  consisted  of  1 field  officer, 

3 staff  officers,  12  line  officers,  and  400  enlisted  men.  These  are  in 
seven  companies,  three  large,  healthy  companies  of  the  regiment  being 
at  Fort  Pike,  which,  had  they  been  with  me,  would  have  made  my  bat-  It 
talion  of  disciplined  men  probably  the  largest  in  the  field  or  the  corps. 

It  is  but  due  to  all  the  officers  of  the  battalion  to  say  that  without 
exception  they  behaved  with  marked  courage  and  energy,  handling 
their  men  with  coolness  and  efficiency  in  every  fiosition  in  which  they 
were  placed.  Individual  comment  would  include  all,  or  do  injustice  to 
some.  • 

Of  the  non-commissioned  officers  of  the  regiment  the  same  may  be 
said,  and  of  all  the  enlisted  men.  I am  happy  to  say  that  their  bap- 
tism of  fire  has  proved  them  brave  without  exception,  obedient  without 
question,  and  reliable  for  any  position.  I saw  no  man  fall  out,  fall 
back,  or  falter.* 

W.  S.  B.  HOPKINS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding  Thirty-first  Massachusetts . f. 

Capt.  E.  H.  Fordham,  A.  A.  A.  <£.,  3d  Brig.,  3 d Div.,  19 th  A.  C.  \ 


No.  21. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  William  L.  Rodman , Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts 
Lnfantry , of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

Hdqrs.  Thirty-eighth  Regt.  Massachusetts  Vols., 

On  the  road  to  Opelousas , La.,  April  18,  1863. 
Colonel  : In  obedience  to  your  order  I beg  leave  to  forward  my 


Nominal  list  of  casualties  omitted ; embodied  inrevised  statement,  p.  319. 


3hap.  XXY3X]  OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA.  351 

report  of  tlie  operations  of  my  command  during  the  12th,  13th,  and 
L4th  instant : 

On  the  12th,  being  on  the  left  of  the  Third  Brigade,  acting  as  reserve, 
diere  was  little  worthy  of  note  in  the  action  of  the  Thirty-eighth.  We 
merely  followed  the  movements  of  the  Second  Brigade  in  advance  of 
is  on  the  march. 

On  the  13th,  at  about  8 a.  in.,  I received  your  order  to  cross  the  river, 
ind  immediately  obeyed.  The  passage  of  the  regiment  over  the  pon- 
toon bridge  brought  down  a sharp  fire  from  the  enemy’s  artillery,  and 
ywo  shells  burst  within  a few  yards  of  the  bridge,  splashing  wate!  over 
:wo  or  three  companies.  Arriving  on  the  other  side  of  the  bayou,  I 
soon  formed  my  command  in  three  divisions,  and  advanced  beyond  the 
3atalpa  trees  into  the  immense  cane  field,  which  subsequently  proved 
:o  be  a veritable  field  of  battle.  While  the  Thirty-first  Massachusetts 
leployed  across  the  field  and  skirmished  forward  under  the  active 
personal  supervision  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hopkins,  my  command 
aid  upon  the  ground  in  the  grass  ready  to  support  the  Thirty-first 
f necessary. 

At  1 p.  m.  I was  ordered  to  deploy  my  regiment  and  relieve  the 
Thirty-first.  This  was  done  promptly,  and  the  line  of  skirmishers 
idvanced  a short  distance  beyond  the  line  occupied  by  the  Thirty-first, 
inder  orders  to  merely  watch  and  prevent  any  advance  of  the  enemy. 

At  2 p.  m.  I received  your  order  to  prepare  to  advance  my  skir- 
mishers, with  further  instructions  to  press  on  until  within  good  musket 
shot  of  the  works,  then  to  halt  and  await  orders.  I had  hardly  time  to 
gallop  along  the  line,  communicating  this  order,  when  it  was  modified, 
;o  the  effect  that  we  were  to  press  on,  and  if  we  reached  the  enemy’s 
works  we  were  to  go  into  them,  and  to  move  at  once. 

At  2.20  p.  m.,  having  communicated  this  order  to  Major  Richardson, 
who  took  charge  of  the  left,  and  throughout  the  day  remained  with  the 
idvance,  and  ordered,  “Guide  left,”  I gave  the  command  “ Forward,” 
md  ordered  the  reserve  to  fix  bayonets. 

I think  I am  justified  in  describing  the  advance  as  elegant.  The 
skirmishers  were  at  proper  intervals,  and  my  reserves  advanced  steadily 
md  in  perfect  order  under  a furious  fire  of  artillery  and  musketry. 
A large  number  of  the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  although  at  long  range, 
immediately  fled  from  the  ditches  and  the  cane  and  retired  to  the  earth- 
works. The  fire,  which  had  been  incessant  all  day,  was  much  increased 
it  this  moment,  and  several  of  my  men  were  put  hors  de  combat. 

Color  Corpl.  George  H.  Trow  was  instantly  killed,  and  Captain  Gault, 
)f  Company  A,  who  was  in  the  left  reserve,  fell,  with  his  leg  shot  com- 
pletely off,  and  soon  after  died  on  his  way  to  the  hospital,  while  several 
)thers  were  more  or  less  severely  wounded.  Captain  Gault  was,  as  an 
iccomplished  officer  and  gallant  gentleman,  beloved  by  his  companions 
n arms  while  living,  and  his  loss  is  deeply  deplored  by  the  whole  regi- 
ment. 

The  regiment  continued  to  advance,  at  first  rapidly,  but  afterward 
slowly,  until  my  left  was  within  about  450  yards  of  the  earthworks. 
At  this  time,  4.15  p.  m.,  my  right  had  reached  the  wood,  where  it  was 
evident  a strong  force  was  stationed,  not  more  than  50  yards  distant, 
protected  and  concealed  by  felled  logs  and  thick  brush- wood.  Finding 
t impossible  to  advance  in  this  direction  I halted  my  line,  which,  pro- 
jected by  ditches  and  stumps,  continued  to  fire  as  opportunity  pre- 
sented, and  reported  to  you  the  condition  of  things  at  4.45  p.  m.  I was 
lesirous  before  dark  to  learn  the  progress  made  by  the  One  hundred 
md  fifty-sixth  New  York,  which  was  moving  in  the  wood  on  the  right 


352 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xXvn. 

flank,  fearing  if  I pressed  into  tlie  wood  my  men  might  be  between  two 
fires.  I also  reported  that  my  center  was  nearly  our  of  ammunition. 

At  5.15  p.  m.  I was  directed  to  allow  my  skirmishers  to  be  relieved 
by  the  Fifty-third  Massachusetts,  which  had  been  following  150  yards 
in  my  rear,  and  to  send  to  the  rear  for  ammunition.  I brought  back 
seven  companies  to  a ditch  about  100  paces  in  the  rear  of  their  ad- 
vanced position,  ordered  them  to  retake  proper  intervals,  and  send  de- 
tails for  cartridges.  Just  before  this  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-sixth 
New  York,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sharpe,  had  come  up  in  the  wood, 
and  my  men  on  the  right  were  extremely  reluctant  to  retire.  Finding 
that  my  left,  acting  under  directions  received  from  one  of  your  staff, 
was  moving  a little  farther  to  the  rear,  I ordered  back  my  whole  line 
to  a point  about  100  yards  in  advance  of  the  road  leading  across  the 
plantation  from  the  sugar-house,  where  ammunition  was  immediately 
Issued  and  preparations  made  to  again  advance  to  the  support  of 
Colonel  Kimball. 

The  enemy’s  fire,  which  was  strong  at  the  time  of  the  advance  of  the 
Fifty-third,  soon  slackened  in  front,  but  continued  very  severe  in  the 
wood  on  the  right  until  dark.  After  this  but  few  shots  were  fired,  at 
long  intervals. 

My  list  of  casualties  indicates  the  severity  of  the  fire  of  the  enemy. 
My  left  was  most  exposed  to  the  fire  of  the  rebel  artillery  and  suffered 
most  severely. 

Were  I to  enumerate,  colonel,  all  of  my  command  that  behaved  well 
I should  send  you  my  roster,  and,  with  few  emendations,  my  company 
rolls.  Officers  and  men,  on  learning  that  the  order  was  to  advance  into 
the  enemy’s  works,  from  the  first  regarded  themselves  as  a forlorn  hope, 
but  hesitated  not  to  advance  boldly,  and,  I think,  performed  all  that 
could  be  expected  of  them.  Every  step  in  their  advance  revealed  more 
and  more  the  strength  of  the  Confederate  works,  which  were  found 
vastly  more  formidable  than  was  suspected  in  the  morning. 

I inclose  a list  of  casualties,  which  shows  a loss  of  6 killed  and  29 
wounded ; of  these  last,  the  surgeon’s  report  shows  17  severely,  5 dan- 
gerously, and  7 slightly  wounded.  With  one  exception  all  these  casual- 
ties occurred  in  the  advance.  My  right,  which  entered  the  wood,  found 
the  bodies  of  17  dead  within  the  enemy’s  position,  and  were  told  that 
they  were  killed  by  the  bullets  of  the  companies  forming  my  right,  who 
fired  coolly  at  the  smoke  made  by  the  Confederate  rifles.  They  also 
learned  from  prisoners  that  were  taken  in  this  quarter  that  there  were 
two  regiments  at  least  in  these  woods,  which  fully  expected  to  turn  the 
right  flank  of  your  brigade,  but  were  staggered  by  the  steadiness  of 
the  advance,  not  only  of  the  Thirty-eighth,  but  of  all  the  troops  of  your 
command. 

During  the  night  of  the  13th  all  was  quiet  until  about  1 o’clock,  when 
the  enemy’s  artillery  was  distinctly  heard  on  the  roads  beyond  the  wood 
in  the  rear  of  the  rebel  works. 

At  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  14th  Colonel  Kimball  moved  his 
command  and  took  possession  of  the  abandoned  earthworks.  The 
appearance  of  the  national  flag  on  the  parapet  was  greeted  with  loud 
cheers  from  all  parts  of  the  field. 

I moved  my  command  into  the  works  at  7.30  o’clock,  and  shortly  after- 
ward ordered  the  regiment  to  deploy  and  skirmish  in  the  woods.  The 
woods  were  only  passable  through  paths  and  wood  roads.  In  passing 
through,  4 prisoners  were  taken  and  turned  over  during  the  day.  On 
reaching  the  bayou  we  were  compelled  to  halt,  owing  to  the  partial  de- 
struction of  the  bridge.  The  Thirty-eighth,  aided  by  some  of  the  men 


hap.  XXVH.]  OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA.  353 

f the  First  Maine  Battery,  repaired  the  bridge,  enabling  your  brigade 
o move  forward  at  2 p.  m. 

I desire  to  mention  one  case  of  gallantry  reported  to  me.  Private 
^trick  Smith,  of  Company  D,  coming  suddenly  upon  three  rebels  in 
he  wood  upon  the  right,  shot  one  of  them  and  compelled  the  other  two 
o give  up  their  arms  (Harper’s  Ferry  smooth-bores),  and  brought  them 
oth  in  as  prisoners. 

I think,  colonel,  I have  above  detailed  with  sufficient  exactness  the 
•art  taken  by  the  Thirty-eighth  Regiment  in  the  operations  of  the 
•rigade  under  your  command,  which  contributed  so  much  to  the  suc- 
ess  of  the  Nineteenth  Army  Corps  on  the  banks  of  the  Bayou  Teche. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  LOGAN  RODMAN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Thirty -eighth  Begt.  Mass.  Vols. 

Col.  O.  P.  Gooding, 

Comdg.  Third  Brigade , Emory’s  Division , 19 th  Army  Corps. 


No.  22. 

leport  of  Col.  John  W.  Kimball , Fifty -third  Massachusetts  Infantry , of 
engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

Hdqrs.  Fifty-third  Massachusetts  Volunteers, 

In  the  Field , April  16,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  doings  of  my  command  on 
he  12th,  13th,  and  14th  instant: 

On  the  12th  instant,  at  10.30  a.  m.,  I was  ordered  to  march  immediately 
rom  Pattersonville.  Proceeding  in  column  by  companies  through  the 
ane  fields  for  about  1J  miles,  I was  ordered  by  Lieutenant  Loring,  of 
leneral  Emory’s  staff,  to  proceed  and  take  position  to  the  left,  and  in 
tie  rear  of  and  in  support  of  Colonel  Ingraham’s  brigade,  whose  skir- 
lishers  were  then  engaged  with  those  of  the  enemy  in  the  open  field 
eyond  the  wood,  in  front  of  his  line,  and  immediately  took  the  posi- 
on  designated,  throwing  out  skirmishers  on  my  left  flank.  Upon  pro- 
eeding  to  the  support  of  Colonel  Ingraham  we  discovered  an  aban- 
oned  earthwork  at  the  edge  of  the  wood,  and  upon  examination  found 
road  leading  from  it  through  the  wood  to  the  field  beyond.  Deeming 
fis  road  of  some  importance  I immediately  ordered  Major  Pratt,  with 
iiree  companies,  forward  to  hold  the  same. 

At  1.30  p.  m.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Blanchard,  commanding  the  One 
undred  and  sixty-second  New  York  Volunteers,  reported  to  me  with  his 
?giment,  and  was  placed  in  position  on  my  right.  During  this  time 
16  skirmishing  in  front  had  been  quite  brisk,  with  the  enemy  gradually 
dling  back. 

About  3.30  p.  m.  I was  ordered  to  rejoin  the  brigade  and  proceeded 
bout  1 mile  toward  the  front,  where  I was  ordered  into  line  of  battle, 
iy  position  being  at  the  right  of  the  brigade  line.  After  lying  in  this 
osition  about  one  and  a half  hours,  during  which  time  a heavy  can- 
onading  was  going  on  at  the  front,  I was  ordered  back  about  300 
ards  to  a road,  where  we  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

On  Monday,  13th  instant,  at  7 o’clock,  was  ordered  by  Lieutenant 
oring  to  proceed  with  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-sixth  New  York  and 
lfty -third  Massachusetts  Regiments  to  support  Duryea’s  U.  S.  bat- 

23  r r — vol  xv 


354  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

tery.  Remaining  in  this  position  about  one  hour  was  ordered  by  Cap- 
tain Fordham  to  report  immediately  with  my  regiment  to  Colonel 
Gooding,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river.  Upon  arriving  on  the  other 
side  was  placed  in  line  of  battle  upon  a road  in  front  of  a catalpa  hedge, 
with  orders  to  hold  the  position,  for  the  purpose  Of  making  a stand  in 
case  the  troops  in  front  were  driven  back. 

At  2.15  p.  m.  was  ordered  by  Captain  Fordham  to  move  rapidly  to 
the  front  and  deploy  four  companies  of  my  regiment  as  skirmishers  150 
yards  in  the  rear  of  the  Thirty-eighth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  which 
had  just  relieved  the  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  holding 
the  other  four  companies  in  reserve.  I was  further  ordered  to  be  gov- 
erned in  my  movements  by  the  movements  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rod- 
man?s  command,  to  support  him  in  case  of  a repulse,  and,  if  possible, 
to  charge  upon  and  enter  the  enemy’s  works.  Conforming  to  the 
movements  of  Colonel  Rodman,  we  steadily  moved  forward  under  a 
brisk  and  well-directed  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries,  reserving  my 
fire,  as  the  front  line  was  engaged  with  the  sharpshooters  of  the  enemy. 

At  about  5 p.  m.  I was  ordered  to  move  forward  and  relieve  Colonel  I 
Rodman,  his  ammunition  having  become  exhausted.  My  men  moved 
forward  with  alacrity,  passing  his  line  some  20  paces,  in  good  order, 
and  immediately  engaged  the  enemy,  the  fire  upon  the  right  and  left 
being  very  severe.  Sheltering  the  men  as  much  as  possible  behind 
stumps,  I pressed  the  line  steadily  forward  until  the  right  had  ap- 
proached within  125  yards  of  the  enemy,  concealed  behind  an  abatis. 
The  left  was  pressed  forward  to  within  250  yards  of  the  works  under  a 
galling  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries  and  the  riflemen  concealed  be- 
hind the  intrenchments.  The  center,  not  being  under  so  heavy  a fire, 
was  pressed  forward  until  it  secured  an  oblique  fire  upon  the  enemy 
concealed  behind  the  abatis.  Holding  this  position  and  maintaining  a 
brisk  fire  until  dark,  I was  ordered  by  Lieutenant  Morey  to  withdraw 
the  line  about  60  yards,  to  a ditch,  and  hold  that  position  during  the 
night.  A few  minutes  before  this  my  reserve,  under  Major  Pratt,  was 
ordered  by  Lieutenant  Bond  to  move  rapidly  forward  and  relieve  the 
two  companies  on  the  left  of  my  line.  This  was  rapidly  and  hand- 
somely done  under  a hot,  concentrated  fire  from  the  enemy. 

At  10.30  p.  m.  there  were  some  slight  indications  of  the  withdrawal 
of  the  enemy,  which  increased  so  much  that  at  11.30  o’clock  I reported 
to  the  colonel  commanding,  through  Major  Pratt,  that  I had  every 
reason  to  believe  that  the  enemy  was  evacuating  his  works  on  both 
sides  of  the  bayou.  Receiving  no  further  orders,  at  daybreak  I ordered 
Captain  Stratton,  with  12  men,  to  skirmish  forward  and  draw  the 
enemy’s  fire,  and  also  ordered  my  entire  line  forward,  holding  it  some 
30  paces  in  the  rear.  The  men  moved  forward  in  good  order  and 
entered  the  works,  planting  our  flag  upon  the  breastworks  at  5.30  a.  m. 

I immediately  reported  to  the  colonel  commanding  the  occupation  of 
the  works. 

At  1 p.  m.  I was  ordered  by  Captain  Fordham  to  take  10  cavalrymen 
and  proceed  with  my  regiment  up  the  left  bank  of  the  bayou  until  I 
should  arrive  opposite  the  head  of  General  Weitzel’s  column,  then 
moving  up  on  the  right  bank  of  the  bayou,  and  to  capture  cattle,  mules, 
and  horses.  We  moved  as  rapidly  as  possible,  throwing  out  flankers 
on  my  right  flank.  Arrived  at  the  plantation  of  Mr.  Anderson,  oppo- 
site Franklin,  at  8 p.  m.,  where  we  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  speaking  of  the  behavior  of  my 
command  in  this  their  first  engagement  with  the  enemy.  The  men 
showed  while  under  fire  fhe  utmost  coolness  and  bravery,  obeying  my 


HAP.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


355 


►rders  with  alacrity  and  moving  forward  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy 
vith  a determination  of  veterans.  Of  my  officers,  when  all  behaved  so 
veil,  it  would  be  manifestly  unjust  to  discriminate,  and  I would  say 
hat  without  exception  their  behavior  on  the  13th  instant  meets  my 
learty  approbation. 

I desire  to  remark  that  First  Lieutenant  Nutting,  who  was  killed, 
>articularly  distinguished  himself  by  his  personal  bravery,  placing  his 
nen  in  the  most  favorable  position  and  encouraging  them  on  by  acts 
is  well  as  words.  He  died  in  a noble  cause,  and  I believe  he  had  rather 
net  his  death  there  than  to  have  seen  his  company  driven  back  one 
bo t by  the  traitors  to  the  country. 

Accompanying  this  I hand  you  a list  of  casualties  on  the  13th  in- 
fant $ * also  a list  of  captures.} 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  KIMBALL, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  E.  H.  Fordham, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  23. 

Report  of  Col.  Michael  K.  Bryan,  One  hundred  and  seventy -fifth  New 
York  Infantry , of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland. 

Franklin,  La.,  April  25, 1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  accordance  with  orders  re- 
vived from  brigade  headquarters,  April,  1863,  this  command  struck 
;ents  and  marched  to  the  railroad,  where  we  secured  transportation  to 
Brashear  City,  arriving  there  about  1 o’clock  the  same  afternoon. 

Shortly  afterward,  under  your  direction,  we  crossed  to  Berwick  City 
md  encamped,  where  we  remained  until  April  11,  when  orders  were 
received  to  break  camp,  and  with  the  regiment  immediately  report  to 
General  Weitzel.  Twenty  minutes  after  the  receipt  of  the  order  we 
vere  on  our  way  with  this  command,  and  after  marching  about  2 miles 
received  orders  from  General  Weitzel  to  return  to  the  nearest  landing 
place  on  the  levee,  and  there  await  a steamer,  which  had  been  ordered 
:o  take  us  on  board  and  land  us  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river,  from 
md  near  the  head  of  the  column. 

After  waiting  for  nearly  four  hours  we  embarked  on  the  steamer 
Sykes  and  were  landed  opposite  Pattersonville,  where,  after  marching 

1 short  distance,  we  encamped.  Orders  were  received  for  me  to  march 
?orward  apd  keep  my  command  near  the  head  of  the  column  on  the 
eft-hand  side  of  the  bayou. 

I remained  opposite  Pattersonville,  having  pickets  thrown  out  about 

2 miles  above  the  town,  until  Sunday  morning,  when  I,  with  my  com- 
nand,  embarked  again  on  the  steamer  Sykes  and  were  landed  near  the 
pontoon  bridge  and  about  a mile  above  Pattersonville.  Before  em- 
barking, the  pickets  whom  I had  thrown  out  were  fired  on  by  the  rebel 
jiickets  from  the  sugar-mill,  and  one  of  my  men  was  slightly  injured. 
Soon  after  disembarking,  two  of  my  companies  were  detached  on  special 
luty  up  the  Atchafalaya.  I formed  the  remainder  and  moved  up  along 
phe  bayou,  and  then  threw  out  Company  K,  commanded  by  Captain 


* Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  319. 

t Two  of  Texas  cavalry  and  three  of  Eighteenth  Louisiana  Infantry. 


356 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  IChap.  XXVII. 


Ellis,  as  skirmishers,  which,  moved  forward,  and  after  marching  some 
twenty  minutes  engaged  about  40  rebel  cavalry,  whom  they  drove 
back.  Shots  were  exchanged  from  2 till  5.30  p.  m.  Captain  Ellis  was 
assisted  by  10  cavalry,  under  Lieutenant  Snow;  also  by  Companies  A 
and  D,  under  the  command,  respectively,  of  Captains  McCarthey  and 
Kane,  of  my  command. 

After  we  had  met  the  cavalry,  and  had  been  engaged  with  them  about 
an  hour,  Lieutenant- Colonel  Hopkins,  with  his  command,  re-enforced  my 
little  band,  which  consisted  of  only  about  240  effective  men,  as  also  did 
Lieutenant  Morton  with  a section  of  artillery.  We  moved  rapidly  for- 
ward after  these  re-enforcements,  and  passed  nearly  up  to  the  sugar- 
house  with  our  infantry  and  in  advance  with  that  of  our  skirmishers, 
who  here  took  seven  prisoners  with  their  equipments ; and  soon  after 
another  delivered  himself  up,  declaring  that  he  was  a conscript  and 

served  against  his  will.  . . 

On  that  afternoon  the  two  pieces  of  artillery  took  position  just  oppo- 
site the  sugar-house  and  opened  fire  upon  the  rebel  batteries,  and  con- 
tinued firing  for  about  half  an  hour,  when,  having  all  their  fire  directed 
against  him,  he  was  forced  to  retire,  the  odds  against  him  in  shots  being 

nearly  six  to  one.  , . , , , . , . 

I cannot  pass  by  this  opportunity  without  highly  complimenting 
Lieutenant  Morton,  of  the  First  Maine  Battery,  and  the  men  under  his 
command,  for  their  skill  and  daring  while  laboring  under  such  a heavy 
fire.  They  from  their  excellent  firing  drew  the  whole  fire  of  the  enemy 
from  that  side  of  the  bayou  on  which  we  were  stationed,  and  nobly 
stood  at  their  posts  until,  their  guns  being  heated  and  men  very  much 
fatigued,  they  withdrew  behind  the  sugar-house.  I formed  line  while 
the  artillery  was  firing,  with  my  own  regiment  on  the  right,  and  posted 
the  Thirty-first  on  the  left,  their  left  resting  near  the  bayou. 

But  two  men  were  injured  during  the  day’s  skirmishing,  and  those 
merely  flesh  wounds.  Lieutenant  Morton  narrowly  escaped,  a fragment 
of  shell  gazing  his  neck  and  slightly  bruising  the  skin. 

Toward  dark,  seeing  the  army  on  the  opposite  side  retiring,  I deemed 
it  prudent  to  retire  about  200  yards,  when  I ordered  the  troops  to 
bivouac,  and  soon  after  posted  pickets  on  front,  flank,  and  rear ; also 
posting  one  piece  of  artillery  in  a position  which  commanded  the  gap 
in  the  small  line  of  trees  just  above  the  bridge.  The  other  piece  pro- 
tected another  gap  and  commanded  the  front  of  those  trees  to  a consid- 
erable extent.  Having  made  these  dispositions,  I laid  down  to  rest, 
but  was  awakened  several  times  during  the  night  by  the  pickets 

In  the  morning  I sent  all  the  prisoners  to  General  Weitzel  and  de- 
livered them  over  to  him,  and  was  ordered  to  report  to  General  Emory 
again,  which  I did,  and  received  through  his  orders  both  commissary 
stores  and  ammunition,  which  articles  we  stood  much  m need 

I would  mention  in  connection  with  this  day’s  events  that  the  rebel 
cavalry  were  at  one  time  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  and  seemed  to  medi- 
tate a charge  upon  us.  The  artillery  took  up  position  and  fired  a couple 
of  shots  into  them,  which  dispersed  them,  killing  a lieutenant  and  three 
men.  This  was  ascertained  by  First  Assistant  Surgeon  Beckett,  who 
saw  some  of  the  enemy  fall  and  humanely  went  to  them,  thinking  tha 
his  professional  services  were  needed,  but  he  found  their  bodies  horri- 
bly mangled  and  their  spirits  had  flown  to  the  other  world. 

After  resting  on  our  arms  on  Sunday  night  we  were  gratified  to  fin 
that  you  were  coming  over  with  the  remainder  of  your  brigade  to  take 
charge  of  the  enemy  on  that  side  of  the  bayou.  Soon  after  youi  arrival 


Chjup.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


357 


I was  ordered  to  take  up  a position  in  line  of  battle  at  a place  pointed 
out  by  yourself,  with  instructions  to  follow  the  Thirty-eighth  Eegiment 
at  a distance  of  about  30  paces.  This  was  followed  out  throughout  the 
day,  my  command  remaining  under  an  artillery  fire  the  most  of  the  time, 
and  sometimes  it  was  a very  warm  fire.  I moved  my  command  forward 
until  we  had  passed  a short  distance  beyond  the  sugar-house,  support- 
ing a section  of  artillery,  and  there  remained  until  ordered  to  retire 
about  100  yards  in  rear  of  the  road  leading  to  the  sugar-house,  where 
my  men  rested  on  their  arms  until  an  hour  before  daybreak,  when  they 
were  awakened  and  prepared  themselves  for  the  battle,  which  I sup- 
posed would  be  resumed  that  day.  Soon  after  you  approached  and 
gave  me  orders  to  go  forward  inside  the  intrenchments,  as  the  enemy 
had  evacuated  their  works  and  fled.  This  was  complied  with,  and  soon 
after  I received  orders  to  move  forward,  and  thus  closed  my  connection 
for  that  time  with  Colonel  Gooding’s  gallant  brigade. 

Although  the  part  assigned  to  me  was  not  of  a prominent  character, 
still  I feel  assured  that  my  command  was  not  held  back  from  the  front 
because  they  could  not  be  relied  on,  but  because  it  was  deemed  advisable 
to  hold  a small  force  in  reserve ; and  I hope  when  next  the  enemy  is 
met,  and  when  my  regiment  is  again  placed  under  your  command,  that 
a larger  share  of  the  work  maybe  given  me  to  do,  that  I may  show  the 
other  regiments  in  your  brigade  that  we  are  deserving  a place  by  their 
side,  either  in  or  out  of  action. 

The  following  are  the  casualties  in  the  One  hundred  and  seventy- 
fifth  Regiment  New  York  State  Volunteers:  Killed— William  Mulvey, 

• Company  C,  shot  in  head  by  a rifle-cannon  shot.  Wounded — Cornelius 
Murphy,  Company  A,  slightly,  in  arm;  Michael  Smith,  Company  D, 
slightly,  in  shoulder ; Charles  Helmbe,  Company  I,  slightly,  in  head ; 
John  Geisser,  Company  I,  slightly,  in  arm,  and  Charles  Leobel,  Com- 
pany K,  slightly,  in  the  arm. 

While  I am  pleased  with  the  conduct  of  my  whole  command,  I feel 
that  I cannot  close  this  report  without  making  a special  mention  of 
Adjt.  John  Roberts;  Dr.  Beckett,  who  rendered  me  valuable  service, 
and  Major  Gray,  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  Regiment ; Col- 
onel Hopkins,  Captain  Hollister,  and  Captain  Lee,  of  the  Thirty-first 
Massachusetts  ; Lieutenant  Snow,  of  the  cavalry ; Lieutenant  Morton, 
of  the  First  Maine  Battery;  and  last,  though  not  least,  whose  coolness 
and  courage  came  under  my  own  observation,  was  Lieutenant  Bond,  of 
your  staff,  whose  conduct  during  the  sharp  fire  on  Monday  afternoon  is 
entitled  to  all  praise,  and,  although  it  may  not  be  my  province  to  speak 
of  him,  I feel  that  true  merit  should  not  be  overlooked  without  being 
truly  spoken  of. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  K.  BRYAN, 

Colonel  One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  New  York  Volunteers. 

Col.  O.  P.  Gooding,  Comdg.  3d  Brig .,  3d  Div .,  19 th  A.  C. 


No.  24. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Cuvier  Grover , U.  S.  Army , commanding  Fourth 
Division , of  operations  March  26- April  20. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Division, 

Barrels  Landing , La.,  May  2,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  pursuant  to  instructions  from  the 


358  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVn.! 

Headquarters  of  the  Nineteenth  Army  Corps,  my  division  commenced! 
embarkation  on  transports  at  Baton  Rouge  for  Donaldsonville  on  March 
26.  The  whole  division  encamped  at  the  latter  place  on  the  evening  o: 
the  30th,  and  took  up  its  line  of  march  for  Thibodeaux  on  the  morning 
of  the  31st,  where  it  arrived,  and  received  orders  to  encamp  near  Terre 
Bonne  Station,  2£  miles  from  Thibodeaux,  on  April  2.  From  this  poini 
the  division  was  transported  by  rail  to  Bayou  Bceuff,  where  it  encampec 
from  April  4 to  9. 

On  the  9th  it  again  marched  and  encamped  at  Brashear  City,  when 
it  awaited  transportation  by  water.  Here  I received  orders  to  embarl 
the  division  upon  the  gunboats  Estrella,  Clifton,  Arizona,  and  Calhoun 
under  Lieutenant-Commander  Cooke,  and  such  transports  as  could  ai 
the  time  be  obtained,  and  sail  up  through  Berwick  Bay  into  Granc 
Lake,  and  to  endeavor  to  effect  a landing  on  its  southwestern  shore  a: 
Madam  Porter’s  plantation,  or  some  other  more  convenient  point  be 
yond,  and  there  debarking,  to  march  to  the  Bayou  Teche,  cross,  if  pos 
sible,  and  move  upon  Franklin  on  the  south  side,  with  a view  to  cut  of 
the  retreat  of  the  rebel  garrison  at  Camp  Bisland;  or,  in  event  of  thei:  ] 
holding  their  position  in  their  fortifications,  to  attack  them  in  rear 
The  transportation,  however,  at  Brashear  City  was  found  to  be  so  lim 
ited  that  it  was  found  necessary  to  embark  all  my  artillery,  the  horse: 
of  one  battery,  and  a great  portion  of  our  necessary  stores  upon  flatfi  j 
picked  up  along  the  bay.  So  much  valuable  time  was  thus  lost  tha 
it  was  not  till  late  in  the  evening  of  the  11th  instant  that  the  divisioi 
was  entirely  embarked. 

It  was  my  intention  to  have  sailed  at  2 a.  m.  on  the  next  mornipg  i 
but  a heavy  fog  settled  over  the  bay  during  the  night  and  delayed  ou 
departure  until  8 a.  m.,  when  we  sailed  up  the  bay,  the  Clifton  leading 
Nothing  of  consequence  occurred  in  our  course  until  about  11.30  a.  m. 
when  the  Arizona  grounded  off  Cypress  Island.  Every  means  of  pos  1 
sible  application  were  at  once  used  to  get  her  afloat,  but  without  effect  J 
and  at  3.30  p.  m.  she  was  left  and  the  flotilla  proceeded  ou  its  destina  1 
tion,  and  dropped  anchor  off  Madam  Porter’s  plantation  about  7.30  p.  m 

A reconnoitering  party,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Fiske,  First  Lou 
isiana  Volunteers,  was  at  once  landed  in  the  ship’s  boats  and  the  roa< 
and  landing  thoroughly  examined.  In  about  two  hours  this  party  re 
turned,  finding  the  road  utterly  impassable  for  even  infantry,  the  lak 
from  some  cause  having  overflown  the  greater  part  of  it.  The  Cliftoi 
immediately  weighed  anchor,  and,  sailing  around  the  point  about 
miles  farther,  came  to  anchor  at  what  is  known  as  McWilliams’  plan 
tation.  Here  a reconnaissance,  made  by  Captain  Denslow,  Sixth  Ne^ 
York  Volunteers,  and  Lieutenant  Matthews,  aide-de-camp,  in  commam 
of  a small  party  of  the  Sixth  New  York  Volunteers,  found  the  roads  t> 
the  Teche  to  be  practicable. 

The  difficulties  of  landing  at  this,  as  well  as  at  all  other  adjacen 
landings,  are  very  great  for  boats  of  any  considerable  draught.  N 
transport  of  any  considerable  capacity  was  able  to  go  nearer  tha: 

1 00  yards  of  the  shore ; but  by  constructing  a bridge  of  flats,  and  b; 
the  assistance  of  two  very  small  tow-boats,  the  debarkation,  which'  com 
menced  at  daylight,  was  completed  by  4 p.  m.  The  First  Brigade 
commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  William  Dwight,  was  first  debarked  am 
ordered  to  the  front  to  dislodge  the  enemy  from  a thick  skirt  of  wood 
from  which,  with  one  piece  of  artillery,  supported  by  infantry  or  dis 
mounted  cavalry,  to  the  amount  of  about  300  or  400  strong,  they  en 
deavored  to  destroy  our  transports  and  retard  our  landing.  Havin:  * 
executed  my  orders  in  that  respect  with  small  loss,  he  was  directed  t 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


359 


Chap.  XXVII.  ] 

the  other  edge  of  the  wood,  and  to  hold  the  same  and  observe  the  enemy 
until  further  orders.  Soon  after  reports  from  the  front  led  me  to  be- 
lieve that  the  enemy  was  in  stronger  force  than  had  be®“  ^ .flr™ 
ticipated,  and  Captain  Closson’s  battery  and  two  regiments  of  the  Thmd 
Brigade,  commanded  by  Col.  H.  W.  Birge,  were  ordered  to  the  front  to 
report  to  General  Dwight.  As  it  was  not  my  intention  to  expose  a 
large  force  to  the  view  of  the  enemy  until  the  whole  division  was  in 
readiness  to  cut  its  connection  with  our  point  of  landing,  I ordered 
General  Dwight  to  keep  the  body  of  his  troops  under  the  cover  of  the 
wood,  but  at  the  same  time  approved  of  his  detaching  a small  force  a 
regiment  of  infantry  and  two  sections  of  artillery— to  prevent  the  de- 
struction of  two  bridges  across  the  Teche,  which  would  be  almost  in- 
dispensable to  our  crossing.  I also  ordered  Captain  Barrett’s  company 
of  Louisiana  Cavalry  to  co-operate  with  this  force.  General  Dwight  s 
dispositions  for  this  purpose  were  well  made  and  were  successful.  As 
we  had  no  train,  except  a few  wagons,  necessary  to  transport  ammuni- 
tion, it  became  necessary  to  issue  as  much  hard  bread  and  coffee  as 
could  be  carried  in  haversacks  and  return  the  rest  of  our  supplies  to  the 
transports.  Though  all  possible  dispatch  was  made,  the  division  was 
not  able  to  take  up  its  line  of  march  for  the  south  bank  of  the  Teche 

U1Tmay  aTwell  state  in  this  connection  that,  from  information  which 
has  recently  come  into  my  possession,  I learn  that  the  enemy  liad  ob- 
tained  information  through  their  scouts  of  the  passage  of  the  flotilla 
and  transports  by  Centreville,  but  a short  distance  from  Camp  Bisland, 
the  day  before,  but  had  no  information  as  to  the  force  under  my  com- 
mand/ Immediately  a courier  was  dispatched  to  Butte-a-la-Rose  with 
orders  for  the  rebel  gunboat  Queen  of  the  West,  and  any  others  avail- 
able, to  move  down  into  the  lake  and  attack  us  by  water,  while  a sma  1 
force  of  cavalrv  and  artillery  from  Camp  Bisland,  and  another  small 
force  of  infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery  from  New  Iberia,  was  ordered 
to  observe  our  movements  and  dispute  our  landing.  These  forces  did 
not  however,  have  time  to  effect  a junction  before  our  advance  guard, 
under  General  Dwight,  had  succeeded  in  taking  up  a strong  position, 
which  perfectly  covered  it.  Neither  did  their  gunboats  arrive  until 
after  we  had  cut  our  connection  with  the  landing,  and  then  only  to 
meet  with  discomfiture  and  the  loss  of  the  Queen  of  the  West.  Another 
courier  was  dispatched  about  12  m.  to  the  rebel  commander  at  Camp 
Bisland  with  information  that  the  United  States  forces  had  landed  in 
force  near  Madam  Porter’s  plantation.  ■ , 

About  6 p.  m.  the  division  marched  for  the  Teche  and  crossed  on 
the  upper  of  the  two  bridges  which  had  been  saved  and  encamped  at 
night  fall  on  Madam  Porter’s  plantation,  about  5 miles  from  oiir  land- 
ing. The  enemy  at  this  time  held  a strong  position  in  the  wood  in  our 
front,  and  the  night  was  too  dark  to  make  dispositions  to  dislodge 
or  even  to  find  his  position,  or  for  our  own  skirmishers  to  keep  up  the 
connections.  It  became  necessary  therefore  to  halt  for  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th,  at  daybreak,  my  command  advanced  m 
the  following  order,  viz:  The  Third  Brigade,  with  Rodgers  battery. 
First  Brigade,  with  Closson’s  battery,  and  Second  Brigade,  with  Nims 
battery.  Colonel  Birge,  commanding  the  Third  Brigade,  having  made 
the  usual  dispositions  for  meeting  the  enemy,  and  with  a strong  line  ot 
skirmishers  in  front,  advanced  about  2 miles  to  near  the  edge  of  a dense 
wood,  where  his  skirmishers  were  checked  by  a heavy  fire  from  the 
enemv,  strongly  posted  behind  a rail  fence  and  concealet  >>  un  er 
growth.  The  enemy  also  had  two  pieces  of  artillery  well  posted  under 


360 


W.  FLA.*  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

the  cover  of  an  angle  of  the  road,  which  threw  a cross-fire  upon  our 
ranks. 

The  reserves  were  rapidly  brought  into  action,  which  seriously  shook 
the  enemy’s  position  in  front,  but  which  necessarily,  for  a short  time,! 
exposed  the  right  flank  of  the  Third  Brigade.  Immediate  advantage 
was  taken  of  this  by  the  enemy,  who,  having  a heavy  force  concealed 
in  dry  ditches  and  the  thick  undergrowth  on  my  right,  but  which  up  to 
this  time  had  not  been  discovered,  made  a dashing  charge  in  line  of 
battle  upon  the  right  and  rear  of  the  reserve  regiments.  A sharp  con- 
flict here  ensued,  which  lasted  until  the  boxes  of  the  greater  part  of 
the  regiments  were  exhausted,  when,  much  overborne  by  numbers,  they 
fell  back  to  the  First  Brigade,  now  coming  into  position,  and  reformed 
behind  it. 

Upon  the  first  indication  of  this  flank  attack  I at  once  ordered  up  the 
First  Brigade,  under  General  Dwight,  and  placed  it  in  position  on  the 
flank,  with  instructions  to  drive  back  the  enemy  on  the  flank  and  con- 
nect his  skirmishers  with  Colonel  Birge’s  on  the  front.  In  the  mean 
time  one  section  of  Bodgers’  battery,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Brad- 
ley, which  had  retired  when  its  support  had  found  it  necessary  to  fall 
back,  was  placed  in  position  to  rake  the  advancing  line  of  rebel  infantry,, 
and  did  great  execution  in  their  ranks. 

Of  the  admirable  behavior  of  this  section  and  the  lieutenant  in 
command  I was  a personal  witness.  Eight  men  and  six  horses  were; 
wounded  in  this  section. 

General  Dwight  having  taken  his  position,  the  Second  Brigade,  com- 
manded by  Colonel  Kimball,  was  drawn  up  in  two  lines  in  reserve,  and 
the  section  of  Bodgers’  battery  was  put  in  position  to  command  the  road 
in  front,  and  the  enemy  were  rapidly  dislodged  from  our  front  and  flank,, 
and  artillery  placed  farther  in  advance.  In  this  advance  were  captured, 
two  caissons  and  one  limber,  the  flag  of  the  Saint  Mary’s  Cannoneers,  a 
large  quantity  of  small-arms,  some  ammunition  for  field-pieces,  and  about 
120  prisoners.  The  caissons,  limber,  and  flag  were  captured  by  the 
Thirteenth  Connecticut  Volunteers. 

Careful  reconnaissances  were  now  made  both  on  the  front  and  flank.. 
The  enemy  was  found  to  have  taken  up  a new  and  still  stronger  posi- 
tion, his  right  supported  by  the  gunboat  Diana,  but  the  greater  por- 
tion of  his  force  was  massed  on  his  left,  opposite  my  right,  and  in  such 
a position  as  to  render  the  cutting  of  his  line  of  retreat  impossible. 

It  was  evident  his  whole  force,  with  the  exception  of  a small  rear  guard, 
was  in  position.  This  was  corroborated  by  prisoners,  we  having  cap- 
tured some  from  every  organization  known  to  be  at  Camp  Bisland,  as 
well  as  some  from  the  re-enforcements  from  Kew  Iberia.  Indications 
were  strong  at  this  time  of  an  intention  on  his  part  to  make  an  imme- 
diate attack  upon  my  position.  The  gunboat  Diana  commenced  moving 
up  slowly.  I immediately  made  preparation  to  receive  her.  Nims’ 
battery  was  placed  in  position  to  open  upon  the  Diana,  and  two  com- 
panies of  sharpshooters  from  the  Thirteenth  Connecticut  placed  in  good 
position  to  pick  off  cannoneers.  1 prepared  to  receive  rather  than  to 
make  an  attack,  for  the  reasons  that  the  advantages  of  position  were 
very  greatly  against  an  attacking  party,  and  also  that  from  the  enemy’s 
position,  in  case  of  a successful  attack,  no  considerable  portion  of  his 
force  could  have  been  cut  off. 

The  Diana  kept  up  a constant  cross-fire  upon  our  position ; but  as 
the  enemy,  after  some  delay,  showed  no  further  disposition  to  attack, 

I ordered  an  advance  on  both  fronts,  whereupon  the  enemy  immedi- 
ately retired.  The  Diana  dropped  down  the  stream  a short  distance 


Chap.  XXYI3.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


361 


and  was  blown  up  and  fired.  A rebel  transport,  which  had  early  in 
the  day  brought  up  re-enforcements  to  the  enemy,  was  also  burned. 
Very  shortly  after  the  retreat  from  my  front  Captain  Perkins’  cavalry, 
from  General  Banks’  column,  entered  Franklin. 

It  is  impossible  for  me  to  state  the  enemy’s  loss  in  this  engagement, 
as  their  killed  and  wounded  were  nearly  all  sent  to  the  rear  in  carts. 
We,  however,  buried  21  of  their  dead  and  carried  off  the  field  35  of 
their  wounded.  Colonel  Beiley,  commanding  brigade,  and  Colonel  Gray, 
commanding,  I think,  the  Twenty-eighth  Louisiana  Volunteers,  were 
among  the  wounded.  Colonel  Beiley  has,  I am  informed,  since  died  of 
his  wounds. 

As  soon  as  communication  was  opened  with  the  headquarters  of  the 
corps  I went  into  camp  near  the  battle-field,  in  accordance  with  instruc- 
tions, and  on  the  morning  of  the  15th  marched  up  the  Teche  in  pursuit 
of  the  retreating  enemy,  and  encamped  near  Dr.  McGuire’s  plantation, 
and  on  the  16th  at  New  Iberia. 

On  the  evening  of  the  16th,  Col.  William  K.  Kimball,  commanding 
Second  Brigade,  was  ordered,  pursuant  to  instructions  from  the  head- 
quarters of  the  corps,  with  the  Twelfth  Maine,  Forty-first  Massachu- 
setts, and  one  company  of  the  Twenty -fourth  Connecticut  Volunteers, 
and  a section  of  Nims’  battery,  to  march  upon  the  salt-works  operated 
by  the  rebel  Government,  about  12  miles  south  of  New  Iberia.  The 
enemy  had,  however,  evacuated  and  removed  the  guns.  Colonel  Kim- 
ball destroyed  the  buildings,  18  in  number,  their  steam-engines,  wind- 
lasses, boiling  and  mining  implements,  and  600  barrels  of  salt  pre- 
pared for  shipment,  blew  up  their  magazine,  and  brought  back  to 
New  Iberia  about  one  ton  of  powder  and  one  ton  of  nails.  Colonel 
Kimball  then  returned,  having  fully  executed  his  orders,  and  rejoined 
the  division,  without  loss  or  casualties,  on  the  18th,  at  Vermillion 
Biver. 

On  the  17th  the  remainder  of  my  division,  with  the  addition  ot  one 
brigade,  commanded  by  Colonel  Kimball,  of  the  Fifty-third  Massachu- 
setts Volunteers,  and  a battery  from  General  Emory’s  division,  took  up 
a line  of  march  in  the  direction  of  the  retreating  enemy  for  Vermillion 
Biver,  the  other  commands  of  the  corps  marching  by  the  way  of  Saint 
Martin ville.  About  3 p.  m.  we  came  in  sight  of  the  enemy’s  retreating 
column,  about  2 miles  in  our  front  and  near  the  bridge  on  the  Vermill- 
ion Biver.  For  want  of  cavalry  we  could  not  press  upon  their  rear 
sufficiently  to  prevent  their  effectually  destroying  the  bridge  by  fire. 
We,  however,  threw  a few  shells  into  their  column,  with  what  effect  I 
am  unable  to  say.  Having  fired  the  bridge,  the  enemy  took  up  a posi- 
tion, with  two  12-pounder  field  pieces  and  dismounted  cavalry,  to  dispute 
our  approach  to  the  river.  Skirmishers  were  sent  out  on  the  right  and 
left  from  the  First  Brigade  and  Captains  Closson’s  and  Nims’  batteries 
were  placed  in  position  in  the  center,  with  a section  of  Captain  Clos- 
son’s battery,  under  Lieutenant  Taylor,  on  the  extreme  left,  and  the 
woods  were  so  effectually  shelled  and  covered  by  our  skirmishers  that 
the  enemy  soon  abandoned  the  position,  with  the  exception  ot  some  few 
sharpshooters,  who  hovered  around  till  late  at  night.  While  Captain 
Closson  was  placing  in  position  the  section  of  his  battery  under  Lieu- 
tenant Taylor  two  of  his  wheel-horses  were  instantly  killed  by  a round 
shot  from  a rebel  12-pounder. 

My  command  encamped  upon  the  Vermillion  Biver.  The  whole  of 
the  next  day  was  consumed  in  rebuilding  the  bridge. 

On  the  1 9th  the  detached  brigade  and  battery  of  General  Emory's 
division  rejoined  its  division  and  we  resumed  the  march  for  Opelousas, 


* 


362 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chai*.  xxvil 


where,  without  further  incident  worthy  of  notice,  we  encamped  on  the 
night  of  the  20th. 

List  of  casualties : 


Killed. 

© 

rj 

a 

p 

> 

Prisoners. 

Missing. 

First  Brigade : On  the  13th ..... ....... .......... 

3 

9 

On  the  14th 

2 

13 

On  the  17th ...... ...... .... 

1 

5 

Total. ..... ...... ..... 

6 

27 

Third  Brigade:  On  the  14th 

46 

236 

I 

29 

1 

Battery  C,  Second  Artillery 

1 

7 

1 

Grand  total ............. 

53 

270 

1 

29 

1 

! 

For  more  detailed  information  with  regard  to  casualties  I would  re- 
spectfully refer  to  inclosed  sub-reports. 

On  the  march  from  Franklin  to  Opelousas  many  prisoners  have  been  ; 
captured,  and  many  escaped  who  might  have  been  captured  had  we 
been  more  adequately  supplied  with  cavalry.  Circumstances  were  such 
as  to  render  it  impracticable  to  keep  an  accurate  account  of  the  num- 
bers sent  to  the  rear,  but  I judge  that  my  division  has  sent  to  the  rear 
not  less  than  300,  besides  those  captured  at  Irish  Bend. 

In  closing  my  report  I must  express  my  indebtedness  to  Brigadier- 
General  Dwight,  commanding  First  Brigade;  Colonel  Birge,  command- 
ing Third  Brigade;  Col.  W.  K.  Kimball,  commanding  Second  Brigade; 
Captain  Closson,  commanding  Battery  L,  First  U.  S.  Artillery;  Cap- 
tain Nims,  commanding  Battery  B,  Second  Massachusetts  Light  Artil- 
lery; Lieutenant  Bodgers,  commanding  Battery  C,  Second  IT.  S.  Artil- 
lery, and  Captain  Barrett,  commanding  Company  F,  Louisiana  Volun- 
teer Cavalry,  for  gallantry  in  action  and  zeal  and  ability  in  the  exercise 
of  their  commands.  For  special  mention  of  regimental  commanders,  of 
field,  staff,  and  company  commanders,  and  others  of  less  rank,  but 
equally  deserving  of  honorable  mention  for  meritorious  conduct,  I would 
respectfully  refer  to  inclosed  sub-reports. 

To  the  members  of  my  staff  who  were  present  during  the  time  cov- 
ered by  this  report,  Surg.  T.  B.  Beed,  medical  director;  Capts.  Joseph 
Hibbert,  jr.,  assistant  adjutant-general ; F.  W.  Perkins,  acting  quar- 
termaster; W.  P.  Cowie,  commissary  of  subsistence;  J.  L.  Swift,  acting 
aide-de-camp;  First  Lieuts.  J.  E.  Colville,  acting  ordnance  officer; 
J.  B.  Brown,  aide-de-camp,  and  Second  Lieut.  T.  C.  Otis,  aide-de-camp ; 
and  also  to  Maj.  C.  A.  Burt,  judge-advocate  and  acting  aide-de-camp, 
during  the  engagement  on  the  14th,  I would  express  my  obligations 
for  gallantry  on  the  field  and  zeal  and  efficiency  in  their  various  de- 
partments. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  GBOVEB, 

Brigadier -General , Commanding  Division . 


Lieut.  Col.  Bichard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General , Nineteenth  Army  Corps. 


CUAP.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 

No.  25. 


363 


Report  of  Lieut.  Joseph  L.  Hallett,  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry, 

Acting  Signal  Officer. 

Headquarters  Signal  Corps, 

Port  Hudson , La .,  July  10, 1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  with  Special  Or- 
ders, No.  2,  dated  New  Orleans,  La.,  April  7, 1863,  I proceeded  with 
my  flagmen,  horses,  and  signal  equipments  to  Brashear  City,  La.,  and 
arrived  there  on  the  morning  of  the  10th.  1 immediately  reported  on 

my  arrival  at  Brashear  City  to  Capt.  W.  W.  Bowley,  and  agreeable  to 
instructions  received  from  him  reported  for  duty  on  the  same  day  to 
Brigadier-General  Grover,  commanding  Fourth  Division. 

First  Lieut.  Thomas  S.  Hall  and  Second  Lieut.  R.  C.  Harris  were  as- 
signed to  my  charge,  and  reported  to  me  on  the  11th.  By  direction  of 
the  commanding  general,  Lieutenant  Hall  was  detailed  for  signal  duty 
on  the  gunboat  Clifton  and  Lieutenant  Harris  on  the  Estrella.  The 
expedition  under  command  of  Brigadier-General  Grover  embarked  on 
transports  on  Saturday,  April  11,  and  left  Brashear  City  at  sunrise  on 
Sunday,  the  12th.  The  fleet  proceeded  up  Berwick  Bay,  Bayou  Teche, 
and  Grand  Lake,  Communication  was  kept  open  with  the  fleet  by 
signals  until  it  reached  Indian  Bend,  where  the  expedition  arrived  at 
5 p.  m.  An  unsuccessful  attempt  was  made  to  land  troops  that  night, 
and  the  fleet  lay  off  Indian  Bend  until  the  next  day  at  6 a.  m.,  when 
four  companies  of  the  First  Louisiana  Volunteers  landed  under  cover 
of  the  gunboats.  They  were  at  once  opened  upon  by  four  pieces  of  the 
enemy’s  artillery,  supported  by  300  of  his  sharpshooters.  I ordered 
Lieutenant  Hall  to  the  Laurel  Hill,  which  lay  near  the  shore,  to  direct 
the  fire  of  the  gunboat.  In  twenty  minutes  after  the  rebel  artillery 
commenced  firing  it  was  silenced  by  the  guns  of  the  Clifton  and  the 
enemy  driven  from  his  position.  At  11  o’clock  the  troops  had  all  dis- 
embarked, and  soon  took  up  their  march  to  Franklin.  As  the  gun* 
boats  were  to  accompany  the  land  force  up  the  Teche,  Lieutenant  Hall 
remained  on  the  Clifton  and  Lieutenant  Harris  on  the  Estrella. 

I disembarked  with  the  troops  at  Indian  Bend,  and  was  with  the 
Fourth  Division  until  it  reached  Thompson’s  plantation,  18  miles  from 
Alexandria.  I have  no  report  to  make  of  the  battles  of  Irish  Bend  and 
Vermillion ville,  the  signal  officers  assigned  with  me  to  the  Fourth  Di- 
vision having  been  ordered  to  the  gunboats,  and  I had  no  officer  to 
signalize  with.  Had  the  object  of  the  expedition  been  accomplished, 
and  the  retreat  of  the  enemy  been  cut  off  at  Franklin,  as  was  antici- 
pated I should  have  opened  communication  with  the  signal  officers 
attached  to  the  Second  and  Third  Divisions,  which  left  Berwick  City  by 
land,  but  did  not  reach  Franklin  until  after  the  enemy  had  retreated* 
* * * * * * * 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ J 1 JOS.  L.  HALLETT, 

First  Lieut.,  Thirty-first  Mass.  Vols,  Acting  Signal  Officer. 

Lieut.  George  R.  Herbert, 

Acting  Adjutant , Signal  Corps,  Department  of  the  Gulf 

* Portion  here  omitted  will  be  printed  in  chapter  covering  operations  against  Port 
Hudson,  May  14- July  9.  Series  I,  Vol.  XXVI. 


364 


W.  FLA.,  8.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


No.  26. 

Report  of  Lieut . Thomas  S.  Hall , Twenty-eighth  Maine  Infantry , Acting 

Signal  Officer. 

\ 

Headquarters  Signal  Corps, 

Port  Hudson , La.,  July  16,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  verbal  orders 
received  from  Capt.  W.  W.  Eowley  at  Brashear  City,  April  10,  1863,  I 
reported  for  duty  to  Lieut.  J.  L.  Hallett,  acting  signal  officer,  and 
agreeable  to  instructions  received  from  Lieut.  J.  L.  Hallett  I reported 
for  signal  duty  to  Captain  Crocker,  of  the  gunboat  Clifton,  the  same 
day. 

The  Clifton  left  Brashear  City  with  an  expedition  under  command  of 
Brigadier-General  Grover  on  the  morning  of  the  12th.  Communication 
was  kept  open  with  the  other  boats  until  the  fleet  reached  Indian  Bend, 
where  it  arrived  at  5 o’clock  p.  m.  On  the  morning  of  the  13th,  while 
our  troops  were  landing,  the  enemy  opened  upon  them  with  four  pieces 
of  artillery  and  300  infantry.  I was  ordered  to  the  Laurel  Hill,  which 
lay  near  the  shore,  to  direct  the  fire  of  the  Clifton’s  guns. 

After  the  troops  were  landed  the  gunboat  Clifton  was  ordered  to 
proceed  to  Brashear  City,  and  thence  up  Bayou  Teche,  to  follow  the 
army. 

At '4  o’clock  p.  m.  on  the  13th  we  arrived  3 miles  below  Camp  Bis- 
land,  where  we  found  a number  of  torpedoes  sunk  in  the  bayou,  which 
we  had  to  take  up  before  proceeding  farther.  We  were  delayed  until 
10  o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  during  which  time  we  took 
an  active  part  in  the  fight  which  was  then  going  on  at  Camp  Bisland, 
our  shot  and  shell  having  excellent  effect  on  their  works. 

We  proceeded  up  the  bayou  a little  in  advance  of  the  army.  I kept 
communication  open  with  the  land  forces  up  as  far  as  Newtown.  The 
Clifton  there  received  orders  to  return  to  Brashear  City  and  wait  for 
orders.  I also  received  orders  from  Capt.  WT.  W.  Eowley  to  remain  on 
board  the  Clifton  until  further  orders. 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th  we  arrived  at  Brashear  City.  We  took 
troops  aboard,  and  at  2 o’clock  p.  m.  started  with  the  Remainder  of  the 
fleet  up  Bayou  Atchafalaya.  Communication  was  kept  open  with  the 
fleet  night  and  day. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th  the  Clifton  engaged  the  fort  at  Butte-a- 
la-Eose  about  half  an  hour,  when  the  fort  surrendered.  The  Clifton 
was  disabled  in  the  engagement,  and  returned  to  Brashear  City  for 
repairs.  I was  ordered  on  board  of  the  Calhoun  by  Commodore  Cooke, 
of  the  gunboat  Estrella.* 

# # # * # # # 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  S.  HALL, 

First  Lieut.,  Twenty-eighth  Maine  Vols.  and  Actg.  Sig.  Off. 

Lieut.  George  E.  Herbert, 

Adjutant  Signal  Corps. 


* Portion  here  omitted  will  he  printed  in  chapter  covering  operations  against  Port 
Hudson,  May  14-July  9.  Series  I,  Yol.  XXVI, 


Chap.  XXVLL] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 
No.  27. 


365 


Report  of  Capt.  Ormand  F.  Nims , Second  Battery  Massachusetts  Light 
Artillery , of  operations  March  2 8-April  19. 

Opelousas,  La.,  April  21, 1863. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  instructions  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the 

following  report : „ , , 

March  28,  started  from  Baton  Rouge  with  106  men,  112  horses,  and 
6 guns,  on  steamer  Laurel  Hill,  for  Don‘aldsonville ; arrived  there  on 
the  afternoon  of  the  same  day  and  went  into  camp. 

On  the  morning  of  March  31  broke  camp  and  took  up  the  line  ol 
march  for  Brashear  City,  about  80  miles  distant ; arrived  there  April 
9,  and  went  into  camp  with  123  men,  having  gained  20  men  by  detail 
from  nine-months’  troops,  and  lost  3 men  left  at  Bayou  Bceun. 

April  11,  embarked  on  steamer  Saint  Mary’s  and  on  flats,  and  on  the 
morning  of  the  13th  landed  at  Madam  Porter’s  plantation,  on  Grand 
Lake;  crossed  the  Bayou  Teche  in  the  afternoon,  and  went  into  camp 
about  2 miles  from  the  lake.  . . l „ 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  my  battery  took  position,  by  order  Gap- 
tain  Closson,  chief  of  artillery,  Grover’s  division,  at  the  right  of  the 
reserve,  where  it  remained  for  about  one  hour  and  a half;  then  ordered 
to  the  left  to  take  position  near  the  bayou  to  engage  the  rebel  gunboat 
Diana,  which  was  supposed  would  come  down  the  Teche  and  run  by. 

April  15,  took  up  line  of  march;  April  16,  arrived  at  New  Iberia, 
and,  by  order  of  General  Grover,  one  section,  under  command  of  Lieut. 
W.  K.  Snow,  was  detached  to  join  an  expedition  to  proceed  to  the  salt- 
works and  destroy  them;  continuing  the  march  the  remaining  four 
pieces  arrived  at  Vermillion  River. 

April  17,  by  order  of  Captain  Closson,  chief  of  artillery,  the  battery 
took  position  on  the  right,  and  shelled  the  enemy’s  position  at  that  place 
for  about  half  an  hour ; distance  about  1,500  yards. 

April  19,  Lieutenant  Snow’s  section  rejoined  the  battery,  and,  con- 
tinuing the  march,  we  arrived  at  Opelousas  on  the  afternoon  of  April 
20  and  went  into  camp. 

Casualties:  Three  men  left  behind  on  the  march,  sick,  and  one  horse, 
unserviceable,  killed  by  order  of  General  Grover. 

’ O.  FRENCH  NIMS, 

Captain , Comdg.  Battery  B,  Massachusetts  Light  Artillery . 


No.  28.  • 

Report  of  Capt . Henry  W.  Closson , Battery  L,  First  TJ.  S.  Artillery , of 
operations  March  27 -April  20. 

Opelousas,  La.,  April  21, 1863. 

Sir:  In  compliance  with  instructions  I submit  the  following  report 
of  the  operations  of  Battery  L,  First  CT.  S.  Artillery : 

Left  Baton  Rouge  on  steamer  Laurel  Hill  March  27,  with  134  men, 
104  horses,  and  6 guns.  Disembarked  at  Donaldsonville,  90  miles,  28th, 
and  took  up  line  of  march  for  Brashear  City  31st;  arrived,  April  9,  80 
miles;  embarked  on  steamer  and  flats  the  night  of  the  11th,  and  dis-. 
embarked  the  morning  of  the  13th  on  Madam  Porter’s  plantation,  on 
Grand  Lake.  The  battery  was  immediately  thrown  to  the  front,  and 


366 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


Taylor’s  and  Appleton’s  sections  detaclied,  each  to  secure  and  hold 
bridges  across  the  Teche  Bayou,  conjointly  with  infantry  and  cavalry. 
This  was  accomplished,  and  at  the  left  bridge,  by  Appleton’s  section 
and  two  sections  of  Battery  C,  Second  U.  S.  Artillery,  under  a very 
annoying  fire  from  four  guns  of  the  rebel  artillery  and  his  sharpshoot- 
ers. Casualty,  1 horse  wounded. 

During  the  fight  of  the  14th  my  battery  was  held  in  reserve.  On  the 
15th,  took  up  line  of  march  and  reached  Vermillion  River  the  17th. 
Estimated  distance,  45  miles.  At  Vermillion  Bridge,  Taylor’s  section  of 
the  battery  was  opened  upon  by  sharpshooters  and  the  rebel  artillery  , 
of  four  guns,  from  the  cover  of  the  opposite  bank.  Casualties,  2 horses 
killed.  The  remainder  of  my  battery  and  four  guns  (Kims’)  coming 
up,  soon  shelled  the  rebels  out. 

On  the  20th,  marched  into  Opelousas.  Estimated  distance  from 
Grand  Lake  Landing,  60  miles. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HEKRY  W.  CLOSSOK, 

Captain , First  Artillery , U.  S.  Army , Comdg.  Battery  L. 

Brigadier-General  Arnold, 

Chief  of  Artillery , Nineteenth  Army  Corps . 


Ko.  29. 

Report  of  Lieut.  John  I.  Lodgers , Battery  0,  Second  U . S.  Artillery , of 
skirmish  at  Porter’s  Plantation  and  engagement  at  Irish  Bend. 

Battery  C,  Second  IT.  S.  Artillery, 

Opelousas , La .,  April  21,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Battery  C,  Second  IT.  S.  Artil- 
lery, was  disembarked  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  instant  and  moved 
immediately  up  to  Bayou  Teche.  During  the  afternoon  two  sections 
were  engaged  in  shelling  the  enemy’s  position  at  the  lower  bridge. 
About  dark  the  battery  crossed  at  the  upper  bridge  and  took  the  posi- 
tion assigned  it  for  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  instant,  according  to  my  orders,  I re- 
ported for  duty  to  Colonel  Birge,  commanding  Third  Brigade,  Fourth 
Division,  with  which  brigade  the  battery  has  since  operated.  The  bat- 
tery followed  in  the  column  of  march,  the  first  section,  under  Lieutenant 
Bradley,  Second  Artillery,  in  rear  of  the  skirmishers ; tbe  remaining  sec- 
tions in  rear  of  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-ninth  Kew  York  Volunteers, 
until  the  enemy’s  position  was  developed,  when  Lieutenant  Bradley’s 
section  was  ordered  by  Colonel  Birge  to  proceed  through  the  open  field 
and  take  position  about  500  yards  from  the  enemy’s  position  in  the  wood. 
In  complying  with  this  order  the  section  was  under  fire  of  the  enemy’s 
guns,  but  fortunately  their  shell  burst  over,  and  after  the  section 
opened  fire  the  enemy  retired  from  that  vicinity  with  their  guns.  The 
rest  of  the  battery  followed  on  the  main  road  and  was  halted  to  await 
orders.  General  Grover  ordered  up  one  piece  and  placed  it  in  position 
on  the  right  of  the  road  in  the  field.  It  opened  fire  with  spherical  case- 
shot  at  800  yards  to  the  left  of  where  the  road  intersects  the  wood,  and 
where  the  caissons  of  the  enemy  were  afterward  found  abandoned. 
After  the  firing  of  this  piece  was  determined  I left  it  in  charge  of  a 
sergeant  and  accompanied  the  other  piece  to  its  position,  about  400 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


367 


yards  in  advance  and  on  the  road.  This  position  was  also  designated  by 
General  Grover.  It  was  about  this  time  of  the  battle  that  the  enemy 
attempted  the  flank  movement  on  the  right  of  onr  line.  From  my  posi- 
tion I soon  understood  the  movement,  but  the  orders  I had.  received 
prevented  me  from  firing  in  that  direction  until  I saw  the  section  ot  my 
own  battery  preparing  to  retire,  and  also  the  dress  of  the  enemy,  when 
I turned  the  fire  of  the  piece  in  that  direction  and  covered  the  retro- 
grade movement  as  well  as  possible. 

The  section  in  the  field  under  Lieutenant  Bradley  took  a new  position 

and  renewed  the  lire,  discharging  canister  rapidly  and  effectively,  which, 
with  the  spherical  case  which  I threw  from  the  road  oyer  our  own  in- 
fantry, succeeded  in  driving  the  enemy  back.  In  retiring,  Lieutenant 
Bradley  had  8 of  his  men  and  6 horses  wounded.  Finding  that  the 
position  of  the  piece  on  the  road  was  in  the  line  of  fire  of  the  skirmish- 
ers and  having  1 man  killed  and  2 disabled,  I fell  back  about  60  yards 
and  renewed  the  fire,  leaving  a corporal  in  charge.  The  left  section 
was  now  ordered  by  Colonel  Birge  to  a position  about  60  yards  m front 
of  the  wood.  As  the  enemy  could  be  seen  I fired  canister,  and  alter  a 
number  of  discharges  the  infantry  entered  the  wood.  There  was  no 
more  artillery  firing  during  the  day.  I was  afterward  annoyed  by  the 
fire  of  the  gunboat,  several  of  her  shells  (30-pounders)  falling  among 
the  teams  of  the  section,  but  fortunately  not  exploding. 

During  the  whole  engagement,  from  8 a.  m.  until  about  2 p.  m.,  the 
men  under  my  charge  behaved  coolly  and  did  their  duty  well.  I he 
first  section,  under  Lieutenant  Bradley,  was  in  the  most  trying  position, 
and  the  manner  in  which  it  was  extricated  from  its  position  reflects 
greatly  on  Lieutenant  Bradley’s  courage  and  high  sense  of  duty. 

The  company  left  its  camp  next  morning  and  marched  along  Bayou 
Teche,  arriving  at  New  Iberia  on  the  night  of  the  16th;  thence  to 
Opelousas,  La.,  arriving  at  its  present  camp  on  the  night  of  the  20th 
instant  ^ 

1 am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JQIiiS  1.  iiUPuiiiiio, 

Lieut.,  Second  Arty.,  Comdg.  Battery  G,  Second  U.  S.  Arty. 

Capt.  H.  W.  Closson, 

First  Artillery,  Comdg.  Artillery,  Grover's  Division. 


No.  30. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  Dwight,  jr.,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First 
Brigade,  of  operations  March  2 6-May  1. 

At  Burnt  Bridges  over  Bayous  Cocodrie  and  Bceuff, 
Before  Washington,  La.,  April  22,  1863 — 7 p.  m. 
Sir  : We  have  been  delayed  at  this  point  by  unexpected  difficulties 
in  constructing  a bridge.  It  is  a more  difficult  bayou  to  cross  than  the 
Vermillion.  I hope  to  cross  by  midnight.  I crossed  some  cavalry  at 
noon  to-day,  and  they  moved  on  the  Bayou  Bcsuff  road,  about  2 A miles 
from  this  position.  They  were  ambushed  by  about  200  of  the  enemy. 

Our  cavalry  lost!  man  killed  and  1 man  prisoner.  The  enemy  lost 
at  least  1 killed  to  our  knowledge. 

From  the  information  which  I gather  here  I think  that  the  cavalry 


* Nominal  list  omitted  shows  1 man  killed  and  7 men  wounded. 


368 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


we  encountered  was  a party  of  the  enemy  returning  to  ascertain  our 
movements.  I do  not  expect  to  encounter  them  to  morrow.  The  con- 
dition of  the  enemy’s  army  when  it  passed  this  point  is  described  by 
those  who  witnessed  it  as  deplorable.  They  threw  a great  deal  of  am- 
munition into  Bayou  Cocodrie,  and  they  threw  great  quantities  of  small- 
arms  into  Bayou  Bceuff.  In  short,  they  were  disposed  to  abandon 
everything.  The  Texans  declared  they  were  going  home,  while  the 
other  troops  said  that  if  they  failed  to  hold  Alexandria  they  would  re- 
treat through  Arkansas  toward  Vicksburg.  Under  these  circumstances 
I can  go  as  far  toward  Alexandria  as  the  commanding  general  may 
direct. 

From  the  information  which  I have  here  to-day  it  would  seem  that 
Washington  might  be  made  a base  of  operations.  There  are  25  feet  of 
water  in  the  bayou  at  this  point.  The  difficulties  of  the  Atchafalaya 
may  be  great — they  appeared  very  great  to  Lieutenant-Commander 
Cooke — but  surely  where  rebel  gunboats  have  been,  and  waters  which 
the  rebels  have  navigated,  our  gunboats  and  transports  can  navigate. 

It  will  be  impossible  to  get  the  supplies,  which  are  in  this  country,  of 
sugar,  &c.,  out  of  the  country,  except  by  means  of  water  transporta- 
tion. There  are  160  hogsheads  of  sugar  at  the  very  first  plantation 
which  we  have  reached.  There  are  10,000  barrels  of  corn  there  belong- 
ing to  the  Confederate  Government,  stored  there  for  the  supply  of  their 


army. 

There  is  no  enemy  before  us,  for  that  army  cannot  rally.  It  is  not 
likely  that  there  is  any  in  the  region  of  Butte-Ala- Bose,  or  prepared  to 
act  on  our  communications  on  the  Atchafalaya.  I have  further  infor- 
mation that  the  raft  on  Grand  Biver  at  present  forms  no  obstruction, 
and  is  not  a serious  obstruction  at  low  water. 

Much  that  I have  written  may  be  already  known  to  you.  I have 
written  it  because  some  of  it  is  new  to  me. 

I have  the  honor  to  be.  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  DWIGHT,  Jr., 

Brigadier-  General. 


Lieut.  Col.  Bichard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


At  the  Burnt  Bridges  on  Bayous  Cocodrie  and  Bceuff, 
Beyond  Washington , La .,  April  23,  1863 — 4.30  a.  m. 

Sir  : My  command  is  beyond  Bayous  Bceuff  and  Cocodrie.  I shall 
make  a long  march  to-day.  Yesterday  I got  information  that  there  was 
a large  flat-boat  loaded  with  supplies  of  flour,  &c.,  up  Bayou  Cocodrie 
attempting  to  get  to  the  railroad,  for  Alexandria.  Having  obtained  a 
good  guide,  I sent  a force  of  cavalry  to  capture  this  flat-boat.  It  was 
captured,  and  its  captain  is  now  here  a prisoner.  It  turned  out  to  be 
loaded  with  about  50  barrels  of  the  best  quality  of  Louisiana  rum  (made 
from  the  sugar  instead  of  molasses),  some  sugar,  and  some  lard.  There 
had  been  some  flour  on  board,  but  it  was  taken  by  a quartermaster  in  the 
Confederate  Army.  The  captain  of  the  flat  is  a speculator ; he  owned 
the  steamer  Wave,  and  he  started  from  Alexandria  with  a cargo  to  run 
the  blockade  of  the  Mississippi  and  go  to  Natchez.  He  was  stopped  at 
the  mouth  of  Bed  Biver  by  the  Hartford,  which  fired  several  shots  at 
him ; he  ran  away  from  her,  and  by  way  of  the  Atchafalaya  reached 
this  point;  here  he  changed  his  cargo  from  the  Wave  to  the  flat-boat. 


Chap.  XX VH,] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


369 


When  the  rebels  evacuated  this  place  they  burned  the  steamer  Wave. 
The  flat  with  its  cargo  I leave  at  this  bridge,  under  a strong  guard,  sub- 
ject to  your  orders.  The  captain  and  bis  brother  will  be  found  there 
prisoners.  The  captain  is  particularly  well  acquainted  with  all  the 
waters  in  this  neighborhood  of  the  Bed  Biver. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  yonr  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  DWIGHT,  Jr., 

Brigadier- General . 


Lieutenant-Colonel  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Advance  Brigade, 

Satcham’s  Plantation , on  the  Bayou  Bceuff 20  miles  beyond 

Washington , La.,  April  24,  1863 — 6 a.  m. 

Sir  : 1 have  nothing  from  your  headquarters  in  reply  to  my  commu- 
nications of  yesterday  iporning  and  the  previous  evening.  I reached 
this  point  yesterday  at  an  early  hour  in  the  afternoon.  I had  in  front 
of  me  during  the'  whole  of  yesterday’s  march  a body  of  about  500  of  the 
enemy’s  cavalry,  which  had  left  Cheney  ville  Wednesday  morning,  April 
22,  to  come  down  Bayou  Bceuff  and  watch  our  movements.  They  off  ered 
no  resistance  of  any  consequence,  keeping  about  30  to  40  men  just  out 
of  our  reach  all  the  time.  From  this  squad  we  captured  4 prisoners. 

The  valley  of  this  bayou  has  been  so  often  overrun  by  the  enemy’s 
cavalry  that  it  is  a poor  field  in  which  to  look  for  horses  and  saddles ; 
the  cattle,  too,  are  easily  secreted  here.  A great  deal  of  the  cotton  of 
this  region  has  been  burned,  but  a great  deal  yet  remains.  The  most  of 
it  is  unginned  or  lying  loosely  in  the  gin  ; this  is  owing  to  the  scarcity 
of  bagging  and  rope  in  this  country.  I had  intended  to  have  sent  my 
train  to  Opelousas  last  night  with  a load  of  cotton,  but  the  quartermas- 
ter who  had  the  matter  in  charge  loaded  the  teams  with  unginned  cot- 
ton ; fortunately,  I found  this  out  before  the  train  started,  and  had  the 
wagons  unloaded.  I shall  send  this  train  forward  to-day  loaded  with 
baled  cotton ; but  there  is  no  way  to  remove  the  cotton  and  sugar  from 
this  region  except  by  means  of  water  transportation.  As  horses  and 
saddles  are  not  to  be  obtained  here,  and  as  I am  without  the  means  to 
remove  cotton  and  sugar,  I shall  retire  a short  day’s  march  to-day.  I 
am  without  rations,  but  I have  ground  a large  quantity  of  corn-meal, 
and  if  I had  coffee,  subsistence  would  be  easily  obtained  here. 

It  would  seem  to  me  that  the  place  to  look  for  cattle  and  horses  is 
on  the  prairies  above  us.  There  I am  assured  they  are  as  plentiful  as  they 
were  on  the  prairies  over  which  your  army  passed  on  its  way  to  Ope- 
lousas. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  DWIGHT,  Jr., 

Brigadier • General. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Advance  Brigade, 

Satcham’s  Plantation , on  the  Bayou  Bceuff \ 20  miles  beyond 

Washington , La.,  April  24,  1863 — 4.30  p.  m. 
Sir  : My  last  communication  from  Alexandria  is  to  4 o’clock  p.  m.  on 
Wednesday.  Two  intelligent  negroes,  who  were  teamsters  in  the  rebel 

24  R r — VOL  xv 


370  W.  FLA.,  S.  FLA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

service,  left  Alexandria  at  that  time  and  reached  here  at  12  o’clock  noon. 
They  say  that  the  greater  part  of  the  rebel  army  was  then  in  Alexan- 
dria and  arrived  there  with  them ; that  a portion  had  preceded  them, 
and  a portion  had  not  arrived  when  they  left.  A small  force  of  cavalry, 
about  500,  they  say,  was  left  at  the  Evergreens,  above  Holmesville,  to 
observe  us.  The  rebels  had  about  thirty  steamboats  at  Alexandria; 
two  of  these  boats  left  there  for  the  Black  Biver  on  Wednesday ; they 
were  loaded  with  molasses,  sugar,  bacon,  and  other  provisions  for  the 
rebel  army.  The  rebels  were  loading  other  boats  with  their  ammuni- 
tion, guns,  and  other  stores  to  transport  to  Shreveport.  The  stand  at 
Alexandria  was  to  be  but  temporary.  The  rebel  force  is  going  to  the 
Upper  Bed  Biver  and  Texas. 

Your  dispatch  of  to-day,  ordering  me  to  halt  in  my  present  position,  is 
received.  I shall  advance  about  3 miles  to  a good  camping  ground. 

The  opening  of  navigation  must  give  you  from  this  vicinity  10,000 
bales  of  cotton,  besides  a large  quantity  of  sugar.  The  greater  part  of 
the  cotton  destroyed  is  that  in  the  gin  and  unginned.  All  baled  cotton 
is  carefully  preserved  by  planters  or  speculators. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  DWIGHT,  Jr., 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Brigade. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  First  Brigade,  Grover’s  Division, 

In  camp  on  Bayou  Boeuff,  beyond 
Washington , La.,  April  27,  1863. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  100, 1 have  the  honor  to 
submit  the  following  report  of  the  operations  of  this  brigade  from  the 
time  it  left  Baton  Bouge  until  its  arrival  in  Opelousas : 

This  brigade  embarked  on  board  the  transports  Saint  Mary’s,  Iber- 
ville, Morning  Light,  Empire  Parish,  and  Saint  Maurice  on  the  after- 
noon of  March  26,  1863.  These  transports  sailed  at  5 o’clock  a.  m., 
March  27,  1863,  for  Donaldsonville,  where  the  troops  were  debarked. 
The  disorders  of  this  embarkation  and  passage  have  been  fully  reported 
to  you.  The  offenders  in  the  Sixth  Begiment  New  York  Volunteers 
have  been  punished,  and  I may  be  permitted  here  to  state  that  the  con- 
duct of  the  regiment  since  it  has  been  purged  of  its  bad  officers  and 
soldiers  has  been  such  as  to  deserve  great  praise.  The  brigade  re- 
mained in  Donaldsonville  until  the  morning  of  March  31,  when  it 
marched  with  the  remainder  of  the  division  for  Thibodeauxville.  It 
marched  through  that  place  and  encamped  at  Terre  Bonne  Bailroad 
Station  April  2, 1863.  The  next  morning  the  brigade  moved  by  railroad 
to  Bayou  Boeuff,  where  it  encamped.  The  conduct  of  the  brigade  during 
this  march  was  generally  very  good.  No  cases  of  marauding  and  pillage 
occurred,  to  my  knowledge,  such  as  have  since  disgraced  this  army. 
But  in  these  early  days  of  the  march  it  was  evident  that  the  severest 
measures  would  be  needed  to  secure  obedience  and  order.  In  an  aggra- 
vated case  of  disobedience  of  orders  on  the  part  of  a soldier,  and  of  his 
having  attempted  the  lives  of  two  officers  who  gave  the  orders,  I 
ordered  the  immediate  execution  of  the  soldier.  It  would  have  been 
well  if  the  execution  had  taken  place.  It  was  a military  necessity  to 
the  morale  of  the  command. 


Chap.  XXYII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


371 


This  brigade  marched  from  Bayou  Bceuff  on  the  9th  of  April,  1863, 
to  Brashear  City,  which  place  it  reached  the  same  day.  On  Saturday, 
April  11,  it  embarked  on  board  the  steamers  Clifton,  Estrella,  Saint 
Mary’s,  and  Calhoun  for  a landing  on  Grand  Lake,  in  rear  of  Franklin, 
La.  The  transports  and  gunboats  sailed  on  Sunday  forenoon  and 
reached  Madam  Porter’s  shell-road  landing  during  that  afternoon.  A 
reconnaissance  of  this  road,  made  under  the  direction  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Fiske,  of  the  First  Louisiana,  showed  this  road  to  be  impracti- 
cable. The  Clifton  then  moved  to  Madam  Porter’s  plantation  road 
landing.  At  about  1 o’clock  on  Monday  morning,  April  13,  Capt.  W. 
J.  Denslow,  of  my  staff,  and  Lieutenant  Matthews,  acting  as  an  aide 
on  my  staff*,  with  a few  men  from  the  Sixth  Regiment  New  York  Vol- 
unteers, made  a reconnaissance  of  this  road,  leading  from  Grand  Lake 
to  Bayou  Teche.  It  was  found  to  be  practicable  for  all  arms,  and  at 
dawn  of  day  the  brigade  commenced  its  debarkation.  The  First  Regi- 
ment Louisiana  Volunteers,  under  Colonel  Holcomb,  was  the  first  regi- 
ment to  land.  As  soon  as  it  advanced  from  the  beach  over  the  open 
field  toward  the  thick  wood  the  enemy  opened  fire  from  a single  piece 
of  artillery,  and  immediately  after  their  skirmishers  opened  with  mus- 
ketry. Lieutenant-Colonel  Fiske,  commanding  the  advance  of  the  First 
Regiment  Louisiana  Volunteers,  advanced  rapidly  upon  their  position, 
Colonel  Holcomb  supporting  him  with  the  remainder  of  the  regiment. 
They  forced  the  wood,  the  enemy  leaving  in  a very  hasty  manner.  The 
First  Regiment  Louisiana  Volunteers  advanced  about  three-quarters  of 
a mile  to  the  outer  skirt  of  the  wood  nearest  the  Teche.  In  this  posi- 
tion I re-enforced  him  with  all  the  troops  that  had  landed,  Colonel 
Birge,  commanding  the  Third  Brigade,  furnishing  me  with  two  regi- 
ments for  this  purpose  from  his  brigade,  these  regiments  having  lauded 
from  the  transport  Laurel  Hill.  It  was  now  9 o’clock  a.  m.  At  this 
time  appeared  to  our  front  and  right  a force  of  the  enemy,  consisting  of 
cavalry  and  four  pieces  of  artillery.  This  force  was  increased  by  the 
appearance  of  some  infantry,  which  appeared  to  be  moving  toward  my 
right  flank.  At  10.30  a.  m.  a battery  of  artillery  and  some  cavalry 
having  reported  to  me,  and  the  enemy  having  apparently  withdrawn 
his  force  behind  the  sugar-house  at  McWilliams’  plantation,  I com- 
menced advancing  my  skirmishers  over  the  open  field  in  my  front,  and 
I ordered  the  cavalry  to  go  forward  and  seize  the  junction  of  the  planta- 
tion road,  over  which  I had  advanced,  with  the  road  on  the  banks  of 
the  Teche.  This  movement  caused  the  enemy  to  'reappear  with  his 
cavalry  and  two  pieces  of  his  artillery  and  to  open  fire  on  our  cavalry. 
I immediately  advanced  a section  of  artillery  and  some  infantry  to 
seize  the  fork  of  the  road  and,  if  possible,  Madam  Porter’s  bridge  over 
the  Teche.  Before  12  o’clock  this  was  accomplished.  The  bridge  had 
been  fired  by  the  enemy,  but  the  fire  was  extinguished  before  any  great 
damage  was  done,  and  the  negroes  on  the  plantation  were  at  once  set 
to  work  to  repair  the  bridge.  At  noon  my  front  at  Madam  Porter’s 
bridge  was  cleared  of  the  enemy,  and  I was  prepared  to  cross  the  Teche. 
Meantime  the  enemy  had  advanced  to  destroy  a bridge  about  a mile, 
farther  down.  This  had  been  prevented  by  our  cavalry  up  to  this 
time,  when  I moved  some  infantry  and  artillery  down  to  hold  the 
bridge.  I kept  possession  of  both  these  bridges.  I did  not  advance 
over  them,  in  obedience  of  the  orders  of  the  brigadier-general  command- 
ing the  division,  but- held  these  positions  while  my  command  was  sup- 
plied with  two  days’  rations.  At  5 o’clock  ip  the  afternoon,  the  enemy 
having  previously  threatened  to  flank  my  position  at  the  lower  bridge 
by  crossing  a portion  of  his  force  at  a bridge  lower  down,  and  having 
relinquished  the  attempt,  he  disappeared  entirely  from  my  front  at  both 


372 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXvn. 

bridges.  At  this  time  I received  an  order  from  the  brigadier-general 
commanding  the  division  to  destroy  the  lower  bridge  and  cross  the 
bayou  at  the  upper  bridge  in  rear  of  the  division  which  was  about  to 
cross.  I obeyed  the  order,  and  long  after  dark  reached  the.  upper 
bridge,  crossed  it  with  difficulty  (it  having  broken  down  during  the 
passage  of  the  artillery  over  it)  and  took  up  position  as  directed. 

This  brigade  moved  the  next  morning  immediately  in  rear  of  the 
Third  Brigade  of  this  division.  The  brigade  was  in  motion  at  6 o’clock 
a.  m.  We  had  hardly  advanced  1£  miles  when  firing  assured  us  that 
the  Third  Brigade  was  engaged  by  the  enemy.  I immediately  rode 
toward  the  front  to  observe  what  was  going  on,  when  I saw  that  the 
enemy  was  posted  in  a very  strong  position  in  the  front  of  a skirt  of 
wood  which  ran  for  some  distance  at  right  angles  to  the  road  on  which 
we  were  moving  and  then  ran  off  obliquely  to  the  left  and  front  of  the 
enemy’s  position.  The  skirt  of  wood  to  the  left  and  front  had  a oane- 
brake  and  high  grass  in  its  front  sufficient  to  conceal  any  movement 
which  the  enemy  might  make  in  that  direction.  The  Third  Brigade 
had  hardly  become  engaged  when  the  enemy  appeared  in  the  cane- 
brake,  flanking  the  position  of  our  troops.  At  this  moment  I received 
an  order  through  Lieutenant  Otis,  aide-de-camp  to  the  general  com- 
manding this  division,  to  move  my  brigade  to  the  front.  Lieutenant 
Otis  had  not  been  informed  in  what  manner  the  brigadier-general  com- 
manding the  division  wished  me  to  dispose  of  my  brigade.  I therefore 
rode  forward  to  see  the  general  commanding  the  division  in  person, 
directing  my  brigade  to  follow  rapidly,  and  giving  the  necessary  direc- 
tions to  stretch  them  well  to  the  right  so  as  to  outflank  the  rebel  force, 
which,  by  its  flank  fire,  was  so  distressing  the  brigade  in  front  of  me. 
As  I moved  forward  the  scene  in  the  open  plain  in  front  of  me  was 
embarrassing.  Two  regiments  of  the  Third  Brigade  were  letieating  in 
disorder  and  the  artillery  on  our  right  was  tailing  back,  because  the 
rebel  infantry  was  enabled  to  advance  upon  it,  owing  to  the  contused 
retreat  of  its  support.  Having  seen  the  brigadier-general  commanding 
in  persou  and  received  his  directions  for  my  advance,  my  brigade  moved 
over  the  plain,  driving  the  enemy  from  all  their  positions,  outflanking 
them  on  their  left,  as  they  had  previously  outflanked  us  on  our  right, 
capturing  prisoners,  forcing  the  wood  in  my  front,  and  occupying  the 
outer  edge  of  that  wood.  Here  I was  ordered  to  halt  and  dispose  my 
troops  so  as  to  hold  the  ground  which  I had  gained  and  more  effectu- 
ally to  protect  the- right  flank  of  our  position,  which  was  said  to  be 
threatened  by  the  enemy.  The  officer  commanding  the  Third  Brigade 
did  not  occupy  the  outer  skirt  of  the  wood  in  front  of  him,  so  that  the 
left  of  the  Ninety-first  New  York  Volunteers  had  to  be  retired  into  the 
wood  to  form  a junction  with  his  line.  The  character  of  the  wood  and 
of  the  ground  on  our  right  flank  made  it  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to 
tell  what  the  enemy  was  doing  in  that  direction,  and  the  constant  re- 
ports from  my  front  in  a great  degree  confirmed  the  reports  from  the 
front  of  the  Third  Brigade  that  the  enemy  were  massing  their  troops 
on  our  front  and  right  for  the  purpose  of  making  an  attack.  By  com- 
mand of  the  brigadier- general  commanding  the  division  1 held  tbe 
position  which  I now  occupied  for  some  time,  and  remained  quiet  in  it. 
Finally  I received  an  order  to  advance  and  clear  my  front.  My  brigade 
did  advance  until  it  met  the  advance  of  General  Emory’s  division  near 
Franklin.  While  the  brigade  was  advancing  the  news  was  announced 
of  the  occupation  of  Franklin  by  the  advance  of  that  portion  of  the 
Nineteenth  Army  Corps  which  was  commanded  by  Major-General 
Banks.  The  brigade  occupied  and  held  all  the  positions  ot  the  enemy 


Chap.  XXVTL]  OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA.  373 

before  which  the  Third  Brigade  had  failed.  Its  loss  was  about  7 killed 
and  20  wounded.  It  captured  70  prisoners  from’  the  enemy.  This 
result  was  mainly  due  to  the  admirable  conduct  and  advance  of  the 
Ninety-first  New  York  Volunteers,  under  Colonel  Van  Zandt;  the  First 
Louisiana  Volunteers,  Colonel  Holcomb,  and  the  Sixth  New  York  Vol- 
unteers, Lieutenant-Colonel  Cassidy  commanding.  The  other  regiments 
of  the  brigade  acted  as  supports.  For  one  and  a half  hours  this  brigade 
held  all  the  positions  of  the  enemy  unsupported  by  any  portion  of  the 
Third  Brigade,  which  was  on  its  left,  and  which  did  not  advance  to  the 
edge  of  the  wood  in  their  front  until  long  after  I had  occupied  the  edge 
of  the  wood  in  my  front.  Their  failure  to  do  this,  and  the  difficulties 
which  the  Sixth  New  York  Volunteers  encountered  in  the  nature  of 
the  ground  over  which  they  advanced,  caused  us  to  lose  many  prison- 
ers that  otherwise  must  have  fallen  into  our  hands.  Too  much  praise 
cannot  be  bestowed  on  the  manner  in  which  the  Ninety-first  Regiment 
New  York  Volunteers  advanced  under  command  of  Colonel  Van  Zandt. 
But  all  the  regiments  of  this  brigade  did  their  duty  in  a manner  which 
reflects  great  credit  on  officers  and  men.  I was  greatly  indebted  to 
my  staff,  Lieutenant  Hunt,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general ; Captain 
Denslow,  acting  chief  of  staff;  Lieut.  F.  M.  Abbott,  aide-de-camp; 
Lieut.  Charles  Dwight,  aide-de-camp,  and  Lieutenant  Matthews,  vol- 
unteer aide-de-camp,  for  their  gallantry  and  the  assistance  which  they 
gave  me. 

This  brigade  encamped  on  the  evening  of  the  engagement,  April  14, 
1863,  near  the  scene  of  the  action.  Next  morning  it  marched  in  pursuit 
of  the  enemy,  and  at  night  encamped  near  Indian  Village.  Next  day 
it  marched  to  New  Iberia.  The  scenes  of  disorder  and  pillage  on  these 
two  days7  march  were  disgraceful  to  civilized  war.  Houses  were  en- 
tered and  all  in  them  destroyed  in  the  most  wanton  manner.  Ladies 
were  frightened  into  delivering  their  jewels  and  valuables  into  the  hands 
of  the  soldiers  b.y  threats  of  violence  toward  their  husbands.  Negro 
women  were  ravished  in  the  presence  of  white  women  and  children. 
These  disgusting  scenes  were  due  to  the  want  of  discipline  in  this  army, 
and  to  the  utter  incompetency  of  regimental  officers. 

At  night  in  New  Iberia  there  was  some  noise  and  confusion  in  this 
brigade,  owing  to  the  fact  that  some  soldiers  got  hold  of  Louisiana  rum. 
On  the  morning  of  the  17th  this  brigade,  in  advance,  started  over  the 
upper  route  for  Vermillion  Bridge.  Before  reaching  the  bridge  the  enemy 
was  seen  by  scouts,  mounted  for  the  purpose,  from  the  Sixth  Regi- 
ment New  York  Volunteers.  These  scouts  soon  brought  notice  of 
wagons  belonging  to  the  enemy  passing  over  the  prairie  to  our  left.  A 
portion  of  the  scouts  were  detached  to  capture  their  wagons.  They 
succeeded  in  capturing  three  of  them.  The  remainder  of  the  enemy7s 
train,  as  far  as  seen,  amounting  to  about  30  wagons,  was  seen  by 
these  scouts.  Had  any  cavalry  with  which  to  pursue  them  been  Avitli 
this  column  we  could  have  captured  them,  but  the  scouts  being  our  only 
mounted  force  it  was  impossible  to  make  the  attempt.  The  enemy7s 
cavalry  was  also  seen  upon  the  plain  and  fired  upon.  During  the  can- 
nonade at  the  bridge  the  brigade  furnished  sharpshooters,  and  also 
furnished  supports  to  the  batteries.  In  performing  these  duties  its  loss 
was  1 killed  and  4 wounded.  We  remained  on  the  18tli  at  the  burned 
bridge.  The  following  day  the  brigade  marched  to  Carrion  Crow 
Bayou.  The  pillage  on  this  day  took  the  form  of  shooting  poultry 
on  the  open  prairie.  Stragglers  from  the  front  of  the  column  fired 
to  the  rear  in  such  a way  as  greatly  to  endanger  the  lives  of  the 
^soldiers  in  rear  of  them.  The  march  of  the  next  day,  April  20,  1863, 


374 


wTfla.,  s.’ala./  s.  mss.7  la.,  tex.,  n.  mex.  ichap.  xxm 

brought  us  to  Opelousas.  The  general  conduct  of  the  brigade,  as  com- 
pared with  the  conduct  of  the  rest  ot  the  army,  has  been  good  during 
these  operations.  But  there  are  worthless  officers  and  soldiers  in  its 
ranks  whp  have  disgraced  it.  I must  speak  with  commendation  of  the 
conduct  of  the  Sixth  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers  since  their  con- 
duct  on  the  way  to  Donaldsonville.  They  have  surprised  me  m their  f 
deportment  and  justified  the  value  I attached  to  ridding  this  regiment 
at  that  time  of  certain  officers  and  soldiers.  They  have  tairly  won  back  j 
their  colors.  To  several  officers  of  the  brigade  I have  been  indebted  j 
lor  their  activity,  energy,  and  vigilance,  but  I must  specially  mention  \ 
Colonel  Holcomb,  of  the  First  Louisiana  Volunteers,  whose  services  have  ji 
been  very  valuable. 

I inclose  a complete  list  of  casualties  in  this  brigade* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  DWIGHT,  Jr., 
Brigadier-General , Commanding  Brigade. 

p.  S.— I also  inclose  reports  from  the  commanding  officers  of  the 
regiments  in  this  brigade,  with  the  exception  of  the  Twenty  -second 
Regiment  Maine  Volunteers.  This  regiment  is  on  detached  service,  ■ 
and  it  is  impossible  to  get  its  report  at  present.  I call  the  particular 
attention  of  the  brigadier-general  commanding  the  division  to  Colonel 
Holcomb’s  report,  which  is  more  minute  than  any  other,  and  very 
accurate  as  far  as  Colonel  Holcomb’s  information  extended.  Colonel 
Holcomb  thinks  the  enemy  had  two  pieces  of  artillery  at  the  landing  at 
Madam  Porter’s  plantation  road.  The  intervals  of  firing  and  the  wheel 
tracks  did  not  indicate  this.  Again,  Colonel  Holcomb  thinks  that  at 
the  engagement  at  Irish  Bend  his  regiment  was  in, the  center  and  the 
Sixth  New  York  Volunteers  and  Ninety-first  New  York  A olunteers 
respectively  on  his  right  and  left.  In  truth,  Colonel  Holcomb’s  regi- 
ment acted  as  a support  to  these  two  regiments.  The  Sixth  and  Ninety- 
first  New  York  Volunteers  were  deployed  across  the  whole  Iront  oi 
Colonel  Holcomb’s  regiment,  and  they  did  not  halt  until  every  position 
of  the  enemy  was  carried  and  held.  There  are  other  minor  and  insig-  | 
nificant  inaccuracies  in  his  report. 

Very  respectfully,  &c.,  __ 

J WILLIAM  DWIGHT,  Je., 

Brigadier-  General. 

Capt.  J.  Hibbert,  Jr.,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Advance  Brigade, 

Shield's  Plantation , April  27,  1863 — 9 p.  m. 

Sir:  Your  communication  of  this  date  has  just  been  handed  me  by 
Lieutenant  Abbott,  of  my  staff.  It  would  take  me  a long  time  to  col- 
lect all  the  supplies  I was  directed  to  obtain,  and,  from  what  I hear  , 
reported  from  your  neighborhood,  1 suppose  I could  never  obtain  heie 
anything  like  Die  amount  to  be  got  in  the  neighborhood  ot  Opelousas 
and  Washington.  The  proper  place  to  look  for  horses  and  cattle  is  on 
the  prairie,  as  I have  said  before.  These  statements  being  taken  as 
true,  there  can  be  no  object  in  my  remaining  here  longer.  1 can  obtain 
nothing  but  what  you  are  getting  more  easily,  and  my  position  is  a baa 
one.  I shall  therefore  retire  to-morrow  morning  at  daybreak.  Ihe  in- 
formation which  1 have  obtained  to-day  of  the  enemy’s  lorce  and  move- 

* Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  319. 


Chap.  XX VII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


375 


ments  is  as  follows:  There  are  400  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  at  the  bridge 
just  beyond  Holmesville.  There  is  a strong  picket  just  this  side  of  that 
place  at  the  cross-road.  There  are  about  40  mounted  men  on  the  Big- 
Cane  road,  which  is  the  road  on  my  right  as  I look  toward  Holmesville. 
At  the  Oocodrie  Bridge,  toward  Chicotville,  there  are  200  more  mounted 
men.  These  latter  went  to  that  bridge  this  morning  or  yesterday  after- 
noon from  the  bridge  above  Holmesville,  when  their  place  was  supplied 
at  the  Holmesville  Bridge  by  300  mounted  men  from  Alexandria.  There 
are  perhaps  from  40  to  60  cavalrymen  ranging  the  roads  to  my  left  as 
1 look  toward  Holmesville,  to  observe  my  movements.  The  little  affair 
of  Captain  Williamson’s  cavalry  yesterday  morning  at  daybreak  is  said 
so  to  have  frightened  the  enemy’s  sentinels  that  they  find  difficulty  in 
keeping  the  men  on  post.  The  enemy  is  said  to  be  moving  back  to 
Holmesville  from  Alexandria  to  feel  us  in  greater  force.  This  he  is  said 
to  be  forced  to  do  because  his  forces  are  so  much  demoralized  that  they 
will  disband  unless  they  can  fight  us.  They  hope  by  a contest  to  call 
back  to  their  ranks  many  who  have  deserted  and  many  who  insist  on 
going  to  Texas. 

The  enemy  are  building  breastworks,  about  15  miles  this  side  of  Alex- 
andria, of  cotton  bales  covered  with  dirt.  I believe  these  are  all  the 
reports  that  I have  of  the  enemy’s  intentions.  They  are  such  as  to 
render  my  stay  here  without  an  object,  or  rather  without  an  important 
object,  useless. 

I hear  further  that  the  enemy  have  just  got  15,000  men  at  Alexandria, 
and  that  they  have  moved  3,000  of  those  we  drove  up  toward  Alexandria 
back  to  this  end  of  the  railroad  from  Alexandria,  toward  Cheneyville. 
The  numbers  in  both  these  cases  are  probably  exaggerated. 

I intended  to  have  sent  out  to-night  a regiment  of  infantry  and  some 
cavalry  to  have  driven  the  enemy  from  the  bridge  beyond  Holmesville 
and  to  have  tested  the  correctness  of  these  rumors.  I should  have 
made  this  movement  at  an  hour  and  under  difficulties  arising  from  the 
mud,  &e.,  which  would  have  insured  success  and  perhaps  surprise,  and 
still  further  puzzled  the  enemy  as  to  my  intentions,  but  your  dispatch 
and  the  entire  circumstances  of  the  case  cause  me  to  retire. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully, 

• WILLIAM  DWIGHT,  Jr., 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding  Advance  Brigade. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  First  Brigade,  Grover’s  Division, 

Washington , La.,  May  2,  1863 — 6 a.  m. 

Sir:  In  compliance  with  instructions  received  from  the  brigadier- 
general  commandiug  this  army,  I moved  yesterday  afternoon  against 
the  enemy  with  all  the  cavalry  belonging  to  this  army,  the  Fourth  Regi- 
ment Wisconsin  Volunteers,  and  two  pieces  of  artillery.  I found  the 
enemy  as  soon  as  I had  crossed  the  bridge  at  Washington,  and  such 
was  the  first  resistance  that  I met  with  from  him  that  I ordered  Captain 
Barrett’s  company  of  Louisiana  cavalry  to  move  to  the  front  through 
an  old  path  and  road  so  as  to  come  out  in  rear  of  the  rebel  troops.  The 
conduct  of  this  movement  was  confided  to  Major  Robinson,  chief  of 
cavalry,  and  he  was  furnished  with  a negro  guide,  who  was  acquainted 
with  the  woods  and  paths.  Major  Robinson  was  directed  to  avoid  the 


376 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVtL 

road  leading  from  the  path  which  lie  was  to  take  to  Madam  Webb’s 
plantation,  and  to  press  on  and  come  out  in  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  on 
the  road  near  Madam  Quirk’s,  and  also  near  a Catholic  church.  Major 
Robinson  was  told  that  if  the  negro  guide  did  not  show  him  the  proper 
road  or  path  to  accomplish  this  end  that  he  must  shoot  the  negro  and 
return  to  this  command. 

The  Fourth  Wisconsin  Eegiment,  in  my  advance,  continued  to  drive 
the  enemy  in  the  front  and  pressed  him  nearly  to  the  cross-road,  which 
joins  the  road  on  the  left  bank  of  Bayou  Boeulf,  at  Madam  Quirk’s  and 
the  Catholic  church,  before  referred  to,  when  Major  Kobinson  joined 
my  rear  through  the  cross-road  on  Madam  Webb’s  plantation,  a road  1 
he  had  been  distinctly  ordered  to  avoid.  Major  Robinson  made  a thou- 
sand difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  execution  of  his  orders.  He  accom- 
plished nothing ; and,  as  all  hope  was  now  lost  of  cutting  off  a portion 
of  the  enemy  at  the  cross-roads,  I contented  myself  with  throwing  a 
few  shells  into  a sugar-house,  said,  by  a prisoner  I had  captured,  to  be 
a station  of  the  enemy’s,  and  observing  the  effect  which  these  shells  ; 
produced.  I then  directed  the  method  in  which  the  troops  should 
retire  to  Washington,  and  immediately  left  for  that  place. 

This  reconnaissance  shows  that  the  enemy  was  in  strong  force  in  cav- 
alry in  our  front ; that  all  his  cavalry  is  now  concentrated  on  the  left 
bank  of  Bayou  Bceuff ; that  his  cavalry  is  composed  of  Sibley’s  brigade, 
the  enemy’s  Louisiana  cavalry,  Clack’s  battalion,  and  Hubbard’s  bat- 
talion— in  all  about  3,000  mounted  men ; that  the  artillery  and  infantry 
of  the  enemy  have  gone  beyond  Alexandria,  and  that  while  this  force 
remained  in  its  present  position  there  is  nothing  to  fear  from  attacks 
on  the  enemy’s  right  from  the  jdains  leading  toward  Texas. 

I shall  send  you  the  prisoner  captured  last  night  and  any  others  who 
may  fall  into  our  hands. 

With  the  exception  of  Major  Robinson  the  troops  did  all  that  was 
asked  of  them. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  DWIGHT,  Jr., 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Brigade. 


Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


P.  S. — This  report  has  been  written  in  a very  hasty  manner.  I shall 


endeavor  to  see  the  brigadier-general  commanding  these  forces  as  soon  , 


as  1 have  rested  from  my  fatigue. 
Very  respectfully, 


WILLIAM  DWIGHT,  Jr., 

Brigadier-  General. 


Ho.  31. 


Report  of  Col.  Richard  E.  Holcomb,  First  Louisiana  Infantry  ( Union),  of 
operations  March  2d— April  20. 


Headquarters  First  Louisiana  Volunteers, 

Bayou  Bceuff , La .,  April  28,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I joined  my  regiment  on  March 
29  at  Donaldsonville,  having  been  absent  a few  days  in  Hew  Orleans, 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


377 


atid  remained  there  two  days.  The  regiment  left  Donaldsonville  with 
the  brigade  March  31,  anil  proceeded  to  Terre  Bonne  Station,  near 
Thibodeaux;  remained  there  two  days  and  took  the  cars  for  Bayou 
Bceuff.  Nothing  occurred  on  the  road  of  any  interest. 

Remained  encamped  at  Bayou  Bceuff  until  April  9,  when  we  left  for 
Brashear  City.  Remained  there  from  the  evening  of  the  9th  till  the 
evening  of  the  11th,  and  embarked  on  board  the  United  States  gunboat 
Clifton. 

The  next  morning  the  fleet  started  for  Irish  Bend,  on  Grand  Lake, 
and  arrived  the  same  evening.  A reconnaissance  was  ordered  to  be 
made  of  the  road  it  was  intended  to  pass  over  by  two  companies  of  the 
First  Louisiana  Volunteers,  under  command  of  the  lieutenant-colonel, 
which  was  made  the  same  evening,  the  companies  returning  to  the 
Clifton  at  11  p.  m.,  and  the  route  was  pronounced  impracticable. 

The  fleet  passed  up  the  lake  a short  distance  farther,  a good  road 
was  found,  and  the  order  was  given  for  this  regiment  to  disembark  at 
daylight  on  the  13th.  The  regiment  disembarked  in  a short  time,  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Fiske,  with  two  companies  (C  and  F),  were  ordered 
to  move  forward  as  skirmishers  and  examine  the  country  in  the  neigh- 
borhood of  the  lauding.  The  regiment  was  drawn  up  in  line,  ready  to 
assist  the  skirmishers  or  to  move  in  any  direction  at  a moment’s  warn- 
ing. The  skirmishers  had  advanced  but  a short  distance  when  the 
enemy  opened  fire  with  two  pieces  of  artillery  and  about  two  companies 
of  cavalry,  all  of  which  were  under  cover  of  the  adjacent  wood  and 
behind  a high  fence.  The  skirmishers  continued  to  advance  in  good 
order,  notwithstanding  the  galling  fire  of  the  enemy,  which  was  from 
the  front  and  the  right  flank.  I was  ordered  up  with  the  balance  of 
the  regiment  to  support  the  skirmishers,  and  advanced  directly  up  the 
road  which  led  through  the  field  and  woods,  and  which  was  the  route 
to  reach  the  Teche.  About  this  time  Lieutenant-Colonel  Fiske  and 
two  men  were  wounded,  but  the  skirmishers  still  held  their  ground, 
and  were  in  good  order  when  I came  up.  I formed  the  regiment  iu 
line  to  the  left  of  the  road,  and  continued  to  advance,  and  soon  received 
the  enemy’s  fire  from  the  front  and  the  right  flank,  and  had  two  men 
slightly  wounded.  The  two  pieces  of  artillery  of  the  enemy  were 
directly  ahead  in  the  road  at  the  edge  of  the  wood,  and  I thought  by 
moving  a little  to  the  left  1 could  avoid  their  fire,  and  also  the  fire  of 
the  gunboats,  several  shells  from  which  fell  near  the  right  of  our  line, 
and  that  by  entering  the  wood  and  making  a flank  movement  to  the 
right  I might  cut  off'  the  retreat  of  the  enemy.  I ordered  the  regiment 
to  lire  a volley  and  charge  into  the  wood,  which  they  did  in  good  style, 
but  the  enemy  seeing  this  movement  retreated  as  quickly  as  possible. 

1 would  say  here  that  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command  behaved 
admirably  and  with  great  gallantry.  They  advanced  as  steadily  under 
lire  as  veterans.  Though  perhaps  some  officers  deserve  especial  praise, 
yet  when  all  did  so  well  it  is  difficult  to  particularize. 

I was  then  ordered  to  advance  on  the  road  through  the  swamp  to 
the  edge  of  the  clearing  beyond,  which  I did,  throwing  out  skirmishers 
in  advance.  As  we  came  to  the  edge  of  the  clearing  we  saw  the  enemy 
drawn  up  in  line,  with  four  pieces  of  artillery  and  a battalion  of  cavalry. 
Remained  at  the  edge  of  the  clearing  till  10  p.  m.,  most  of  the  division 
having  passed  by,  when  we  were  ordered  to  go  forward  and  support 
Olosson’s  battery,  which  was  protecting  a crossing  of  the  bayou  about 
3 miles  below  Madam  Porter’s.  1 also  had  a part  of  the  One  hundred 
and  thirty-first  New  York,  the  Sixth  New  York,  and  the  Twenty-second 
Maine.  I threw  out  some  of  my  men  as  sharpshooters,  as  the  enemy 


378 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chai*.  xxvn.] ( 


were  pouring  in  a scattering  and  galling  fire  from  the  west  bank  of  the 
bayou.  Lost  two  men  killed  in  the  afternoon.  At  about  6 p.  in.  was 
ordered  back  to  bivouac  ou  the  west  bank  of  the  bayou,  with  orders  to 
destroy  the  bridge  we  had  been  holding. 

Early  the  next  morning,  the  14th,  the  regiment  was  put  in  line  of 
march  and  proceeded  down  the  bayou,  when  firing  commenced  between 
our  advance  and  the  enemy,  who  had  taken  a position  about  2 miles 
from  Franklin.  The  Third  Brigade  was  first  to  advance,  but  the  enemy, 
holding  too  strong  a position,  it  was  found  necessary  to  send  forward 
the  First  Brigade,  and,  with  the  Ninety-first  and  Sixth  New  York,  l 
was  ordered  forward.  The  Ninety- first  advanced  on  the  left,  the  Sixth 
New  York  on  the  right,  and  the  First  Louisiana  in  the  center.  The 
First  Louisiana  and  the  Sixth  New  York  advanced  but  a short  distance 
when  we  were  ordered  to  halt  in  that  position  till  about  3 p.  m.  I was 
ordered  to  send  forward  two  companies  as  skirmishers,  which  1 did, 
under  command  of  Adjt.  Charles  H.  Grosvenor,  and  they  arrived  to 
near  the  line  first  occupied  by  the  enemy.  The  Sixth  New  York  had 
been  ordered  to  advance  as  skirmishers  on  our  left,  and  I was  ordered1 
to  go  forward  and  support  them,  sending  forward  the  skirmishers  on 
the  right.  In  accordance  with  this  order  we  advanced  about  2 miles, 
when  we  suddenly  came  upon  the  forces  under  command  of  General 
Emory.  The  same  evening  we  returned  and  encamped  at  Irish  Bend, 
on  the  Teche. 

The  next  morning  (the  15th)  we  again  took  up  the  line  of  march  foi 
Newtown,  or  New  Iberia,  which  place  we  reached  the  afternoon  of  the 
16th. 

On  this  march  I received  orders  from  General  Banks  to  allow  nc 
straggling,  and  was  told  if  any  enlisted  man  was  found  out  of  the  ranks 
during  the  march  without  the  permission  of  his  company  commandei 
the  captain  of  the  company  to  which  such  man  belonged  would  be  dis 
honorably  discharged  the  service.  I communicated  this  order  to  m> 
company  commanders,  and  most  of  the  companies  succeeded  in  comply 
ing  with  it.  Two  captains,  however  (Captain  Salomon,  Company  E. 
and  Captain  Benaud,  Company  A),  after  repeated  warnings,  allowed 
their  men  to  loiter  behind  so  much,  for  the  purpose  of  pillaging,  ap 
parently  taking  no  pains  to  prevent  it,  that,  in  accordance  with  the1 
order  received  from  the  commanding  general,  I was  obliged  to  place 
them  under  arrest.  At  Newtown,  during  the  night  that  we  remained] 
there,  the  men  found  some  intoxicating  liquor  of  some  kind,  and  man\ 
of  them  during  the  night  and  the  next  morning  were  under  the  influ 
ence  of  it.  They  made  me  some  trouble,  though  nothing  serious  hap 
pened. 

The  morning  of  the  17th  we  proceeded  on,  and  made  a long  march  ol; 
22  miles  to  Vermillion  Bayou.  Here  the  enemy  had  burned  a bridge 
and  had  two  or  three  pieces  of  artillery  posted  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  bayou  to  oppose  our  advance.  Our  batteries  were  ordered  up  and 
shelled  the  woods,  where  they  were  until  about  dark,  when  we  went 
into  camp,  but  were  allowed  to  build  no  fires,  of  which  my  men  com 
plained  somewhat,  as  they  had  had  nothing  to  eat  for  some  time  and 
wished  to  make  some  hot  coffee.  We  were  detained  at  Bayou  Vermill 
ion  the  next  day  waiting  for  the  reconstruction  of  the  bridge. 

The  morning  of  the  19th  our  line  of  march  was  taken  up  for  Opelousas, 
I was  quite  unwell — indeed,  had  been  suffering  for  some  time;  so  much 
so  that  I left  the  regiment  in  command  of  Adjt.  Charles  H.  Grosvenor. 
and  I followed  slowly  on  my  horse.  I was  ordered  to  leave  a company 
at  the  bridge  before  referred  to,  and  left  Company  G,  Capt.  A.  W.  Per 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


379 


sons.  About  1 o’clock  on  this  day’s  inarch,  while  the  brigade  was 
halted,  several  rifle  shots  came  whistling  over  my  regiment,  fired  by 
stragglers  who  were  engaged  in  plundering.  One  shot  struck  very 
near  one  of  my  lieutenants.  Two  men  were  arrested  by  General  Dwight 
for  this  carelessness,  and  were  ordered  by  him  to  be  shot,  and  the  First 
Louisiana  was  ordered  to  furnish  a detail  of  six  men  with  loaded  mus- 
kets to  do  it.  The  general,  however,  countermanded  the  order  aud  sent 
the  men  to  be  placed  in  charge  of  the  guard  of  the  First  Louisiana  Regi- 
ment, where  they  are  now. 

During  this  day’s  march  I was  ordered  to  send  two  of  my  companies 
from  my  regiment  out  on  either  side  of  the  road  to  pick  up  all  the  horses 
they  could  And,  and,  if  possible,  mount  all  their  men  and  join  the  regi- 
ment again  in  the  evening. 

Nothing  further  of  importance  occurred  until  arriving  at  Opelousas 
the  evening  of  the  20th.  The  First  Louisiana  Volunteers  were  marched 
through  the  town  and  placed  in  camp  on  a road  going  out  to  the  west. 

While  at  Opelousas  I issued  an  order  appointing  Adjt.  Charles  H. 
Grosvenor  acting  major,  as  we  have  had  no  major  for  some  time,  and 
Lieut.  T.  L.  Scott  acting  adjutant. 

I have  now  so  far  recovered  as  to  be  able  to  take  command  of  ray 
regiment. 

I would  remark,  in  conclusion,  that  my  men,  during  a great  part  of 
the  time  referred  to,  suffered  for  the  want  of  a sufficient  quantity  of 
coffee  and  hard  bread,  and  many  of  them,  too,  complained  of  being 
obliged  to  carry  knapsacks  when  they  seemed  of  so  little  use. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

K.  E.  HOLCOMB, 


Colonel , Commanding. 


Lieut.  William  B.  Hunt, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  32. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Michael  Cassidy , Sixth  New  York  Infantry , of  opera- 
tions March  2 G-April  20. 

Hdqrs.  Sixth  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers, 

Little  Bayou  Bceuff , La .,  April  25,  1863. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  verbal  instructions  received  from  Brigadier- 
General  Dwight,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  Sixth  Regiment 
New  York  Volunteers  embarked  on  the  steamer  Morning  Light  at  Baton 
Rouge  March  26  for  Donaldson ville,  arriving  next  morning,  where  the 
regiment  encamped  until  Tuesday,  March  31,  leaving  that  day  and  pass- 
ing through  Thibodeaux  April  2,  encamping  for  the  night  near  the  rail- 
road station  at  Terre  Bonne,  and  on  the  3d  going  on  the  cars  to  Bayou 
Bceuff,  encamping  there  until  April  9,  when  the  regiment  marched  to 
Brashear  City,  where  the  regiment  again  encamped  until  the  11th  in- 
stant. That  day  embarked  on  board  the  steamers  Estrella  and  Clifton, 
landing  at  Indian  Bend,  on  Grand  Lake,  on  Monday  morning,  the  13th 
instant,  and  was  there  engaged  with  the  enemy,  having  1 man  mortally 
wounded  (since  dead).  Crossed  the  Teche  that  night,  encamping  on 
Madam  Porter’s  plantation.  Next  morning  we  marched  to  Irish  Bend, 
where  a battle  took  place.  The  Sixth  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers 


380 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVn. 

being  engaged  with  the  enemy,  encamped  near  the  battle-field  that 
night.  Next  morning  commenced  to  march  toward  New  Iberia,  which 
place  the  regiment  reached  on  the  16th  instant,  and  next  day  marched 
to  V ermillion  Creek,  where  the  regiment  was  again  engaged  with  the 
enemy,  losing  1 man  killed  and  3 wounded ; crossing  the  creek  next 
day,  marching  toward  Opelousas,  which  place  was  reached  on  the  l'0th 
instant,  and  encamped  there. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

MICHAEL  CASSIDY, 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Sixth  Regt .,  New  York  Vols .,  Comdg. 

First  Lieut.  William  B.  Hunt, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

I 


No.  33. 

Report  of  Col.  Jacob  Van  Zandt , Ninety-first  New  York  Infantry  of  en- 
gagement at  Irish  Bend  and  action  at  Bayou  Vermillion. 

Beport  of  marches  and  engagements  made  by  Ninety-first  New  lrork 
Volunteers  since  leaving  Baton  Bouge,  La.,  March  26,  up  to  the  time  of 
its  arriving  at  Opelousas,  La.,  April  21,  1863: 

Left  Baton  Bouge  on  board  steamer  Laurel  Hill  March  26  for  Dou  - 
aldsonville.  Left  Donaldson ville  March  31  and  marched  three  days, 
arriving  at  Thibodeaux.  Left  Thibodeaux  on  April  3 and  arrived  at 
Bayou  Boeuff ; encamped  until  the  9th  instant  and  marched  to  Bra- 
shear  City.  Left  Brashear  City  on  the  12th  instant  on  board  steamer, 
Calhoun  and  landed  at  Irish  Bend  on  the  13th  instant. 

On  Tuesday,  14th  instant,  while  three  regiments  and  a section  of 
L . S.  artillery  were  in  full  retreat,  the  regiment  was  ordered  to  the  front 
as  skirmishers,  and  passed  through  the  wood,  meeting  with  a loss  of  % 
enlisted  men  killed  and  1 commissioned  officer  and  8 men  wounded.' 
Again  marched  until  the  17th  instant  to  Bayou  Vermillion,  when  the 
regiment  was  again  ordered  to  the  front,  and  met  with  a loss  of  2 enlisted 
men  wounded.  Left  Bayou  Vermillion  on  Sunday,  the  19th  instant,  and 
arrived  at  Opelousas  on  the  21st  instant. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted.  » 

J.  VAN  ZANDT, 

Colonel , Commanding  Ninety-first  New  York  Volunteers.  < 


No.  34. 

Report  of  Col.  Nicholas  W.  Bay , One  hundred  and  thirty-first  New  York 
Infantry , of  operations  March  26- April  20. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  as  the  incidents 
that,  occurred  during  the  march  of  this  regiment,  One  hundred  and 
thirty-first  Begiment  New  York  State  Volunteers,  from  Baton  Bouge 
to  Opelousas : 

Thursday,  March  26,  went  on  board  transport  steamer  Saint  Mary’s 
at  Baton  Bouge  at  11  p.  m. 

1 rid  ay,  March  27,  left  Baton  Bouge  at  daylight.  On  the  way  to 


>H  AF.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


381 


Donaldsonville  was  ordered  to  disarm  30  men  of  the  Sixth  New  York 
Volunteers,  which  order  was  executed.  The  same  day  reached  Donald- 
sontille  and  went  into  camp. 

Tuesday,  March  31,  left  Donaldsonville  at  6 a.  m.  and  marched  to 
Terre  Bonne. 

Thursday,  April  2,  arrived  at  Terre  Bonne  in  the  evening  and  went 
into  bivouac. 

Friday,  April  3,  the  left  wing  started  in  the  cars  at  3 p.  m.,  followed 
by  the  right  wing  about  dusk,  for  Bayou  Boeulf,  reaching  there  and 
croing  into  bivouac  until  the  next  day,  when  tents  were  pitched. 

” Thursday,  April  9,  left  Bayou  BoeutT  at  5 a.  m.  and  marched  to  Bra- 
shear  City,  arriving  at  3 p.  m. 

Saturday,  April  11,  the  regiment  embarked  in  the  gunboat  Estrella, 
Commander  Cooke. 

Sundav,  April  12,  at  daylight  the  gunboat  sailed  with  the  regiment. 

Monday,  April  13,  landed  about  9.30  a.  m.  on  McWilliams’ plantation, 
oil  western  shore  of  Grand  Lake.  Marched  up  and  formed  in  line  of 
battle  in  the  rear  of  the  Sixth  New  York,  who  were  acting  as  skirmish- 
ers. Marched  to  the  Teche,  throwing  one  company  out  as  skirmishers, 
Olosson’s  battery  following  us.  At  Madam  Porter’s  plantation  used 
the  negroes  to  repair  the  plantation  bridge,  which  the  rebels  had  par- 
tially destroyed.  About  fifteen  minutes  after  we  arrived  there,  was 
ordered  to  send  five  companies,  under  Major  Bexford,  to  a bridge  at  the 
sugar-house,  some  1J  miles  below  Madam  Porter’s.  Arriving  here  the 
enemy  opened  with  brisk  firing  on  both  flanks  (artillery  and  infantry) 
from  the  other  side  (west  side)  of  the  bayou.  This  continued  until  dark, 
our  companies  maintaining  their  position,  when  the  enemy  retired  in 
consequence  of  the  skirmishers  of  Birge’s  brigade,  who  had  crossed  the 
upper  bridge  and  were  marching  down  on  the  opposite  side  (right  bank) 
of  the  bayou.  We  then  destroyed  the  bridge  and  retired  up  the  bayou 
to  Madam  Porter’s  bridge,  where  we  crossed  and  bivouacked  for  the 
night.  In  the  action  at  the  bridge  we  had  4 men  wounded,  1 mortally. 
We  found  by  this  day’s  experience  that  our  pieces  were  very  defective 
and  exceedingly  short  of  range. 

Tuesday,  April  14,  left  Madam  Porter’s  plantation  and  marched  to- 
ward Franklin.  When  within  about  2 miles  of  the  town  the  head  of 
the  column  was  attacked;  a brisk  engagement  ensued;  were  called 
to  support  Birge’s  brigade ; advanced  in  line  of  battle  to  the  wood, 
having  3 men  taken  to  "the  rear  wounded.  The  enemy  retired.  Went 
into  bivouac  at  sugar-house,  near  the  battle-field. 

Wednesday,  April  15,  marched  to  Charenton  and  bivouacked. 

Thursday,  April  16,  marched  to  New  Iberia  and  went  into  bivouac. 

Friday,  April  17,  pursued  the  enemy  to  Vermillion  Bridge,  where 
they  burned  the  bridge.  Here  occurred  a brisk  artillery  duel,  the  ene- 
my being  posted  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  bayou.  My  regiment  sup- 
ported N ims’  battery;  bivouacked  that  night  near  the  bayou. 

Saturday,  April  18,  changed  position  in  the  morning  nearer  bayou. 

Sunday,  April  19,  marched  to  Carrion  Crow  Bayou  and  went  into 
bivouac  at  dark  on  the  farther  side. 

Monday,  April  20,  marched  to  within  1 mile  of  Opelousas  and  went 
into  bivouac  at  dusk. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  general,  yours,  respectfully, 

NICHOLAS  W.  DAY. 


382 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 
No.  35. 

Reports  of  Col.  William  K.  Kimball , Twelfth  Maine  Infantry , command- 
ing Second  Brigade , of  operations  March  27 -April  20. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Grover’s  Division,  -i, 

Opelousas , La.,  April  21,  1863.  j| 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  accordance  with  instructions 
of  General  Grover,  on  the  night  of  the  17th  instant,  with  the  Twelfth 
Begiment  Maine  Volunteers,  Forty -first  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  one 
company  from  the  Twenty-fourth  Connecticut  Volunteers,  and  one  sec- 
tion of  Mins’  battery,  I left  New  Iberia  lor  the  salt-works,  operated  by 
the  Confederate  Government,  about  12  miles  distant  from  that  place,  i 
1 reached  the  island  upon  which  the  salt-works  were  situated  early  on 
the  morning  of  the  18th  instant,  and  found  the  enemy  had  evacuated 
his  works  and  removed  his  guns.  1 proceeded  at  once  to  destroy  all 
the  buildings,  18  in  number,  connected  with  the  salt-works,  steam- 
engines,  windlasses,  boilers,  mining  implements,  and  machinery  ot  all 
kinds  ; also  600  barrels  of  salt,  ready  for  shipment.  About  one  ton  of 
powder  and  one  ton  of  nails,  found  in  the  magazine,  I caused  to  be 
transported  to  New  Iberia  and  delivered  to  Captain  Long,  pro^  ost- 
marsha-l  at  that  place.  The  bomb  proof  magazine  connected  with  the 
fortification  1 caused  to  be  blown  up  and  the  works  destroyed,  so  far 
as  they  could  be  with  the  means  at  my  command.  Having  complied 
with  my  instructions  so  far  as  1 was  able  to  do  so,  I immediately  re- 
turned to  New  Iberia  the  same  night,  and  have  rejoined  your  division 
without  loss  and  with  no  casualties. 

To  Colonel  Chickering,  Forty-first  Massachusetts ; Lieutenant-Colonel 
Ilsley,  Twelfth  Maine  Volunteers,  and  Lieutenant  Snow,  of  Nims’  bat- 
tery, I am  under  obligations  for  their  efiicient  co-operation  in  carrying 
out  the  object  of  the  expedition. 

J have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant,  , 

WM.  K.  KIMBALL, 

Colonel , Commanding  Second  Brigade , Grover’s  Division . 

Captain  Hibbert, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Grover’s  Division, 

Opelousas , La .,  April  23,  1863.  j 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  operations  of  this  brigade  during' 
their  march  from  Baton  Bouge  to  this  place  : 

March  27,  it  embarked  at  Baton  Bouge  on  a steamer  for  Donaldson  - 
ville.  March  31,  started  on  the  road  for  Thibodeaux,  on  the  Bayou  La 
Fourche  road ; encamped  that  night  at  Napoleonville.  April  1,  marched 
from  Napoleonville  to  Labadievilie.  April  2,  marched  from  Labadie- 
ville  to  Terre  Bonne  Station,  on  the  New  Orleans,  Opelousas  and  Great 
Western  Bailroad,  and  remained  till  April  4.  April  4,  went  via  railroad 
to  Bayou  Bceuff;  remained  at  this  place  until  April  9 ; then  marched 
to  Brasliear  City.  April  11,  embarked  on  transports  Arizona  and  Saint 
Mary’s.  April  13,  it  landed  near  Irish  Bend,  on  the  Bayou  Teclie,  and 
bivouacked  near  Madam  Porter’s  plantation.  April  14,  marched  to 
near  the  battle-ground  of  Franklin.  April  15,  marched  to  — • 
April  16,  marched  to  New  Iberia  j thence  the  Twelfth  Maine  and  Forty- 


Dhaf.  XXYII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


383 


First  Massachusetts,  with  one  section  of  Mins7  battery,  marched  to  and 
lestroyed  the  salt-works,  leaving  the  Fifty-second  Massachusetts  and 
rwenty-fourth  Connecticut  in  command  of  Colonel  Greenleaf.  The 
Twelfth  and  Forty- first  rejoined  the  command  at  Ver million ville  on  the 
L8th.  At  this  post  the  Fifty-second  and  Twenty-fourth  were  put  in  the 
trout  to  support  Nuns’  battery.  April  18,  in  the  afternoon,  crossed  the 
3reek.  April  19,  marched  to  Carrion  Crow  Bayou.  April  20,  marched 
to  Opelousas. 

During  this  march  there  was  no  casualty  of  any  kind  in  the  brigade. 
I am,  very  respectfully, 

WM.  K.  KIMBALL, 

Colonel , Commanding  Second  Brigade , Fourth  Division . 

Captain  Hibbert, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  36. 

Report  of  Col.  Henry  W.  Birge  [?],  Thirteenth  Connecticut  Infantry , com < 
manding  Third  Brigade , of  engagement  at  Irish  Bend. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Brigade,  Grover’s  Division, 

Opelousas , La .,  April  22,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  by  order  of  Brig.  Gen. 
Grover,  commanding  division,  this  brigade,  consisting  of  the  Thirteenth 
Connecticut  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Warner;  Twenty-sixth 
Maine  Volunteers,  Colonel  Hubbard;  Twenty -fifth  Connecticut  ’Vol- 
unteers, Colonel  Bissell;  and  One  hundred  and  fifty-ninth  New  York 
Volunteers,  Colonel  Molineux,  embarked  on  transports  at  Baton  Rouge 
March  28.  Debarked  at  Donaldsonville  March  29.  On  the  31st, 
marched  to  Pancaville  [Paincourtville],  12  miles,  the  One  hundred  and 
fifty-ninth  having  been  detached  and  sent  to  Thibodeaux  on  transport 
Empire  Parish  as  guard  of  division  baggage.  April  1,  marched  to  Laba 
dieville,  12  miles.  April  2,  marched  to  Terre  Bonne  Station,  11  miles. 
At  9 p.  m.,  same  day,  moved  by  railroad  to  Bayou  Bceuff;  in  camp  at 
Bayou  Bceuff  till  the  9th  instant,  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-ninth  New 
York  joining  the  brigade  on  the  4th.  On  the  9th,  marched  to  Brashear 
City;  11th,  embarked  on  transports  (Twenty-fifth  Connecticut  on  Saint 
Mary’s  the  other  regiments  on  Laurel  Hill),  and  at  daylight  on  the  13th 
debarked  at  McWilliams’  plantation,  on  Grand  Lake,  the  enemy,  with 
two  guns  and  a small  force,  making  a feeble  attempt  to  oppose  our 
landing.  Occupied  during  the  day  the  position  assigned  the  brigade. 
At  sunset  crossed  the  Bayou  Teche,  and  by  direction  of  the  general 
commanding  placed  the  regiments  in  position  as  follows:  The  Thir- 
teenth Connecticut  holding  the  bayou  road  to  Franklin,  about  11  miles 
below  Madam  Porter’s  plantation ; the  One  hundred  and  fifty-ninth  on. 
the  right  of  the  Thirteenth,  the  picket  line  of  the  two  regiments  ex- 
tending from  the  bayou  on  the  left  to  the  woods  on  the  right  and  con- 
necting with  the  pickets  of  the  Second  Brigade  ; the  Twenty-sixth  Maine 
and  Twenty-fifth  Connecticut  in  line  in  the  field  on  the  right  of  the 
road,  and  1 mile  to  the  rear. 

On  the  14th  instant  marched  at  daylight  toward  Franklin  in  follow- 
ing order:  The  Twenty-fifth  Connecticut,  after  passing  picket  line,  with 
five  companies  as  skirmishers  deployed  to  the  front  from  the  roads  to 


384 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 


the  bayou  and  on  the  right  flank,  and  five  companies  in  reserve  in  the 
opening  between  the  wood  and  the  road;  two  companies  of  Twenty-sixth 
Maine  in  the  road;  first  section  of  Rodgers’  battery,  under  command 
of  Lieutenant  Bradley ; eight  companies  Twenty-sixth  Maine  Regiment; 
One  hundred  and  fifty -ninth  New  York  Regiment ; Rodgers’  battery, 
and  Thirteenth  Connecticut  Regiment.  Had  marched  about  2 miles, 
and  the  head  of  the  column  was  within  40  rods  of  the  right  angle  made 
by  the  road  at  Irish  Bend,  where,  following  the  course  of  the  bayou, 
it  turns  to  the  south,  and  crossing  the  open  country,  enters  the  wood, 
when  the  skirmishers  on  the  right  discovered  the  enemy  posted  in  the 
edge  of  the  wood,  and  concealed  by  a heavy  rail  fence.  Brisk  firing 
immediately  commenced  on  both  sides.  The  five  companies  of  the 
Twenty-fifth  Connecticut  at  once  changed  front  forward,  and  advanced 
within  200  yards  of  the  enemy’s  line.  The  Twenty-sixth  Maine  filed 
to  the  right  into  the  field  and  formed  on  the  left  of  the  Twenty -fifth 
Connecticut,  both  regiments  lying  down  and  firing  on  the  enemy  when- 
ever he  could  be  seen.  At  the  same  time  the  first  section  of*  Rodgers 
battery  was  placed  in  position  in  rear  of  the  interval  between  the  two 
regiments,  directing  fire  principally  on  two  guns,  which,  from  their  posi- 
tion where  the  road  enters  the  wood,  had  opened  on  our  forces  as  they 
marched  into  the  field.  It  becoming  evident  that  the  enemy  were  in 
strong  force,  by  direction  of  the  general  commanding  the  One  hundred 
and  fifty-ninth  New  York  was  brought  into  action,  forming  on  the  left 
of  the  Twenty-sixth  Maine.  The  Thirteenth  Connecticut,  turning  the 
angle  in  the  road,  deployed  between  the  road  and  the  bayou,  and  ad- 
vanced on  the  enemy’s  right,  the  second  section  of  Rodgers’  battery 
taking*  position  in  the  road  and  shelling  the  wood. 

While  these  movements  were  in  progress  the  enemy  were  re-enforced 
by  the  arrival  on  transports  of  troops  from  below,  which,  passing  through 
the  wood  to  the  left  of  their  line,  gained  unperceived  a position  in  a deep 
ditch,  concealed  by  thick  bushes,  and  from  which  they  obtained  an  en- 
filading fire  on  the  Twenty-fifth  Connecticut,  Twenty-sixth  Maine,  and 
One  hundred  and  fifty-ninth  New  York.  These  regiments  held  their 
ground  bravely,  and  returned  the  enemy’s  fire  with  great  spirit,  until, 
having  expended  their  ammunition,  one-fourth  of  their  number  killed 
and  wounded,  and  it  being  apparent  that  they  were  opposed  by  a greatly 
superior  force,  having  advantage  of  the  cover  of  the  wood  and  fence, 
they  withdrew  and  reformed  their  lines  in  rear  of  the  First  Brigade,  now 
coming  up  to  their  support.  In  the  mean  time  the  Thirteenth  Connec- 
ticut, on  the  left  of  the  road,  had  entered  a grove  between  which  and 
the  main  wood  was  an  open  field,  about  300  yards  in  width.  Emerging 
from  this  grove  under  a deadly  fire  it  steadily  advanced,  the  men  load- 
ing and  firing  as  they  marched  ; broke  the  enemy’s  lines,  and  driving 
him  back  in  the  utmost  confusion,  captured  two  caissons,  one  limber,  a 
quantity  of  sinall-arms,  the  flag  of  the  Saint  Mary’s  Cannoneers,  sev- 
eral horses,  and  from  50  to  60  prisoners.  The  regiment  was  now  far  in 
advance  of  the  right  of  our  line  and  in  rear  of  the  enemy’s  left. 

Deeming  it  imprudent  to  press  the  enemy  farther  uutil  supported  I 
ordered  Colonel  Warner  to  fall  back  to  the  edge  of  the  wood  and  hold 
that  position.  The  Twelfth  Maine  coming  up,  the  Thirteenth  again  ad- 
vanced and  pushed  through  the  wood,  the  Twelfth  following,  and  the 
skirmishers  of  the  First  Brigade  at  the  same  time  entering  on  their  right. 
Little  or  no  resistance  was  ottered  by  the  enemy,  but  on  reaching  the 
opposite  ground  beyond  he  was  discovered  in  line  with  artillery,  sup- 
ported by  infantry  and  cavalry,  on  rising  ground  about  1,000  yards  dis- 
tant. I immediately  reported  the  position  to  General  Grover,  and  was 


Chap.  XXVIL] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


385 


ordered  by  him  to  withdraw  the  Twelfth  Maine  and  Thirteenth  Connec- 
ticut to  the  center  of  the  wood,  and  to  form  them,  with  the  Twenty-fifth 
Connecticut,  Twenty-sixth  Maine,  and  One  hundred  and  fifty-ninth  New 
York,  in  two  lines,  the  left  resting  on  the  baybu. 

Meanwhile  the  enemy’s  gunboat  Diana  had  come  up  the  Teche  and 
commenced  throwing  shell  and  solid  shot  in  the  wood  at  short  intervals. 
By  direction  of  Gen.  Grover  a company  of  sharpshooters  from  each  regi- 
ment was  concealed  on  the  bank  of  the  bayou  to  pick  off  her  gunners 
should  she  come  within  range,  which  at  one  time  she  threatened  to  do. 

About  2 p.  m.  was  ordered  by  General  Grover  to  advance  the  Twelfth 
Maine,  with  a strong  line  of  skirmishers  in  front,  to  feel  the  enemy.  Be- 
fore this  order  could  be  executed  he  suddenly  withdrew,  and  the  Diana 
was  discovered  to  be  in  flames. 

About  4 p.  m.  was  ordered  to  withdraw  from  the  wood  and  put  my 
brigade  in  camp  for  the  night. 

The  casualties  of  the  brigade  in  this  engagement  were:* 


| Killed. 

Wounded. 

Prisoners. 

Missing. 

Thirteenth  Connecticut : 

Ottl  CATQ  - - - 

3 
47 

5 

77 

1 

49 

4 

73 

1VT p,n  . . . , . . . _ ............ ............ . ......  ......  . . . . . . ...... . . . . . . . . 

7 

2 

7 

Twenty-fifth  Connecticut : 

nfiicorfl  

9 

Twenty-sixth  Maine : 

ccrQ  _ _ ............ 

11 

4 

15 

One  hundred  and  fifty -ninth  Xew  York: 

( Ifficpro  _ 

Men  

20 

1 

Total 

46 

259 

29 

1 

A complete  list  of  casualties  has  already  been  forwarded  to  you.  It 
records  the  name  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Draper,  who  fell  with  three 
wounds,  either  of  wilich  would  have  been  fatal.  A good  soldier,  a 
gallant  officer,  an  estimable  gentleman,  his  death  is  mourned  by  his 
friends  and  is  a loss  to  his  country. 

Adjutant  Lathrop  and  Lieutenants  Manley  and  Lockwood,  of  the  One 
hundred  and  fifty-ninth  New  York,  Captain  Hayden  and  Lieutenant 
Dewey,  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Connecticut,  all  instantly  killed  on  the  field. 
Lieutenants  Plunkett  and  Price,  One  hundred  and  fifty-ninth  New  York, 
mortally  wounded  and  since  dead.  Their  names  are  added  to  the  list 
of  patriots  who  have  illustrated  their  devotion  to  their  country  by  the 
sacrifice  of  their  lives.  Colonel  Molineux,  One  hundred  and  fifty-ninth 
New  York,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hersey,  Twenty-sixth  Maine,  very 
dangerously  and  painfully  wounded  while  brayely  encouraging  their 
men,  were  carried  from  the  field.  I am  happy  to  add  that  both  are  re- 
covering. Captain  Sprague  and  Lieutenants  Strickland  and  Kinney, 
Thirteenth  Connecticut,  Lieutenant  Reeves,  Twenty-sixth  Maine,  Lieu- 
tenant Waterman,  Twenty-fifth  Connecticut,  all  wounded,  but  not  dis- 
abled, refused  to  leave  the  field  until  the  close  of  the  engagement.! 


* But  see  revised  statement,  p.  319. 

tThe  copy  of  the  foregoing  report,  received  by  the  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army, 
is  incomplete  and  without  signature.  Col.  H.  W.  Birge,  Thirteenth  Connecticut 
Infantry,  commanded  the  brigade  during  the  time  covered  by  the  report. 

25  R R — VOL  XV 


386 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 
No.  37. 

Report  of  Capt.  Robert  T.  Dunham , Assistant  Adjutant- General,  V.  S. 
Army , of  the  capture  of  the  steamer  Ellen. 

Barrels  Landing,  La., 

April  22,  1863—9.30  p.  in. 

Str  • I have  to  report  that  we  have  captured  the  steamer  Ellen.  As 
soon  as  we  arrived  here  a negro  informed  me  that  a steamer  was  down 
in  4l  small  creek  emptying  into  the  Courtablean.  I immediately  re- 
quested Colonel  Blanchard  to  send  an  officer  and  10  men  for  her,  and 
she  has  iust  arrived;  is  a stern-wheel  boat,  over  a hundred  feet  long, 
capable  of  carrying  over  400  bales  of  cotton,  and  is  m good  order. 

What  shall  I do"  with  her  ? 1 , 

I have  found  over  300  hogsheads  of  sugar,  200  bales  of  cotton,  have 
captured  about  25  good  horses,  and  will  drive  in  any  number  of  mules, 

cattle,  and  sheep.  ~ , 

We  have  encamped  here  for  to-night.  The  road  down  the  Courta- 
bleau  is  only  passable  to  a point  4 miles  below  this.  This  afternoon  I 
sent  a small  cavalry  force  down  to  that  point,  and  the  lieutenant  reports 
that  the  country  contains  nothing  of  value  or  worth  confiscating.  1 
found  the  bridge  over  the  Teche  broken  down,  but  repaired  it;  crossed 
with  20  cavalry,  and  went  up  the  Courtableau  to  within  4 miles  ot 

To-morrow  morning  I intend  crossing  the  Courtableau  in  the  Ellen 
with  a company  of  cavalry,  and  scour  the  country  in  every  direction 
for  8 or  10  miles.  I will  doubtless  find  a great  number  of  mules,  horses, 
and  cattle.  Will  drive  them  all  in,  and  cross  them  to  this  side  on  the 

steamer.  _ „ 

Wrhat  shall  I do  with  the  cotton  and  sugar?  . 

Will  start  for  Opelousas  on  the  morning  of  the  24th.  Engines  ot 

Ellen  in  perfect  order.  , , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  T.  DUNHAM, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  38. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Gen.  B.  Kirby  Smith,  O.  S.  Army,  commanding  Trans ■ 
Mississippi  Department , of  operations  April  9 -26. 

Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Alexandria,  La.,  April  23,  1863. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a report  of  General  Taylor’s 
recent  operations  in  the  Teche  and  in  Western  Louisiana. 

The  enemy  landed  at  Berwick  Bay  a column  of  at  least  18,000  men, 
thoroughly  equipped  and  prepared  for  offensive  operations.  General 
Taylor’s  effective  force  was  not  over  4,000.  . , . . . , a 

The  completeness  with  which  the  enemy  was  repulsed  m his  attacks 
of  the  12th  and  13th,  the  skill  and  ability  with  which  our  little  army 
was  extricated  from  apparently  irretrievable  destruction  on  the  14tu, 


hap.  xxvn.i 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


387 


he  obstinacy  with  which  every  foot  of  ground  was  contested  in  the 
etreat,  and  the  successful  saving  of  our  material  and  stores  under 
ircum stances  of  great  difficulty  stamps  General  Taylor  as  a leader  of 
io  ordinary  merit. 

Notwithstanding  straggling  and  desertions  have  reduced  General 
^aylor’s  command  at  least  one-third,  such  dispositions  have  been  made 
,s  it  is  hoped  will  delay  the  advance  upon  Alexandria  for  some  days, 
n the  mean  time  measures  have  been  taken  for  the  removal  of  all  the 
tores  at  this  point  up  Red  River,  and  orders  given  for  the  concentra- 
ion  of  troops  at  Natchitoches  or  Shreveport,  as  the  enemy’s  movements 
nay  allow. 

The  fall  of  the  battery  at  Butte-a-la-Rose,  the  opening  of  the  Atcha- 
alaya,  and  the  concentration  of  a large  fleet  of  boats  below  Vicksburg 
lake  the  occupation  of  this  country  by  General  Banks  an  easy  and  cer- 
ain  operation. 

Tbe  battery  at  Fort  De  Russy  cannot  stand  a land  attack ; the  ad- 
duce of  the  enemy’s  column  to  the  Hauffpaur,  or  an  expedition  from 
he  Atchafalaya  up  Bayou  de  Glaise,  will  insure  its  speedy  fall,  with 
oss  of  guns  and  garrison.  Under  these  circumstances  General  Taylor 
ias  ordered  the  removal  of  the  32  rifle  and  11-inch  columbiad  to  a posi 
ion  higher  up  Red  River. 

Anticipating  disaster  from  the  weakness  of  General  Taylor’s  force, 
rhen  General  Banks’  landing  at  Berwick  Bay  was  reported  to  me 
ordered  General  Walker’s  division  from  the  Arkansas,  a brigade  qf 
?exas  troops  from  near  Fort  Towson,  and  all  the  disposable  force  from 
he  vicinity  of  Galveston.  The  rapid  advance  of  the  enemy  And  the 
aagnitude  of  the  distances  to  be  marched  will  throw -the  point  of  con- 
entration  back  to  Natchitoches  or  Shreveport.  I shall  concentrate  a 
orce  of  at  least  10,000  men  and  take  the  offensive,  with  strong  hopes  of 
ecovering  the  country  when  the  waters  fall. 

Disastrous  as  the  loss  of  the  sugar  country  in  Louisiana  is  to  us,  Gen- 
ral  Taylor  has  done  everything  that  was  possible  with  the  resources  at 
is  command.  His  effective  force  in  the  district  was  not  over  5,000 ; 
hat  in  the  District  of  Arkansas  was  under  15,000  and  too  far  to  be 
vailable. 

Could  General  Taylor  have  drawn  upon  Port  Hudson  for  re-enforce- 
lents,  or  had  the  troops  in  East  and  West  Louisiana  been  under  one 
ontrol,  the  force  at  Port  Hudson  might  have  been  marched  across  to 
he  Atchafalaya  and  rapidly  transported  to  the  scene  of  action  in  time 
o have  defeated  General  Banks. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  KIRBY  SMITH, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 
General  S.  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Alexandria,  April  25,  1863. 

(Received  April  29.) 

General  : The  Federal  army  under  General  Banks  is  within  one 
j ay’s  march  of  Alexandria. 

General  Taylor  is  falling  back  toward  Natchitoches,  and  the  Red 
| 'iver  below  Alexandria  will  soon  be  in  possession  of  the  enemy. 

E.  KIRBY  SMITH, 

Lieutenant-General , 

General  S.  Cooper,  Richmond , Va. 


388 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap,  xxm 
No.  39. 


Report  of  Map  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  C.  S.  Army , commanding  District 
of  Western  Louisiana,  of  operations  April  9-23. 


Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 

Alexandria,  April  23,  1863. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  recent  j 

engagements  with  the  enemy : , . 

On  Thursday  morning,  9th  instant,  information  was  communicated 
to  me  by  Colonel  Gray,  commanding  at  Camp  Bisland,  that  the  enemy 
under  cover  of  their  gunboats  had  crossed  a small  force  from  Brashear 
City  to  Berwick  City  and  that  our  pickets  in  the  vicinity  of  Berwick 
had  been  driven  in.  Later  in  the  day  the  same  officer  dispatched  to 
me  information  that  the  enemy  was  in  force  at  Brashear  and  was  cross- 
ing troops  to  Berwick.  This  reached  me  while  I was  on  my  way  to 
Butte-Ala-Rose  for  the  purpose  of  hastening  the  departure  of  our  gun- 
boat fleet  from  that  point,  in  order  to  place  it  m Grand  Lake  with  a view 
to  operations  against  the  enemy  or  protection  of  the  several  landings  . 
on  that  lake  from  his  approach,  as  his  movements  might  be  developed. 

1 immediately  returned  to  Camp  Bisland  and  moved  Colonel  Greens 
Regiment,  Fifth  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers,  to  the  front,  throwing  out : 
a strong  picket  in  advance  with  orders  to  proceed  as  near  Berwick  as 
possible,  to  skirmish  with  the  enemy,  ascertain  his  strength,  and  retard 
his  advance.  Having  given  orders  for  the  gunboats  Queen  of  the  vV  est, 
Grand  Duke,  and  Mary  T.  to  rendezvous  at  Butte-Ala-Rose,  and  with 
the  utmost  dispatch  proceed  down  the  Atchafalaya  and  Grand  Lake,  1 
sent  one  of  my  staff  officers  to  hurry  them  down. 

During  Thursday  night  and  Friday  the  enemy  crossed  a large  force 
of  infantry,  artillery,  and  cavalry,  with  wagons,  the  protection  of  their 
gunboats  and  a heavy  advance  guard  securing  them  from  interruption 
by  our  troops.  On  Friday  afternoon  slight  skirmishing  took  place 
between  Colonel  Green’s  outpost  pickets  and  the  enemj  s advance 
guard.  On  the  morning  of  Saturday,  the  11th  instant,  the  enemy  com- 
menced seriously  to  advance.  With  an  advance  guard  of  five  regiments 
of  infantry,  several  batteries  of  artillery,  and  a battalion  of  cavalry  be 
moved  up  in  line  of  battle  toward  the  upper  mouth  of  the  Bayou. 
Teche,  where  he  halted  and  encamped  for  the  night.  A ac- 

companied this  advance  line  and  served  as  a support  to  its  light  flank . 
Colonel  Green’s  pickets  and  advanced  guard  fell  back  slowly  befo 
the  enemy,  skirmishing  with  them.  On  the  morning  of  Sunday  the  12th, 
the  enemv  continued  his  advance  slowly  and  steadily  on  the  west  bank 
of  the  bayou,  and  at  4 o’clock  in  the  afternoon  had  approached  our  line 
of  defenses  just  below  Bethel’s  plantation,  halting  at  a distance  of 
about  1,200  yards  and  displaying  m line  of  battle  six  regiments  of ^m 
fantry,  three  batteries  of  artillery,  and  a considerable  body  of  cavalry 
A heavy  second  line  was  held  by  the  enemy  about  600  or  yard«n 
rear  of  his  first  line.  On  the  east  bank  a considerable  force  of  infentry 
and  cavalry  and  several  pieces  of  artillery  were  displayed  m front  oi 
our  lines,  distant  about  1,800  yards  from  the  works A 
ading  was  opened  by  our  batteries  along  our  whole  line,  which  was  re 
plied  to  by  the  enemy  and  continued  until  sundown,  when  the  enemy 
fell  back  a few  hundred  yards  and  encamped  for  the  night.  The  w ^ 
force  of  our  army  was  disposed  of  as  follows  : The  Fifth  Texas  Mounted 
Volunteer  Begiment,  Colonel  Green,  and  Wallers  battalion,  both  dr 
mounted,  on  the  extreme  right,  which  rested  upon  a swamp  and  com 


Chap.  XXV H.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA 


389 


manded  the  approach  by  the  railroad  embankment.  The  Yalverde 
Battery,  Captain  Sayers',  on  the  left  of  Green’s  command ; Colonel 
Gray’s  Twenty-eighth  Louisiana  Regiment  occupying  the  center,  witli  a 
section  of  Cornay’s  battery  light  artillery  and  Semrnes’  battery  posted 
along  the  center,  and  a 24-pounder  siege  gun  in  position  under  Lieu- 
tenant Tarleton,  of  Cornay’s  battery,  commanding  the  road  along  the 
west  bank  of  the  bayou.  The  gunboat  Diana,  commanded  by  Lieuten- 
ant Nettles,  of  the  Yalverde  Battery,  heading  down  the  stream  on  tbe 
line  of  our  defenses,  and  on  the  east  side  of  the  bayou  the  Yellow 
Jacket  Battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Fournet;  Crescent  Regiment, 
Colonel  Bos  worth  ; Eighteenth  Louisiana  Regiment,  Colonel  Arm  ant, 
with  Faries’  Pelican  Battery  of  light  artillery,  posted  along  the  line, 
and  Colonel  Bagby’s  regiment,  Seventh  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers, 
dismounted,  thrown  forward  as  skirmishers  and  sharpshooters  to  the 
front  and  in  the  woods  on  the  extreme  left,  which  woods  terminated  on 
the  left  in  a swamp.  The  Second  Louisiana  Cavalry,  Colonel  Vincent, 
and  Fourth  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers,  Colonel  Reily,  were,  during 
the  morning,  held  in  the  rear  of  our  line  as  reserves.  Learning  that  a 
gunboat  and  several  transports  of  tbe  enemy  had  been  seen  in  Grand 
Lake,  Vincent’s  regiment  was  ordered  about  midday  to  proceed  to 
Verdun’s  Landing  and  watch  the  movements  of  these  boats,  prevent- 
ing them  from  making  a landing  at  that  point,  which  was  only  4 miles 
to  the  left  and  rear  of  our  position.  A section  of  Cornay’s  battery  was 
also  ordered  to  report  to  Colonel  Vincent  at  Verdun’s. 

Shortly  after  the  close  of  this  engagement  I received  information  that 
live  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats,  with  several  transports  towrng  barges  and 
Hats  crowded  with  troops  and  artillery,  had  gone  up  Grand  Lake,  and 
were  lying  off  Hudgins’  Point,  when  Vincent’s  regiment,  re-enforced 
with  another  section  of  Cornay’s  battery,  was  ordered  to  that  point, 
with  instructions  to  prevent,  if  possible,  a landing  by  the  enemy  at 
Hudgins’  and  Charenton.  A few  hours  later  I proceeded  in  person  to 
Vincent’s  command,  leaving  Major  Brent  and  Major  Levy,  of  my  staff, 
to  make  the  necessary  arrangements  with  Brigadier-General  Sibley  for 
an  attack  by  our  forces  on  the  enemy  at  daylight  the  next  morning. 
By  leaving  a small  force  behind  our  earthworks  I was  satisfied  that  the 
other  troops,  assisted  by  the  Diana,  moving  down  the  bayou  on  a line 
with  the  attacking  column  on  the  west  bank  of  the  bayou  could  drive 
the  enemy  back,  throw  him  in  confusion,  and  render  it  necessary  for 
him  to  withdraw  the  force  which  he  was  endeavoring  to  land  in  our 
rear  to  the  assistance  of  his  army  in  our  front.  Shortly  after  9 o’clock 
on  Sunday  night  Major  Brent  and  Major  Levy  proceeded  to  communi- 
cate these  orders  to  Brigadier- General  Sibley,  then  commanding  the 
forces  south  of  Red  Riv^r,  but  the  supineness  of  that  officer,  who  delayed 
communicating  with  Brigadier-General  Mouton  until  2 o’clock  in  the 
morning,  and  his  positive  declaration  of  the  impracticability  of  carrying 
the  plan  into  execution  for  want  of  time  frustrated  the  scheme,  which  1 
am  satisfied  would  have  accomplished  the  most  favorable  results  if  ac- 
tively attempted.  I.  returned  to  our  front  about  daylight,  and  was  in- 
formed by  Major  Brent  and  Major  Levy  of  the  failure  of  Brigadier-Gen 
eral  Sibley  to  organize  the  attack. 

On  Monday  morning,  at  about  9 o’clock,  the  enemy  commenced  again 
to  advance  slowly  on  our  line,  having  in  the  mean  time  thrown  a largely 
increased  force  of  cavalry,  artillery,  and  infantry  on  the  east  bank  and 
concentrated  a large  artillery  force  on  the  west  bank,  besides  strength- 
ening his  front  line  of  attack  on  that  bank. 


390 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Lieutenant  Kettles,  who  had  eommanded  the  Diana  up  to  Monday 
morning,  and  had  handled  her  with  great  skill,  was  at  that  time  forced 
to  retire  on  account  of  severe  illness,  and  Captain  Semmes,  of  the  artil- 
lery, was  placed  in  command  of  her.  Having  sent  Vincent’s  regiment 
to  the  lake  shore,  Beily’s  regiment  constituted  my  only  reserve,  and 
during  the  morning  of  Monday  received  information  that,  contrary  to 
my  instructions,  Colonel  Vincent  had  contented  himself  with  placing  a 
small  picket  at  Hudgins’  and  Charenton  and  encamped  the  remainder  | 
of  his  command  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Teche,  and  that  the  enemy 
had  succeeded  in  landing  a large  force  at  Hudgins’.  I ordered  Beily’s 
regiment  to  proceed  toward  that  point,  re-enforce  Colonel  Vincent,  and  i 
prevent  the  enemy  from  crossing  the  Teche  and  falling  on  my  rear,  thus  ; 
being  compelled  to  deprive  myself  of  all  reserves. 

At  about  11  o’clock  on  Monday,  the  13th,  the  enemy  displayed  in  our 
front,  on  both  sides  of  the  bayou,  at  least  14,000  men,  and  advanced  j 
with  a show  of  confidence  upon  our  earthworks.  A fierce  combat  was 
kept  up  until  sundown.  The  cannonading  was  uninterrupted,  the  en- 
emy having  brought  to  the  front  about  sixty  pieces  of  artillery,  many 
of  them  heavy  rifled  and  Parrott  pieces.  Our  artillery  wasted  no  am- 
munition, but  opened  on  the  advancing  line  of  the  enemy  whenever 
they  attempted  to  force  our  works.  A battery  of  Parrott  guns  concen- 1 
trated  their  fire  upon  the  Diana,  which,  under  Captain  Semmes,  was  i 
pouring  its  fire  upon  the  center  of  the  advancing  line,  when  a shell 
from  a 30-pounder  Parrott  siege  gun  penetrated  the  plating  in  front  of 
the  boilers,  exploded  in  the  engine-room,  deranged  a portion  of  the 
machinery,  and  killed  2 men — the  chief  and  one  of  the  assistant  engi- 
neers—and  wounded  5 of  the  crew.  This  rendered  it  necessary  for  the 
Diana  to  fall  back  beyond  the  range  of  the  enemy’s  guns  and  repair 
damages,  which  occupied  the  remainder  of  the  day,  and  was  completed 
only  at  about  midnight.  The  enemy  made  two  attempts,  by  charging 
with  their  infantry,  to  carry  our  right,  but  were  repulsed  in  both,  with  | 
considerable  loss,  by  the  forces  under  Colonel  Green  and  Colonel  Gray,  j 
During  these  charges  the  Valverde  Battery  rendered  most  efficient 
service,  and  I regret  to  report  that  its  gallant  commander,  who  han- | 
died  his  battery  "with  consummate  skill,  was  wounded  during  these  j 
charges.  The  Twenty-eighth  Begiment  Louisiana  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Gray,  and  Semmes’  battery,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Barnes;  section 
of  Cornay’s  battery,  Lieutenant  Gordy,  and  detachment  serving  24- 
pounder  siege  gun,  Lieutenant  Tarleton,  checked  every  advance  of  the 
enemy  upon  our  center  and  thwarted  any  attempt  to  force  it.  On  the 
extreme  right  the  enemy  was  not  only  repulsed  but  driven  back  in  con-  j 
. fusion  through  the  thicket,  which  he  sought  as  a cover.  \ 

On  the  east  bank  of  the  bayou  the  forces  under  command  of  Bnga-j 
dier-General  Mouton  behaved  with  the  same  signal  gallantry.  On  that 
bank  the  object  of  the  enemy  was  to  turn  our  left  and  gain  the  woods,  j 
under  cover  of  which  he  could  get  to  our  rear.  Colonel  Bagby’s  Sev- 
enth Texas  Begiment  Mounted  Volunteers,  dismounted,  and  a detach- j 
ment  of  the  Eighteenth  Louisiana  Begiment  held  the  left  against  all  J 
the  attacks  which  were  made,  and  at  the  close  of -the  engagement  the 
enemy  had  gained  no  ground  since  its  commencement,  but  had  been 
repulsed  in  every  attempt  to  force  our  position.  The  dispositions  and 
handling  of  his  troops  by  Brigadier- General  Mouton  are  entitled  to  the 
highest  praise,  and  the  gallant  manner  in  which  he  held  his  position 
and  punished  and  drove  back  the  enemy  is  worthy  ot  the  greatest 
commendation.  The  Pelican  Battery,  Captain  Paries,  was  most  effi- 
ciently served,  and  contributed  in  an  eminent  degree  toward  preserving 


Chav.  XXYIT.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


391 


our  position  on  the  east  bank.  During  the  engagement  on  our  left 
Colonel  Bagby  was  wounded  seriously,  but  not  dangerously,  in  the  arm, 
but  remained  on  the  field  with  his  regiment  until  the  enemy  had  been 
driven  back  and  ceased  his  attacks. 

Our  ability  to  hold  our  line  of  defense,  even  against  the  greatest  odds 
in  favor  of  the  enemy,  was  fully  demonstrated  by  the  engagements  of 
Sunday  and  Monday $ and  notwithstanding  the  exhaustion  of  our  troops 
consequent  upon  their  hard  service  for  the  two  preceding  days  in  the 
earthworks,  I was  satisfied  that  if  the  regiments  of  Vincent  and  Reily 
and  the  sections  of  Corn  ay’s  battery,  which  had  been  sent  to  the  lake 
shore,  could  be  successful  in  preventing  the  enemy  from  landing  in  my 
rear,  thus  enabling  me  to  use  them  as  reserves  and  relieve  the  troops 
on  the  line  of  earthworks,  we  could  have  held  our  position  or  driven 
the  assailants  back  to  the  bay. 

About  9 o’clock  on  Monday  night  I received  a dispatch  from  Cplouel 
Reily,  informing  me  that  the  enemy  had  landed  a very  heavy  force  at 
Hudgins’  Point ; that  he  had  met  Vincent’s  cavalry  on  the  west  side  of 
the  Bayou  Teche,  he  having  fallen  back  before  them  ; that  the  enemy 
had  crossed  the  bayou  over  the  bridge  at  Mrs.  Porter’s  plantation,  and 
that  his  (Reily’s)  whole  command  was  at  Carline’s,  1J  miles  below  Frank- 
lin. Thus  the  enemy  were  left  in  possession  of  the  only  road  by  which 
a retreat  of  our  forces  toward  New  Iberia  could  be  effected.  With  a 
force  of  at  least  14,000  men  in  our  front  and  this  movement  of  the 
enemy  in  our  rear  in  heavy  force  the  situation  of  our  little  army,  which 
at  the  commencement  of  the  contest  was  less  than  4,000,  was  most 
critical.  To  extricate  it  by  evacuation  of  the  position  at  the  earthworks 
and  cut  its  way  through  the  force  on  the  New  Iberia  road  above  Frank- 
lin was  the  only  plan  which  presented  itself,  and  to  be  successful  it 
must  be  immediately  attempted.  I therefore  ordered  all  the  wagons, 
containing  quartermaster,  commissary,  medical,  and  ordnance  stores,  to 
be  started  at  once  on  the  road  to  Franklin,  and  all  the  infantry  and 
artillery,  except  one  rifle  section  of  Semmes’  battery,  to  inarch  at  the 
earliest  practicable  moment  on  Franklin.  The  Fifth  Regiment  Texas 
Mounted  Volunteers  and  Waller’s  battalion  of  mounted  men,  with  the 
rifle  section  of  Semmes’  battery,  Lieutenant  West  commanding,  consti- 
tuting the  rear  guard,  were  ordered  to  evacuate  the  position  below 
Bethel’s  before  daybreak,  cover  the  retreat  of  our  army,  skirmish  with 
the  enemy  if  he  pursued  us,  and  retard  his  advance  until  we  had  forced 
a passage  through  the  column  above  Franklin.  As  soon  as  these  orders 
had  been  issued  and  proper  instructions  given  for  removing  the  sick 
and  wounded  I proceeded  to  Reily’s  command  and  moved  it  forward 
above  Franklin.  Just  before  daylight  this  command — -Reily’s  and  Vin-' 
cent’s  regiments  and  Clack’s  battalion,  the  latter  having  just  reached 
me  from  New  Iberia,  and  two  sections  of  Cornay’s  battery,  were  marched 
to  the  field  in  front  of  McKerall’s  sugar-house,  about  a mile  above 
Franklin.  Clack’s  battalion  was  deployed  as  skirmishers  and  advanced 
across  the  field,  occupying  the  woods  in  front.  A section  of  Cornay’s 
battery  was  then  moved  up  the  bayou  road  and  took  position  at  the 
lower  edge  of  the  field,  above  these  woods,  and  Vincent’s  and  Reily’s 
regiments,  with  Clack’s  battalion,  were  posted  in  line  of  battle  along 
the  upper  skirt  of  the  woods,  fronting  on  the  field. 

Immediately  after  daylight  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  appeared  in  the 
upper  portion  of  the  field  in  front  of  our  line,  and  were  quickly  followed 
by  his  forces,  consisting  of  four  regiments  of  infantry,  a battalion  of 
cavalry,  and  a battery  of  artillery,  on  the  left,  in  line  of  battle.  W e 


392  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  ICha*.  XXVU. 

opened  with  our  artillery  and  infantry  upon  them  and  checked  their 
advance. 

It  soon  became  evident  that  it  was  the  purpose  of  the  enemy  to  de- 
tain us  at  that  point  until  his  column  from  below  had  come  up  and 
hemmed  us  closely  in.  At  about  7 o’clock  the  Twenty-eighth  Louisiana 
Regiment,  Colonel  Gray,  arrived  at  Franklin,  reporting  the  remainder 
of  our  forces  en  route  several  miles  behind. 

I immediately  posted  Colonel  Gray’s  regiment  on  the  extreme  left  of 
our  line,  and  with  that,  Vincent’s,  and  Reily’s  regiments,  and  Clack’s 
battalion,  numbering  in  all  less  than  1,000  men,  we  charged  the  enemy’s 
line  and  drove  him  back  in  confusion  and  with  considerable  loss  to  him. 

The  enemy  then  displayed  a much  larger  force,  which  up  to  this  time 
had  been  held  concealed  and  as  a reserve,  but  they  were  unable  to  re- 
cover their  lost  ground  and  were  held  in  check.  In  this  engagement 
with  the  enemy  near  Franklin  I regret  to  announce  the  death  of  Col. 
Reily,  of  Fourth  Regiment  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers,  who  was  mor- 
tally wounded  just  before  the  charge  and  died  on  the  field.  Colonel 
Vincent,  Second  Louisiana  Cavalry,  was  wounded  in  the  charge,  in  the 
neck ; Adjutant  Prudkomme,  of  the  same  regiment,  in  the  thigh ; Cap- 
tain Bradford  in  the  neck  and  leg.  All  these  officers  were  gallantly  | 

leadiug  their  men.  . _ j 

Having  repulsed  the  enemy  and  holding  him  in  check  I ordered  the 
gunboat  Diana  to  move  up  above  Franklin  anti  take  position  on  the  right 
of  our  line,  so  that  her  guns  would  sweep  the  fields  and  woods  which  the 
enemy  had  held,  and  placing  Brigadier-General  Mouton  in  command  of 
the  troops  who  were  in  line  at  McKerall’s  field,  I repaired  to  Franklin 
and  pressed  forward  the  train  and  troops  then  just  arriving  on  the  cut- 
off road  from  Franklin  to  New  Iberia. 

Colonel  Green  with  the  rear  guard  of  his  own  regiment,  Waller’s  bat- 
talion, and  the  rifle  section  of  Sernmes’  battery  had  left  the  line  below 
Bethel’s  just  before  daybreak,  all  the  stores  having  been  removed  ahead  ; 
of  them a 24-pounder  siege  gun  and  a 12-pounder  howitzer  of  Cornay’s 
battery,  the  latter  having  been  disabled  during  the  action  of  Monday, 
being  necessarily  abandoned. 

With  great  coolness  and  steadiness  Colonel  Green  retired  slowly  be- 
fore the  heavy  advance  guard  of  the  enemy,  opening  upon  him  with  his 
artillery  whenever  he  came  within  range  and  charging  and  driving  him 
back  when  the  nature  of  the  ground  permitted  such  movements.  I had 
given  the  necessary  orders  for  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops  under  com- 
mand of  Brigadier-General  Mouton,  the  abandonment  of  the  Diana  by 
Captain  Sernmes  and  his  crew,  and  the  burning  of  that  vessel  belore 
Colonel  Green  with  the  rear  guard  came  into  the  town  of  Franklin,  at 
the  upper  end  of  which  town  the  cut-off  road  commenced.  But,  as  I 
have  since  learned,  Brigadier- General  Sibley,  without  communicating 
his  intention  to  me,  although  I was  in  Franklin  at  the  time,  dispatched 
one  of  his  staff  officers  to  Colonel  Green  with  an  order  to  fall  back  at 
ouce  through  Franklin  or  the  enemy  would  take  possession  of  the  road 
above  at  a point  known  as  Harding’s  Lane  and  cut  him  off.  In  obedi- 
ence to  that  order  Colonel  Green  immediately  fell  back  through  Frank- 
lin into  the  cut-off  road,  set  fire  to  the  bridge  on  the  road,  taking  it  tor 
granted  that  all  the  other  troops  had  passed  over.  Brigadier-General 
Mouton  with  his  command  then  retired,  the  general  and  his  staff  cross- 
ing the  bridge  while  it  was  burning.  Captain  Sernmes  held  the  Diana 
in  position,  faithfully  discharging  his  duty  and  set  her  on  fire  only  when 
General  Mouton  had  fallen  back.  Thus  by  the  unjustifiable  and  care- 
less order  of  General  Sibley  the  escape  of  Captain  Sernmes  and  his  crew 


Chav.  XXVUL] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


893 


as  prearranged  was  prevented,  and  I fear  tliat  he  and  the  greater  por- 
tion of  the  crew  have  become  prisoners. 

At  about  9.30  o’clock  a.  m.  all  the  wagons  and  troops  had  passed 
through  the  town  of  Franklin,  and  as  the  rear  of  General  Mouton’s  com- 
mand left  the  upper  portion  of  the  town  the  advance  guard  of  the  enemy 
entered  the  lower  portion.  At  Franklin  the  steamboats  which  had  been 
in  the  Lower  Teche  and  used  for  transportation  of  troops  and  stores 
were  burned  to  prevent  them  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy, 
with  the  exception  of  the  steamer  Cornie,  on  which  the  sick  and  wounded 
had  been  removed  from  Camp  Bisland,  and  the  unheard  of  plan  was 
adopted  of  attempting  to  pass  the  boat  with  the  sick  and  wounded  on 
board  through  the  enemy’s  lines  under  a hospital  flag,  although  I had 
given  orders  for  a sufficient  number  of  vehicles  to  be  in  readiness  at 
Franklin  to  transport  the  sick  and  wounded  by  land  to  a place  of  safety. 
This  course  was  adopted  by  Chief  Surgeon  Parish,  under  orders  from 
Brigadier-General  Sibley,  and  of  course  the  boat  and  those  on  board 
fell  into  the  enemy’s  hands.  Our  troops  and  train  then  proceeded,  en- 
camping on  Tuesday  night  just  above  Jeanerette,  Colonel  Green,  in 
command  of  the  rear  guard,  covering  the  retreat  and  keeping  up  almost 
constant  skirmishing  with  the  enemy’s  advance.  On  leaving  Franklin 
I,  in  person,  ordered  Brigadier-General  Sibley  to  march  at  the  head  of 
the  column,  preventing  straggling,  select  a suitable  camp  for  the  troops 
and  wagons,  and  report  to  me  the  selection  which  he  had  made  of  camp- 
ing ground  for  the  night.  Keeping  in  the  rear  of  our  column  I was 
much  surprised  to  find  late  in  the  afternoon  that  this  order  had  not  been 
complied  with ; that  General  Sibley  was  not  with  the  command,  but  had 
taken  a different  road  from  that  of  the  troops,  and  that  the  men  were 
straggling  without  order  over  the  whole  line  of  march  and  adjacent 
country.  I immediately  dispatched  a note  to  General  Sibley,  requiring 
his  prompt  obedience  to  the  orders  referred  to,  but  not  hearing  from 
him  at  once  I selected  in  person  the  camping  ground  and  endeavored  to 
collect  the  stragglers.  Late  in  the  evening  General  Sibley  reported  to 
me  in  person,  stating  that  he  was  sick,  and  asking  permission  to  go  on 
the  line  of  retreat  in  advance  of  the  column,  which  request  1 granted. 

Thus  commenced  the  scattering  and  straggling  of  our  troops  and  fall- 
ing back  to  Vermillion  Bridge.  Nearly  the  whole  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Fournet’s  battalion,  passing  through  the  countiy  in  which  the  men  had 
lived  before  joining  the  army,  deserted  with  their  arms,  remaining  at 
their  homes.  I was  compelled  to  order  the  destruction  of  the  gunboat 
Stevens  below  New  Iberia;  she  was  in  charge  of  the  Navy  Department 
and  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Humphreys,  C.  S.  Navy.  That  officer 
reporting  to  me  that  she  was  in  an  unfinished  condition  and  unfit  for 
action  with  the  enemy,  there  being  no  means  of  getting  her  out  of 
reaqh  of  the  enemy,  I ordered  her  to  be  suuk  as  low  down  the  bayou 
as  possible,  so  that  she  would  afford  an  obstruction  to  the  enemy’s  boats 
ascending.  This  order  was  not  carried  out  as  given  by  me,  but  she  was 
sunk  about  2 miles  below  New  Iberia,  when  she  might  have  been  sunk 
5 or  6 miles  lower. 

The  retreat  continued,  halting  only  for  the  night  until  our  arrival  at 
Vermillion  Bayou,  the  rear  guard  under  Colonel  Green  keeping  almost 
constantly  within  gunshot  distance  of  the  enemy’s  advance,  skirmishing 
all  the  time  and  charging  them  frequently.  As  soon  as  the  whole  train 
and  all  our  forces  had  crossed  the  bayou  1 had  the  bridges  burned,  and 
posting  four  pieces  of  artillery  on  the  heights  and  sharpshooters  along 
the  upper  banks,  the  troops  and  teams,  which  were  much  exhausted, 
were  allowed  to  rest  from  Thursday  afternoon  until  midday  on  Friday. 


394 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  TChap.  xxvn.  i 

■ 

At  Vermillion  Crossing  sharp  skirmishing  was  kept  up  and  no  demon-  < 
stration  of  importance  was  made  by  the  enemy  while  our  forces  were 
encamped  at  the  bayou.  The  retreat  was  recommenced  on  Friday,  and  ! 
on  Sunday  our  forces  and  train  left  Washington,  the  troops  and  com- 
missary,  medical,- and  ordnance  wagons  proceeding  up  the  Bayou  road  ] 
by  Moundville,  and  the  quartermaster  train  moving  by  way  of  Ville 
Platte  and  Chicot  to  the  Bayou  Boeuff,  the  two  trains  uniting  on  the 
Boeulf  about  16  miles  below  Cheney  ville. 

After  crossing  at  Moundville  I had  the  bridges  across  the  Bayous  Bceuff 
and  Cocodrie  at  that  place,  the  bridge  over  the  Cocod rie  at  J udge  Moore’s  \ 
plantation,  and  that  known  as  La  Fleur’s,  about  20  miles  above  Wash- 
ington, burned.  Colonel  Green,  with  his  rear  guard,  effectually  covered 
the  retreat,  and  continued  his  skirmishing  with  the  enemy  until  near 
the  town  of  Opelousas,  enabling  us  to  move  across  the  Boeuff,  and  be- 
yond danger  of  capture,  an  extensive  train.  On  Monday  morning  I 
started  the  whole  cavalry  force  of  my  command,  except  Waller’s  bat-  ! 
talion,  under  Brigadier-General  Mouton,  to  the  westward  of  Opelousas 
on  the  open  prairie,  where  from  the  nature  of  the  country  and  its  adap- 
tation to  cavalry  movements  it  can  harass  the  enemy  on  his  flank  and 
rear,  attack  his  trains,  and  if  not  successful  in  preventing  his  farther 
advance  into  the  interior  of  the  State,  will  render  it  so  slow  and  cautious 
as  to  give  us  time  for  making  such  dispositions  of  our  forces  as  will  be 
of  great  benefit  to  us. 

The  remainder  of  the  forces  are  now  encamped  at  Lecompte,  the 
terminus  ©f  the  Alexandria  Bailroad,  at  which  place  the  wagons  are 
also,  with  all  the  stores,  except  such  as  have  been  brought  to  Alex- 
andria. 

The  loss  sustained  by  us  in  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners  captured 
in  battle  I cannot  at  present  estimate.  The  number  of  prisoners  actually  1 
captured  by  the  enemy  was  small.  I regret,  however,  to  report  that  a 
very  considerable  number  have  voluntarily  placed  themselves  within 
reach  of  the  enemy  by  stopping  at  their  houses  in  the  parishes  through 
which  we  retreated,  a very  large  proportion  of  our  army  being  com- 
posed of  conscripts,  unwillingly  put  into  service,  and  those  who  volun- 
teered at  a late  date  to  avoid  conscription.  From  Sibley’s  brigade  also 
a very  considerable  number  have  straggled  off  and  returned  to  their 
homes  in  Texas.  This  was  the  case  with  all  the  regiments  of  the  brigade. 
While  those  who  participated  in  the  engagements  and  the  constant 
fighting  on  the  retreat  behaved  with  distinguished  gallantry,  it  is  to  be 
regretted  that  a great  lack  of  discipline  pervades  the  brigade,  which  it 
is  to  be  hoped  will  be  corrected  and  the  excellent  material  rendered  of 
more  efficient  service  to  our  cause. 

In  all  our  engagements  with  the  enemy  and  during  the  fighting  on 
the  retreat,  running  through  ten  days,  the  conduct  of  officers  and  troops 
who  participated  therein  cannot  be  too  highly  extolled.  Their  patient 
endurance  of  fatigue  and  privation,  pertinacious  and  successful  resist- 
ance to  the  pursuing  columns  of  the  enemy  are  worthy  of  great  com- 
mendation. . 

Brigadier-General  Mouton,  commanding  the  troops  on  the  lett  ot  our 
line  below  Bethel’s,  and  to  whom  I assigned  the  command  of  the  troops 
at  McKerall’s  field  after  their  repulse,  behaved  with  marked  gallantry, 
and  I take  pleasure  in  bearing  testimony  to  his  skill,  fidelity,  and  courage 
in  every  position  in  which  he  was  placed.  Colonel  Green,  commanding 
the  rear  guard,  distinguished  himself  by  the  faithful  and  successful 
manner  in  which  he  discharged  the  important  duties  intrusted  to  him. 
To  his  zeal,  vigilance,  and  daring  the  extrication  of  our  little  army  from 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


395 


its  perilous  position  is  indebted  to  a great  extent.  He  has  shown  him- 
self equal  to  every  emergency,  and  to  him  and  the  officers  and  men  ot 
his  command  I feel  proud  to  return  my  acknowledgments.  In  truth, 
he  was  the  Key  of  our  retreat,  and  the  shield  and  buckler  of  our  little 
force. 

Colonel  Reily,  of  the  Fourth  Texas  Regiment  Mounted  Volunteers, 
who  fell  in  the  battle  of  Franklin,  was  a gallant  and  chivalrous  soldier, 
whose  loss  I deeply  regret. 

Colonel  Gray  and  his  regiment,  Twenty-eighth  Louisiana  Volunteers, 
officers  and  men,  deserve  most  favorable  mention.  Their  gallantry  in 
action  is  enhanced  by  the  excellent  discipline  which  they  have  pre- 
served,  and  no  veteran  soldiers  could  have  excelled  them  in  their  con- 
duct during  the  trying  scenes  through  which  they  passed.  I cannot 
omit  mentioning  particularly  Captain  Bradford,  of  the  Twenty-eighth 
Louisiana  Regiment,  whose  bravery  and  coolness  was  conspicuous  on 
ail  occasions.  I am  happy  to  state  that  his  wounds  are  not  dangerous, 
and  hope  that  he  will  shortly  be  restored  to  service.  Colonel  Bagby, 
who  was  wounded  in  the  action  on  Monday,  merits  the  highest  consid- 
eration. 

Colonel  Vincent,  and  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Second  Louisiana 
Cavalry,  in  the  action  of  Tuesday,  and  those  who  participated  in  the 
retreat,  behaved  handsomely. 

Captain  Seinmes,  in  command  of  the  Diana,  and  his  crew  conducted 
themselves  with  the  greatest  bravery  and  intrepidity,  and  deserve  the 
highest  encomiums. 

Lieutenant  West,  of  Semmes’  battery,  who  commanded  the  rifled  sec- 
tion on  the  retreat  from  the  lower  line  to  Jeanerette,  handled  his  pieces 
with  great  skill  and  efficiency  and  inflicted  severe  loss  upon  the  enemy 
in  his  pursuits.  This  officer  and  his  men  contributed  largely  toward  the 
extrication  of  our  army  from  its  position  of  peril. 

Lieutenant  Tarleton,  of  Cornay’s  battery,  commanded  the  24-pounder 
siege  gun,  and  acquitted  himself  with  credit  and  distinction. 

Captain  Sayers  and  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Valverde  Battery  be- 
haved with  great  gallantry.  Captain  Sayers  was  wounded  in  the  ankle 
in  the  action  of  Monday,  the  13th.  Semmes’  battery  fully  sustained  its 
merited  reputation  and  did  efficient  service. 

The  Pelican  Battery,  Captain  Faries,  was  handled  with  great  skill, 
and  all  its  officers  and  men  bore  themselves  like  good  soldiers  and  re- 
ceive my  acknowledgments  for  their  brave  and  effective  service. 

The  Confederate  Guards  Response  Battalion,  Major  Clack  command- 
ing, which  reached  me  about  daybreak  on  Tuesday  morning  was  of  in- 
valuable service  to  me,  and  after  a march  of  upward  of  20  miles  dur- 
ing the  night  entered  into  the  engagement  near  Franklin  on  Tuesday 
morning  like  fresh  troops  and  bore  themselves  like  invincible  soldiers. 
To  their  courage  is  added  thorough  discipline,  which  they  kept  up  dur- 
ing the  whole  retreat. 

In  mentioning  these  particular  corps  and  individuals  I do  not  mean 
to  detract  from  the  merit  and  gallantry  of  the  other'brave  troops  of  the 
command  ; all  who  participated  in  the  fight  manifest  courage  and  devo- 
tion which  is  worthy  of  all  praise.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Fournet,  who 
was  deserted  by  the  most  of  his  command,  displayed  courage  and  gal- 
lantry throughout  the  engagements.  Other  officers  and  soldiers,  who 
have  distinguished  themselves,  will  be  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  Gov- 
ernment when  General  Mo u ton’s  report  is  received. 

1 cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  services  rendered  by  my  staff'  officers 
and  those  of  General  Sibley,  who  remained  with  me.  Lieutenant- 


396  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYLL 

Colonel  Herbert,  who  had  been  detached  from  his  battalion,  the  Arizona 
by  General  Sibley  and  placed  on  his  staff,  remained  constantly  with 
the  rear  guard  and  displayed  the  highest  qualities  of  a soldier.  Major 
Ochiltree,  chief  of  staff  of  the  Sibley  brigade,  was  constantly  under  tire 
and  afforded  me  the  most  valuable  assistance  by  his  activity  and  dar- 
ing, as  did  Major  Eobards,  ordnance  officer  to  the  same  brigade. 

Major  Magoffin,  of  General  Sibley’s  staff,  was  also  very  active  in  dis- 
charging the  duties  intrusted  to  him.  Major  Levy,  adjutant  and  in- 
spector general  on  my  staff,  and  Captains  Norton  and  .Fusilier,  volun- 
teer aides,  were  always  under  hre,  carrying  orders,  enduring  fatigue, 
hurrying  up  caissons  when  the  severity  of  the  fire  made  the  drivers 
hesitate,  and  in  fact  doing  the  duties  of  couriers  as  well  as  of  officers. 
I can  speak  in  the  same  terms  of  Lieutenant  Bonford,  aide-de-camp, 
who  joined  me  at  the  close  of  Monday’s  action  and  was  present  at  the 
action  near  Franklin.  Lieutenant  Bringier,  my  other  regular  aide,  only 
reached  me  at  the  Vermillion,  but  from  that  time  shared  in  the  dangers 
and  fatigues  of  the  retreat.  # 

If  only  remains  for  me  to  speak  of  Major  Brent,  my  chief  of  ordnance 
and  artillery.  Posting  his  guns  with  great  skill  he  superintended  the 
serving  of  them  in  person.  Always  in  the  right  place  and  at  the  right 
time,  he  merits  the  highest  commendation.  Major  Surge t,  my  chief  of 
staff',  was  compelled  to  remain  at  Alexandria.  The  large  territory  over 
which  my  small  force  was  necessarily  scattered  in  the  district  rendered 
it  imperative  for  him  to  remain  at  a central  point,  though  his  applica- 
tions to  join  me  were  urgent. 

In  consequence  of  these  operations  having  extended  through  several 
days,  this  report  is  necessarily  somewhat  lengthy ; nor  does  opportunity 
offer  in  the  present  state  of  affairs  to  reduce  it  to  a less  prolix  form. 

I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  TAYLOE, 

Major- General. 

Brigadier-General  Boggs,  Chief  of  Staff. 


No.  40. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  Mouton , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Brigade, 
of  operations , April  11-19. 


In  the  Field,  Niblett’s  Bluff, 

May  2,  1863. 

Major:  I beg  leave  to  submit  to  the  major-general  commanding  a 
report  of  the  operations  of  the  troops  under  my  command  from  Satur- 
day, April  11,  till  Sunday,  April  19,  1863: 

On  reaching  Camp  Bisland  it  was  ascertained  that  the  line  of  in- 
trenchments  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Teche,  corresponding  with  those 
on  the  west  bank  recently  thrown  up,  had  not  even  been  commenced, 
and  by  direction  of  the  major-general  measures  were  immediately 
adopted  to  complete  them.  Lieutenant  Mullet  and  Private  Alfred 
Fusilier,  the  latter  acting  on  my  staff' as  assistant  engineer,  were  placed 
in  charge  late  on  Friday,  the  10th.  The  necessary  orders  were  issued 
for  obtaining  hands,  and-  by  the  most  strenuous  efforts  negroes  were 
collected  during  the  night  and  the  works  commenced  early  on  Satur- 
day. From  this  moment  until  Monday  morning  the  labor  was  con- 
tinued night  and  day  by  the  troops  under  my  command  and  the  negroes 


Chap.  XXVIT.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


397 


obtained,  with  only  momentary  interruptions,  occasioned  by  the  artil- 
lery fire  of  the  enemy.  During  the  whole  of  the  time  Lieutenant  Mullet 
and  Private  Fusilier  were  incessantly  at  their  posts  and  labored  with 
indefatigable  zeal  and  commendable  energy,  completing  the  line  about 
midday  Monday.  I regret,  however,  that  several  traverses  which  I had 
ordered  could  not  be  completed,  owing  to  the  too  heavy  firing  of  the 
enemy,  which  frightened  and  drove  the  negroes  away,  while  the  troops 
were  compelled  to  take  their  position  in  line. 

On  Sunday,  April  12,  about  10  a.  m.,  the  enemy,  under  cover  of  their 
gunboats,  commenced  landing  troops,  consisting  of  infantry,  artillery, 
and  cavalry,  at  Lynch’s  Point,  on  the  east  bank.  Colonel  Bagbv,  Third 
Eegiment,  Sibley’s  brigade,  under  my  command,  was  posted- at  this 
point  with  his  regiment  and  ordered  to  check  the  enemy’s  advance  by 
every  means  in  his  power.  This  he  did  effectually  and  heroically,  de- 
fending every  inch  of  ground  with  about  300  men  against  an  overwhelm- 
ing force  till  about  4 p.  m.,  when  the  enemy  advanced  to  within  1,500 
yards  of  the  i n trench  rnents.  From  about  5 until  dark  an  artillery  duel 
was  kept  up,  which  resulted  in  nothing  of  any  importance. 

At  night  I sent  out  my  adjutant,  Oapt.  Louis  Bush,  to  reconnoiter 
the  position,  force,  and  dispositions  of  the  enemy,  who  returned  at  a 
late  hour,  imparting  all  the  information  which  it  was  possible  to  obtain. 
Guided  by  this  information  and  knowing  the  formation  of  the  ground, 

1 concluded  that  the  efforts  of  the  enemy  would  be  mainly  directed 
against  my  left  flank,  and  in  consequence  I directed  Colonel  Bagby  with 
his  regiment  to  take  position  in  front  of  the  intrenchments,  about  500 
yards  in  advance,  on  my  left  flank,  in  a copse  of  woods  bordering  on 
the  lake,  with  orders  to  hold  the  point  at  all  hazards,  and  T distributed 
the  remainder  of  the  troops,  numbering  about  1,000  men,  along  the  line, 
Fournet’s  battalion  on  the  right,  the  Crescent  Eegiment  in  the  center, 
and  the  Eighteenth  Eegiment  on  the  left,  their  left  resting  on  the  re- 
doubt covering  the  left  flank.  The  Pelican  Battery,  Captain  Faries, 
was  distributed  by  sections  on  the  main  road,  and  thus  a connected 
line  was  formed  from  the  Teche  to  the  redoubt,  a distance  of  about  900 
yards.  The  great  length  of  principal  line  and  the  small  number  of 
troops  under  my  charge  precluded  the  possibility  of  holding  a single 
man  in  reserve,  every  one  being  required  to  cover  the  main  line. 

Monday,  13th,  about  9 a.  m.,  the  movements  of  the  enemy  began  to  be 
developed,  their  skirmishers  having  been  previously  thrown  forward, 
who  were  met  by  ours  and  steadily  held  in  check.  At  10  a.  m.  a for- 
ward movement  commenced  as  if  intended  to  attack  the  whole  line,  but 
it  soon  became  apparent  that  my  left  flank  would  be  the  serious  point? 
of  assault,  and  as  soon  as  this  became  evident  I took  position  on  the 
parapet  of  the  redoubt,  whetfe  I could  more  easily  observe  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy  and  direct  those  of  our  troops,  and  where  it  became 
necessary  for  me  to  remain  the  entire  day.  The  enemy  continued  to 
press  forward,  but  mainly  on  my  left  flank.  Here  a struggle  ensued 
which  on  the  part  of  our  troops  could  not  be  surpassed  for  cool  and  de- 
termined courage,  bravery,  and  heroic  valor.  Against  this  flank  five 
regiments  were  successively  thrown  and  effectually  resisted  on  the  open 
field  by  not  over  500  men,  under  the  lead  of  the  gallant  and  chivalric 
Bagby,  until  night,  when  they  were  compelled  to  yield  slightly  under 
the  pressure  of  the  overwhelming  force  concentrated  against  them. 

During  this  conflict  it  became  necessary  under  orders  to  detach  from 
Fournet’s  battalion  first  104  men  and  then  150  men,  the  latter  of  whom 
soon  returned  and  were  stationed  in  reserve  behind  the  second  parapet 
on  the  left  and  3 yards  in  the  rear  of  the  first.  From  this  reserve  I 


398 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA  , S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [OH*r.  XXVTL 

early  threw  forward  to  the  support  of  Colonel  Bagby  Captain  Beraud 
and  his  company,  and  directed  the  remainder  to  the  right  of  the  main 
line,  where  the  enemy  were  making  a serious  demonstration  with  three 
regiments,  apparently  simultaneous  with  the  movement  forward  on  the 
west  bank.  While  this  conflict  was  progressing  it  became  further  nec- 
essary to  support  Colonel  Bagby  with  the  entire  left  wing  of  the  Eight- 
eenth Kegiment,  under  the  different  line  officers,  and  finally  a detach- 
ment from  Waller’s  battalion  sent  to  my  assistance  from  the  west  bank, 
under  the  lead  of  the  tried  and  gallant  Major  Boone,  composed  ot  about 
GO  men,  were  advanced  into  the  hottest  of  the  engagement.  On  the 
balance  of  the  line  an  incessant  and  continuous  fire  was  maintained  and 
the  enemy  pressed  forward  with  two  regiments  on  the  center  and  three 
on  the  right  till  dark,  when  they  were  checked  at  about  800  yards  from 
the  parapet.  The  enemy  threatening  to  storm  our  works,  our  men  fixed 
bavonets  and  resolutely  prepared  to  meet  and  dispute  with  them  to  the 
death  the  possession  of  the  intrenchments.  They,  however,  although 
they  could  easily  have  borne  us  down  by  superiority  of  numbers,  dared 
not  expose  themselves  to  a hand-to-hand  conflict. 

At  midnight  orders  w^ere  received  to  evacuate  my  position  and  I con- 
fided to  my  adjutant  the  direction  of  the  retrograde  movement,  which 
was  executed  with  all  the  dispatch  and  promptness  possible,  especially 
when  it  is  considered  that  Captain  Faries  had  lost  a large  number  ot 
his  horses.  Everything  was  saved  except  a caisson,  which  had  to  be 
abandoned  in  a disabled  condition  from  the  lack  of  horses. 

It  would  be  invidious,  and  in  fact  almost  impossible  to  chronicle  in- 
dividual acts  of  valor  and  heroism.  Where  all  behaved  so  well  and 
merit  so  much  from  the  country  I feel  incapable  of  doing  full  justice  to 
every  one.  When  it  is  remembered  that  the  whole  army  was  aware  that 
we  had  been  flanked  by  a force  of  from  8,000  to  10,000,  which  was  march- 
ing down  on  our  rear  and  pressing  heavily  upon  a small  column  which 
was  facing  them  and  could  at  any  time  have  been  completely  crushed, 
the  coolness,  resolution,  and  determination  of  our  troops,  evinced,  too, 
when  they  were  exhausted  and  almost  prostrated  by  excessive  fatigue 
and  want  of  rest,  are  remarkable,  and  deserve  the  highest  praise  which 
can  be  conferred  upon  meritorious  soldiers. 

I would  particularly  mention  Col.  A.  P.  Bagby,  his  regiment,  and  the 
re-enforcements  sent  him  during  the  action.  Troops  ne\er  acted  with 
more  gallantry,  nor  was  ever  such  an  overwhelming  force,  at  least  3,000 
men,  with  all  the  appliances  of  war  to  support  them,  longer  held  in 
check  by  a handful  of  heroes.  Here  it  was  that  Colonel  Bagby  was 
slightly  wounded,  and  I sincerely  hope  he  will  soon  be  in  a condition  to 
report  for  duty. 

The  Pelican  Battery  covered  itself  with  glory.  Too  much  praise  can- 
not be  awarded  to  Captain  Faries,  Lieuts.  Felix  Winchester,  Richard 
Winchester,  Garrett,  and  Gaudet.  Ever  at  their  post,  they  did  their 
duty  nobly,  arresting  the  advance  of  the  enemy  at  every  step  and  giv- 
ing important  assistance  to  the  forces  on  the  west  bank  by  effectually 
opening  on  the  advancing  columns  of  the  enemy.  This  battery  may  be 
equaled  but  cannot  be  surpassed  by  any  in  the  Confederate  service. 
The  remainder  of  the  troops  behaved  with  equal  valor  and  deserve  the 
highest  commendation. 

I reached  Franklin,  10  miles  distant,  at  8 a.  m.,  Tuesday,  14th,  and 
reported  to  Major-General  Taylor,  who  placed  me  in  command  ot  the 
troops  holding  the  enemy  in  our  rear  in  check.  It  is  due  to  the  truth 
of  history  that  I should  here  record  the  fact  that  the  salvation  of  our 
retiring  army  was  entirely  owing  to  the  bold  and  determined  attack  ot 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


369 


our  troops  under  the  immediate  command  of  Major-General  Taylor,  he 
leading  the  van,  upon  the  enemy  at  early  dawn,  thereby  arresting  the 
advance  of  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy,  8,000  to  10,000  strong,  with 
not  over  1,200  men,  until  our  retreating  forces  had  gotten  tar  on  the 
road  leading  to  the  Cypremort  and  beyond  the  reach  of  pursuit.  The 
enemy  were  thus  kept  at  bay  until  midday,  when  one  of  my  staff  offi- 
cers, Maj.  E.  W.  Sanders,  assistant  quartermaster,  informed  me  that 
all  our  troops  had  retired  and  that  the  enemy  were  in  Franklin.  The 
enemy  were  in  a position  and  threatened  to  cut  off  our  retreat,  but  by 
means  of  a by-path  I succeeded  in  eluding  their  pursuit  and  extricated 
the  troops  from  a very  perilous  attitude,  arising  from  information  not 
having  been  given  me  in  time  of  the  arrival  of  our  rear  guard  in  Frank- 
lin, and  saw  every  man  file  over  a burning  bridge  in  the  rear  of  the 
village,  myself  and  staff  crossing  when  it  was  almost  entirely  consumed. 

It  would  be  a dereliction  of  duty  were  I to  fail  to  mention  that  I am 
greatly  indebted  to  the  invaluable  services  of  Capt.  O.  J.  Semmes  and 
the  officers  and  men  under  his  command,  on  board  of  the  Diana,  in  re- 
tarding the  enemy  at  this  point.  As  ever,  he  proved  himself  an  officer 
of  high  merit,  and  the  duties  confided  to  him  could  not  have  been  in- 
trusted to  safer  hands. 

At  about  2 p.  m.  I came  up  with  Colonel  Green,  of  Sibley’s  brigade, 
and  assigned  him  to  the  command  of  the  entire  cavalry,  while  I col 
lected  and  reorganized  as  rapidly  as  I could  the  shattered  fragments  of 
my  own  brigade.  With  such  of  them  as  I could  unite  I bivouacked  on 
the  plantation  of  Louis  Gravemberg  for  the  night,  about  10  miles  from 
New  Iberia,  and  proceeded  Wednesday,  15th,  to  that  point.  Here  I 
received  orders  to  assume  command  of  the  forces  south  of  Eed  Eiver, 
and  in  fulfillment  of  that  duty  I proceeded  early  Thursday  morning 
toward  the  enemy,  who  were  being  held  in  check  by  Colonel  Green 
with  the  cavalry  and  artillery  under  him. 

From  this  time  till  Friday,  17th,  5 p.  m.,  the  enemy,  by  movements 
on  their  flanks,  feints,  charges,  and  maneuvers,  were  retarded  in  their 
progress  to  Vermillion  Bridge,  where,  after  retiring  over  the  bayou  and 
burning  the  bridge,  heavy  skirmishing  and  an  artillery  duel  ensued,  re- 
sulting in  nothing  of  serious  consequence,  except  to  delay  the  enemy  j 
thence  to  Opelousas,  distance  of  25  miles,  the  enemy,  numbering  from 
18,000  to  20,000,  were  retarded  till  Monday,  20th,  about  12  m.,  on  which 
day  I executed  the  flank  movement  ordered,  concerning  which  I have 
already  reported. 

To  the  military  knowledge,  intrepidity,  and  undaunted  bravery  of 
Col.  Thomas  Green  I am  greatly  indebted  for  the  successful  check  of 
the  advance  of  the  enemy.  From  our  intrenchinents  to  Opelousas  he 
brought  up  the  rear,  faced  the  enemy  at  every  step,  and  exhibited 
energy,  zeal,  and  courage  unsurpassable  by  that  of  any  officer  in  the 
service. 

My  most  sincere  thanks  are  due  and  gratefully  tendered  to  the  offi- 
cers of  my  staff.  Capt.  Louis  Bush,  my  adjutant,  displayed  his  usual 
coolness,  energy,  and  devotedness  to  our  cause.  In  the  most  perilous 
situations  lie  communicated  my  orders  fearlessly  and  rapidly  ; directed 
the  movements  confided  to  him  with  marked  ability,  and  rendered  me 
the  most  important  services  while  combating  the  enemy  and  during 
the  retreat. 

Capt.  A.  Schreiber,  acting  ordnance  officer;  Lieut.  D.  Avery,  acting 
aide-de-camp,  and  Lieut.  J.  G.  Olivier,  volunteer  aide  de  camp,  did 
all  that  could  be  expected  from  men  who,  knowing  their  duty,  act  up 
Mly  to  all  its  requirements,  Amidst  the  warmest  of  the  conflict,  and 


400 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYTL 

where  danger  and  death  stared  them  in  the  face  at  every  step,  they 
bore  my  orders  to  every  point  of  the  field  with  alacrity  and  promptness. 
Maj.  R.  W.  Sanders,  assistant  quartermaster,  and  Maj.  J.  S.  Mouton, 
A.  0.  S.,  attended  to  their  duties  not  only  in  their  respective  depart-  I 
ments  but  at  times  in  the  field  and  under  fire.  It  is  also  my  pleasing 
duty  to  make  particular  mention  of  Private  Alfred  A.  Fusilier.  He  has 
been  acting  as  assistant  engineer  since  October  last,  and  during  the  j 
engagement  remained  with  me,  acting  as  aide.  He  is  indefatigable, 
brave,  and  devoted.  His  horse  was  killed  under  him  while  carrying 
orders. 

It  is  out  of  ray  power  to  furnish  lists  of  casualties,  having  been  and. 
being  still  separated  from  the  troops  under  my  command  at  the  in-  i 
trenchments.  As  soon  as  they  can  be  obtained  they  will  be  forwarded. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ J ’ alf:  mouton, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Maj.  E.  Surget,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


APRIL  12,  1863. — Affair  on  the  Amite  River*,  La. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Col.  John  M.  Siraonton,  First  Mississippi  Infantry. 

No.  2.— Capt.  Gadi  Herren,  First  Mississippi  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  John  M.  Simonton , First  Mississippi  Infantry . 

Ponchatotjla,  La.,  April  13,  1863.  | 

MAJOR : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  ou  the  9th  instant  I ordered  ' 
Captain  Herren,  with  his  and  Captain  Cochran’s  companies  of  cavalry,  . 
to  proceed  to  the  wreck  of  gunboat  at  mouth  ot  Amite  River,  to  re-  _ 
cover  guns  and  other  valuables.  Captain  Herren  succeeded  in  getting  ! 
a schooner  in  the  Amite  River,  with  which  he  proceeded  to  the  wreck 
and  placed  one  gun  and  a quantity  of  ironou  board  and  started  for  the  ■ 
mouth  of  the  Tickfaw,  before  reaching  which  he  discovered  lie  was  ! 
being  watched  by  a steamer  in  Lake  Maurepas,  and  a small  party  m a 
yacht  was  sent  out  to  intercept  him.  He  succeeded  in  getting  into  | 
the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  left  a portion  of  his  men  on  board  the  ; 
schooner  and  went  ashore  with  the  balance  and  placed  them  in  ambush 
until  the  party  in  the  yacht  passed  up  the  river,  when  he  fired  on  them,  , 
and  after  a considerable  little  skirmish  succeeded  in  capturing  the 
entire  party  (killing  1 private).  Prisoners  taken  : One  adjutant,  bixth 
Michigan  : 1 lieutenant,  1 corporal,  1 musician,  and  4 privates,  who1 
are  now  at  this  place,  and  I will  send  to  Jackson  to-day.  Captain 
Herren  was,  however,  so  closely  followed  by  the  steamer  he  was  com- 
pelled to  throw  overboard  the  gun  and  leave  the  schooner,  making  his 
way  up  the  Poncliatoula  in  the  yacht.  I have  sent  a force  to  protect 
the  schooner,  if  possible,  and  will  yet  secure  the  guns  if  practicable. 
Captain  Herren  and  his  men  deserve  the  highest  praise  for  energy  ana 
bravery.  Our  loss,  none. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  major,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  M.  SIMONTON, 

Co  lonel , Co  mm  an  d ing f 


Major  Willson ? Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Chap.  XXVII.]  AFFAIR  ON  THE  AMITE  RIVER,  LA.  401 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Gapt.  Gadi  Herren , First  Mississippi  Cavalry. 

Camp  Ruggles,  April  13,  1863. 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  your  orders,  on  Thursday,  the  9th  instant, 
I proceeded  with  my  company  (H),  First  Mississippi  Cavalry,  and  Com- 
pany C,  Second  Arkansas  Cavalry,  to  the  wreck  of  the  gunboat  in  the 
mouth  of  the  Amite  River  to  remove  the  cannon  and  other  valuables 
to  a point  where  they  could  be  transported  to  this  place.  I had  great 
difficulty  in  getting  a schooner  into  the  lake,  owing  to  the  fierce  gale 
blowing  from  the  south.  I succeeded,  however,  after  two  days’  hard 
labor,  in  sailing  out  and  getting  the  cannon  above  water  on  board.  I 
found  the  tide  very  high,  covering  the  whole  wreck  with  2 feet  water. 
This  cannon  and  a little  iron  was  all  I could  procure  at  this  stage  of 
the  water.  I took  on  board  the  schooner  with  me  Lieutenant  Allen 
and  20  men.  I sent  the  remainder  of  my  force  to  camp  by  land,  under 
Lieutenant  Elliot.  I sailed  for  the  Tickfaw  at  10  o’clock  a.  m.  Sunday, 
the  12th  instant.  I had  light  wind  for  some  time  and  traveled  very 
slowly  until  getting  out  2 miles  from  land,  when  the  breeze  suddenly 
changed  and  blew  stoutly  from  the  north,  driving  me  off  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  South  Pass.  At  this  time  I discovered  smoke  from  a boat 
coming  up  the  Pass.  She  came  up  to  the  lake  and  halted,  evidently 
watching  my  movements.  She  remained  in  this  position  some  half 
hour  and  then  dropped  down  the  Pass  again.  I could  at  the  same  time 
distinctly  see  smoke  arising  from  three  or  four  other  boats  farther  down 
and  beyond  the  first  one.  By  this  time  I had  gotten  the  schooner  into 
the  month  of  the  river,  and  feeling  confident  I had  been  discovered  and 
would  be  pursued  I directed  Lieutenant  Allen  to  take  charge  of  the 
schooner  and  move  up  as  fast  as  possible.  I then  took  a small  boat 
and  went  back  to  the  lake  to  watch  any  movement  from  that  direction. 
I soon  discovered  a small  craft  making  out  of  the  Pass  direct  for  me. 
I immediately  hastened  back  to  the  schooner  and  landed  two-thirds  of 
my  force  on  the  east  bank  of  the  river,  placing  them  in  ambush  in  the 
tall  grass  on  the  river  bank.  I then  directed  Lieutenant  Allen  to  con- 
ceal his  men  on  the  schooner  and  bear  in  to  the  west  shore.  By  this 
time  the  enemy  came  in  sight,  but  to  my  surprise  and  mortification 
they  passed  close  to  the  opposite  shore,  compelling  me  to  fire  at  them 
over  200  yards.  They  were  so  near  the  land  they  succeeded  in  getting 
out  of  their  boats.  I then  directed  Lieutenant  Allen  to  move  rapidly 
with  his  force  on  the  west  bank  and  cut  off  their  retreat.  He  obeyed 
this  order  promptly,  and  after  chasing  them  some  distance  captured 
their  whole  party.  I killed  1 and  took  8 prisoners ; among  the  pris- 
oners are  two  lieutenants.  I also  captured  a large  yawl,  capable  of 
carrying  35  men,  and  one  small  boat.  My  loss,  nothing.  I could  still 
see  the  smoke  in  the  Pass,  moving  in  the  direction  of  the  lake.  I was 
satisfied  they  were  after  me  and  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  tow  the 
schooner  up  the  river  (the  wind  being  against  us)  in  time  to  escape 
them.  I therefore  determined,  in  order  to  save  my  command  from 
capture,  to  throw  the  cannon  overboard  and  leave  the  schooner,  which 
I did  1 mile  inside  the  mouth  of  the  river. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  calling  special  attention  to  the 
cool  and  determined  courage  of  every  officer  and  man  under  my  com- 
mand in  this  engagement.  There  was  no  lagging  behind  $ every  man 

26  r r — yol  xv 


402  W.  FLA.,  S ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [CaAr.  XXYIL 

did  his  duty.  Lieutenant  Allen,  the  only  commissioned  officer  I had 
■with  me,  is  entitled  to  great  credit  and  praise  for  the  gallantry  and 
intelligence  he  displayed  iu  the  execution  of  my  orders. 

I am,  colonel,  with  high  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

GrADI  HEiaiaBN , 
Captain , Commanding  Detachment . 

Col.  J.  M.  Simonton. 


APRIL  18,  1863.— Affair  at  Sabine  Pass,  Tex. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  W.  R.  Scurry,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Lieut.  Col.  W.  H.  Griffin,  Twenty-first  Texas  Infantry. 

No.  1. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  W.  R.  Scurry , C.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Eastern  Sub  District  of  Texas, 

Houston , Tex.,  April  19,  1863. 

Sir  • I have  the  honor  of  reporting,  for  the  information  of  the  major- 
general  commanding,  the  following  telegram  directed  to  me  and  just 

received : _ 

Headquarters  Sabine  Pass, 

April  18,  1863. 

Last  night  I placed  30  men  in  the  light-house,  under  Lieutenant  Jones,  of 
battalion8  To-dav,  at  11  o’clock,  13  Federals  came  up  to  the  light-house  m two  small 
boats  We  captured  6 men,  including  Captain  McDermot,  of  the  Cayuga,  who  was 
mortally  wounS,  and  the  captain’s  gig  The  other  boat  escaped  with  “ Four 
were  killed  in  the  water.  Second  Lieutenant  Wright,  of  D company,  Griffin  bat 
talion,  was  killed,  gallantly  leading  the  men.  No  other  caraaltie^  QRI  ^ 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Sabine  Pass. 

I would  also  report  that  on  the  13th  instant  Capt.  Charles  Fowler, 
with  3 men,  on  the  Don  Juan,  was  captured  while  on  a reconnaissance 

in  Sabine  Bay.  . , 

I shall  transmit  the  official  reports  so  soon  as  received. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^  ^ S0URRY 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 
Capt.  E.  P.  Turner,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  W.  H.  Griffin , Twenty-first  Texas  Infantry. 


Headquarters, 

Sabine  Post , April  28,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  as  to  an  engage- 
ment between  a part  of  the  troops  under  my  command  and  a small  part 
of  the  enemy  on  Saturday,  the  18th  instant: 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


AFFAIR  AT  SABINE  PASS,  TEX. 


403 


On  Friday  afternoon  (the  17th  instant)  one  of  my  pickets  reported 
that  a boat  from  the  Federal  gunboat  had  landed  7 men  on  the  Louisi- 
ana shore,  and  that  they  were  then  in  the  light  house  making  observa- 
tions. Before  I could  make  any  arrangement  to  capture  them  they 
withdrew  to  the  Federal  fleet.  I then  determined  to  lay  a plan  to  cap- 
ture the  next  party  that  should  come  to  the  light  house.  I subse- 
quently on  that  night  placed  a party  of  30  men,  under  the  command  of 
First  Lieut.  W.  J.  Jones,  of  0 company,  and  Second  Lieut.  E.  T.  Wrighty 
of  D company,  Twenty-first  (Griffin’s  battalion)  Texas  Volunteer  In- 
fantry, in  the  light  house  and  the  dwelling-house  near  to  it,  instructing 
Lieutenant  Jones  not  to  let  his  men  show  themselves  in  the  boat,  and 
to  endeavor  to  capture  any  party  of  the  Federal s that  should  land.  On 
Saturday,  at  about  11  o’clock  a.  m.,  13  men  in  two  small  boats  from  the 
Federal  gunboats  landed  at  about  600  yards  from  the  light-house. 
Three  of  the  men  approached  very  cautiously  to  within  a few  yards  of 
the  light-house,  when,  upon  a demand,  they  surrendered ; the  other 
men  having  400  yards  the  advantage  of  my  men  started  at  the  double- 
quick  step  for  their  boats.  My  men  immediately  gave  chase,  being  gal- 
lantly led  by  Lieutenants  Jones  and  Wright.  The  boat  from  the  Cay- 
uga, with  Captain  McDermot,  mortally  wounded,  and  5 sailor  men,  cap- 
tured. The  boat  from  the  New  London,  with  its  captain  and  the  noto- 
rious traitor  Taylor,  escaped.  I have  since  learned,  under  a flag  of  truce 
that  every  one  in  that  boat  was  wounded  except  one.  Captain  Bead 
lost  an  eye,  besides  receiving  another  wound.  Taylor  was  also  wounded 
dangerously  in  two  different  places. 

It  becomes  my  melancholy  duty  to  inform  you  that  Second  Lieut.  E 
T.  Wright,  of  Company  D,  Twenty-first  Texas  Volunteer  Infantry,  was 
instantly  killed  by  a Harper’s  Ferry  ball  through  the  brain  while  gal- 
lantly leading  and  urging  on  the  men  under  his  command.  No  one  else 
of  the  men  under  my  command  was  at  all  wounded. 

Too  much  credit  and  praise  cannot  be  given  to  Lieut.  W.  J.  Jones,  of 
C company,  Twenty-first  Texas  Volunteer  Infantry,  for  his  gallantry 
and  good  conduct  on  the  occasion.  Captain  McDermot,  of  the  Cay- 
uga, died  at  2 p.  m.  on  the  same  day  of  the  wounds  received.  Assist- 
ant Surgeon  Barton  and  Acting  Assistant  Surgeon  Murray  did  every- 
thing they  could  to  relieve  his  sufferings  and  to  save  his  life,  but  in 
vain.  Immediately  after  his  death  I dispatched  a flag  of  truce  out  to  the 
Federal  fleet  under  Maj.  H.  A.  Hamner  and  Second  Lieut.  F.  H.  Bailey 
proposing  either  to  bury  the  body  on  the  next  day  with  the  honors  of 
war  or  to  surrender  the  body  to  Captain  Bead  if  he  wished  it.  He 
chose  the  latter,  and  sent  Drs.  Bayoth  [Bogertj  and  Kendall,  of  the 
federal  Navy,  for  the  body.  They  took  charge  of  it  and  carried  it  on 
board  ship,  intending  to  send  it  to  his  family  in  New  York. 

At  the  request  of  B.  V . Cook,  captain  commanding  Company  D„ 
twenty -first  Texas  Volunteer  Infantry,  I shall  send  the  body  of  the 
gallant  Lieut.  E.  T.  Wright  to  his  relations  in  Columbus,  Colorado* 
County,  Tex.  ? 

I have  the  honor  to  bring  to  the  notice  and  consideration  of  the  com- 
manding general  that  in  order  to  properly  defend  Sabine  Pass  I have 
iounci  and  still  find  it  necessary  to  keep  troops,  scouts,  and  pickets  on 
tlieLou^ana  side  of  the  channel.  Though  that  is  not  a part  of  the 
aistrict  under Ahe  command  of  the  brigadier-general  commanding  the 

as  ern  Sub-District  of  Texas,  I consider  it  a military  necessity,  and 
snail  so  continue  to  act  unless  otherwise  instructed  by  the  brigadier- 
general  commanding.  I am  advisedly  informed  that  all  the  beef,  mut- 
rJifto*  us.e<^  on  the  Federal  gunboats  are  procured  on  Lake 

Calcasieu,  Calcasieu  Parish,  La.  This  country  is  very  remote  from  the 


404  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  ICbat.  XXVIL 

commands  of  Generals  Taylor  and  Sibley,  or  any  other  general  com- 
manding in  Louisiana.  It  is  all  important  that  these  depredations 

have  already  instructed  Captain  Hare,  commanding  the  cavalry 
squadrons,  to  keep  scouts  on  the  Louisiana  shore,  and  to  capture  all 
parties  of  Federal  depredators  upon  or  landing  upon  the  coast. 

1 I understand  that  Northern  Louisiana  has  recently  been  added  to  the 
command  of  the  major-general  commanding  the  District  of  Texas,  &c., 
if  To  I hereby  make  application  that  Calcasieu  Parish,  Louisiana,  be 
added;  and  constitute  a part  of  the  Eastern  Sub-District  of  Texas,  and 
that  my  command  be  extended  over  the  same. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully  GRIFFIN 

Lieut.  Col. , Comdg.  Texas  Vol.  Infty.,  Comdg.  Sabine  Pass , dec. 
Oapt.  A.  ST.  Miller,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


MAY  3,  1863. — Affair  at  Saint  Joseph’s  Island,  Tex. 

reports.* 


m 1. Col.  A.  M.  Hobby,  Eighth  Texas  Infantry. 

2 — Capt.  Benjamin  F.  Neal,  Eighth  Texas  Infantry. 
SJo.  3. — Capt.  E.  E.  Hobby,  Eighth  Tfexas  Infantry. 

NO.  1. 


Report  of  Col.  A.  M.  Hobby,  Eighth  Texas  Infantry. 

Hdqks.  Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  May  5, 1863. 
q™  • T have  the  honor  herewith  to  transmit  the  official  report  of 
Capts  'B.  F.  Neal  and  E.  E.  Hobby,  of  the  engagement  with  the  enemy 

°nT^TTeport^of8Capta<L°Hobby<fullytexplains  the  whole  affair,  ffis 

now  SiSdtaS? ft®  the 

^1  TThappy^^report  no  TaStaUiSTn ’outside.  ° “ ' 

I have  the^lionor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  youyobedient^nt, 

Colonel , Commanding  Post. 

Maj.  E.  F.  Gray,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


See  General  Orders,  No. 


66,  District  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Ariaona,  p.  1085. 


405 


Cmap.  XXVII.]  AFFAIR  AT  ST.  JOSEPHUS  ISLAND,  TEX. 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Gapt.  Benjamin  F.  Neal , Eighth  Texas  Infantry. 

Camp  Semmes,  May  5,  1863. 

Colonel  : The  enemy  landed  at  Saint  Joseph’s  Island  on  Sunday, 
at  2 o’clock  p.  m.,  and  were  immediately  attacked  by  Captain  Hobby’s 
command,  who  completely  routed  them,  killing  several  and  capturing 
5 prisoners  (the  second  captain  of  the  forecastle  and  4 sailors) ; also 
one  launch,  or  captain’s  gig,  and  six  Sharps  shooters.  The  prisoners  I 
send  down  to  you  in  charge  of  Lieutenant  Vineyard. 

The  details  of  the  fight  are  contained  in  Captain  Hobby’s  report, 
herewith  inclosed. 

It  was  quite  a brilliant  little  victory  achieved  by  Captain  Hobby, 
this  command,  and  too  much  praise  cannot  be  awarded  to  them  for 
their  gallant  exploit. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  NEAL, 

Captain , Commandinq . 

Col.  A.  M.  Hobby.  ’ y 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Gapt.  E.  E.  Hobby,  Eighth  Texas  Infantry. 

Saint  Joseph’s  Island,  May  4, 1863. 

Captain  : On  the  3d  inst.,  about  2 p.  m.,  I attacked  with  28  men  of 
my  company  three  Federal  launches,  containing  about  40  of  the  enemy, 
and  succeeded  in  capturing  one  launch  (captain’s  gig),  5 prisoners,  & 
new  superior  Sharps  rifles,  5 cartridge  boxes,  and  1 ammunition-chest. 

One  of  the  remaining  launches,  being  about  300  yards  from  the  shore, 
had  also  surrendered,  and  was  pulling  toward  us.  I ordered  the  fire  on 
it  to  cease,  and  the  men  to  secure  the  property  belonging  to  the  gig 
already  captured.  While  busily  engaged  in  this  the  bark  opened  fire 
upon  us  and  the  launch  began  to  pull  out  to  her.  We  again  fired  upon 
it,  doing  much  execution.  We  could  distinctly  see  the  men  in  the  launch 
drop  their  oars  and  fall  as  we  fired.  Several  bodies  were  also  seen 
floating  in  the  water.  One  of  the  launches  reached  the  bark  with  only 
2 men  in  it.  The  third  launch,  being  still  farther  out  in  the  Gulf,  pulled 
out  of  our  range  at  the  beginning  of  the  fight.  I do  not  think  I am  mis- 
taken in  estimating  the  loss  of  the  enemy  at  20  in  killed,  wounded,  and 
prisoners.  I cannot  too  highly  praise  the  conduct  of  the  men  on  this 
occasion  $ they  were  regardless  of  danger.  Their  enthusiasm  was  only 
equaled  by  their  bravery,  and  they  promptly  obeyed  every  command. 

The  captured  launch  was  carried  by  the  men  across  the  island  a dis- 
tance of  2 miles,  to  Aransas  Bay. 

On  the  night  of  the  3d  I removed  10  bales  of  cotton  which  had  been 
captured  by  the^nemy  and  placed  on  the  shore  of  Saint  Joseph’s  Island 
and  carefully  concealed  it,  where  it  now  awaits  transportation. 

Privates  Smith  and  Bell,  of  Captain  Brackenridge’s  cavalry,  accom- 
panied me  in  the  attack  upon  the  launches,  and  also  assisted  me  in  con- 
cealing the  cotton.  I am  happy  to  say  I have  no  casualties  to  report. 

I have,  captain,  the  honor  to  lie,  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  HOBBY, 

Gapt.,  Comdg.  Company  D,  Eighth  Texas  Volunteer  Infantry . 

Capt.  B.  F.  Neal. 


406 


w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chai-.  XXVTL 

MAY  9-18,  1863.— Operations  on  the  Amite  River  and  Jackson  Railroad, 
with  skirmishes  at  Ponchatoula,  Independence  Station,  and  Tickfaw 
Bridge,  La. 

reports. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Col.  A.  R.  Witt,  Tenth  Arkansas  Infantry. 

No.  3.— Col.  John  L.  Logan,  Eleventh  Arkansas  Infantry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Defenses  of  New  Orleans^ 

Sir  • On  the  12th  instant  I threw  out  General  Nickerson  with  two 
regiments  upon  the  Amite  River,  together  with  five  companies  of  Lex  as 
cavalry  under  Colonel  Davis.  General  Nickerson,  remaining  on  and 
in  th/ vicinity  of  the  Amite,  was  directed  to  throw  Davis  cavahy 
noon  the  Jackson  Railroad  and  meet  the  two  regiments  of  infantry 
under  Colonel  Clark,  Sixth  Michigan  (Sixth  Michigan  and  One  hun- 
dred and  twenty-eighth  New  York),  which  had  in  the  mean  time  been 

thrown  across  Manchac  Pass.  . , 

As  Colonel  Davis’  report  has  not  yet  been  received  I will  m>w .state 
only  a synopsis  of  the  results.  The  Jacksou  road  has  been  effectually 
broken  up  as  high  as  Camp  Moore;  all  depots  and  railroad  stations 
destroyed  up  to  that  point ; the  large  car  manufactory  near  ^depend- 
ence with  its  contents,  consisting  of  eight  cars,  a number  of  u“®“lfthed 
gun-carriages,  &c.,  destroyed;  the  Confederate  shoe  factory  and  tan- 

“^everal  skirmilhes  loTplace  with  the  rebels  at  Ponchatoula  and 

Independence,  which  resulted  in  1 man  killed  “^  f ^ai^Codirai^of 
• P of  the  rebel  10  to  15 killed,  among  whom  Captain  Cochran,  oi 

tlufrebel  army?25  horses^  60  muskets,  and  1 lieutenant  and  43  prisoners 
captured.  The  prisoners  have  all  arrived  m this  city.  ..  f 

Oeneral  Nickerson  has  captured  in  the  Amite  a large  quantity 
lumber  and ^ome  cotton,  anda  large  number  of  Confederate  soldiers 
deserters  and  furloughed,  whom  he  informs  me  he  has  parole  . The 
people  Ire  rapidly  tilling  the  oath  of  allegiance  and  admit  that  the 

S7hVc\valr  yCIturn^oliie  Amite  to-day,  and  ColonelClarkwinrecross 
the  Pass  to-morrow.  General  Nickerson  I propose  to  maintain  m h 
position  until  the  property  he  has  collected  there  can  be  removed 
iintil  he  mav  be  required  elsewhere.  Vessels  have  gone  iy>  for  it. 

As  soon  as  the  full  reports  have  been  received  they  will  be  forwarded. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^  gHERMAN, 

Brigadier- General , Comwan ding . 

Assistant  Adjutant-General, 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  trutf. 


407 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  OPERATIONS  ON  THE  AMITE  RIVER,  ETC. 

No.  2. 

Reports  of  Col.  A.  R.  Witt,  Tenth  Arkansas  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Olive  Branch, 

May  11,  1863 — 7.30  p.  m. 

General  : My  opinion  of  the  movement  of  the  enemy,  communicated 
in  the  above  dispatch  [see  inclosure],  is  merely  a feint  to  cover  the  re- 
treat of  Grierson  to  his  command  at  Port  Gibson  (Grant’s  army). 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  B.  WITT, 

Colonel , Commanding  Olive  Branch . 

General  Gardner. 

[Inclosure.] 

May  11,  1863. 

Golonel  Logan  : 

A regiment  of  infantry  and  about  500  cavalry  have  left  the  Amite  in 
the  direction  of  the  railroad,  doing  much  damage  to  the  citizens.  My  * 
information  is  from  Mr.  Graham,  a reliable  citizen.  I have  a small 
scout  east  of  the  river  ; will  send  another  to-night. 

S.  D.  BAMSEY, 

Captain , Commanding  Pickets  Amite  and  Comite. 


Headquarters  Olive  Branch, 

v May  12,  1863. 

Major  : Dispatches  from  outpost  pickets  report  that  the  enemy  has 
moved  out  one  regiment  of  negroes  for  the  purpose  of  rebuilding  the 
Montesano  Bridge. 

Later  dispatch : That  they  expected  to  move  across  the  bridge  on 
Bayou  Sara  road  last  night  or  early  this  morning.  The  pickets  report 
that  the  prevailing  opinion  is  that  we  have  evacuated  Port  Hudson  by 
our  not  replying  to  their  fleet. 

Inclosed  you  will  find  dispatch  from  picket  post  on  the  Amite  and 
Comite. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  B.  WITT, 

Colonel , Commanding  Olive  Branch. 

Maj.  T.  F.  Willson,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure.] 


Picket  Beserves  on  Amite  and  Comite, 

May  11,  1863 — 9 p.  m. 

Col.  J.  L.  Logan: 


Dear  Sir:  My  scout  has  just  returned  from  east  of  the  Amite,  who 
informs  me  that  they  went  as  low  as  Gaines’  Ferry,  and  that  there  was 
no  enemy  to  be  found  in  that  vicinity  and  heard  of  none  nearer  than 
Civique’s  Ferry,  where  they  are  in  force  on  the  south  bank  and  have  a 
large  raft  erected  in  the  river.  Heard  nothing  of  the  party  reported  to 
be  marching  to  the  railroad.  I am  of  opinion  Mr.  Long  has  been  misled 
by  an  enemy.  I will  send  a scout  to  Oivique’s  Ferry  early  to-morrow 
morning,  to  return  Wednesday.  All  quiet  on  my  lines. 

S.  D.  BAMSEY, 
Captain , Commanding  Pickets. 


408 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH 


No.  3. 

Reports  of  Col . John  L.  Logan , Eleventh  Arkansas  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Olive  Branch, 

May  11,  1863—10  a.  m. 

General:  I inclose  dispatch  from  Captain  Ramsey,  commanding 
pickets  on  the  Amite  and  Comite  Rivers,  stating  that  Yankees  had 
crossed  some  force  over  the  Amite.  I have  ordered  some  additional 
force  to  Captain  Ramsey,  and  directed  him  to  scout  the  country  and 
watch  the  movements  of  the  enemy.  If  the  enemy  have  crossed  and 
go  in  the  direction  of  Ponchatoula  he  might  very  easily  he  cut  off,  and  I 
should  like  to  do  it.  Nothing  from  Plank  or  Bayou  Sara  roads  this  morn- 
ing. Shall  keep  you  well  advised  of  any  movement  of  the  enemy. 
Colonel  Miles  has  just  arrived. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ B ’ JNO.  L.  LOGAN, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

[General  Gardner.] 


[Inclosure.] 


Picket  Reserve  on  Comite  and  Amite, 

May  10,  1863—11  p.  m. 

Colonel  Looan  : 

Dear  Sir  : Information  has  been  received  from  reliable  citizens  that 
about  500  Federal  cavalry  crossed  the  Amite  on  yesterday  at  Montgom- 
ery’s and  burned  his  premises  and  camped  last  night  at  Mr.  Womack’s, 
in  that  vicinity,  and  still  remain  on  the  east  side  of  the  river.  Numer- 


ous rumors ; unreliable. 


S.  D.  RAMSEY, 
Captain , Commanding  Pickets. 


p.  s. — My  scouts  report  that  a party  of  Yankees  were  across  the 
Amite,  gathering  cotton  and  stock.  My  force  is  too  weak  to  have  out 
a sufficient  scout.  All  quiet  on  the  Comite. 


Headquarters  Olive  Branch, 

May  11,  1863—11.30  a,  m. 

General  : I inclose  you  a dispatch  from  Captain  Terrell,  which  I have 
just  received.  The  enemy  are  building  rafts  and  flats  to  cross  the  Amite 
River.  They  have  infantry,  artillery,  and  cavalry. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  L.  LOGAN, 
Colonel , Commanding. 

[General  Gardner.] 


[Inclosure.] 

Williams’  Bridge,  La.,  May  11,  1863. 

Colonel  Logan  : 

One  of  my  scouts  has  returned  from  destroying  the  flat-boats,  an(^  I®' 
ports  that  the  enemy  were  in  force  at  Civique’s  Ferry,  reported  2,000 


BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


409 


Dhap.  xxvn.] 

strong,  and  making  a large  flat  for  the  purpose  of  crossing  the  river. 
The  impression  there  is  that  they  are  going  to  Ponchatoula,  and  dis- 
patches from  there  went  through  by  couriers  last  night  via  Clinton  to 
Port  Hudson.  The  non-commissioned  officer  could  not  destroy  one  of 
the  flats,  the  enemy  being  there.  But  the  officer  with  two  men  are 
waiting  behind  to  destroy  it  when  the  enemy  leave.  A citizen  informed 
me  that  the  river  was  fordable  in  many  places  down  there.  I do  not 
know  the  correctness  of  his  statement.  I am  sending  out  an  additional 
scout  below  this  morning.  I hope  to  get  additional  information  and 
keep  posted.  I have  ordered  in  the  two  extra  couriers  at  Greensburg 
and  Camp  Moore. 

Respectfully,  &c.,  y ^ TERRELL, 

Captain. 


Headquarters  Williams’  Bridge, 

May  12, 1863—3  p.  m. 

General:  I concentrated  my  cavalry  force  as  much  as  possible, 
leaving  all  outposts  properly  guarded,  making  in  all  about  300  effective; 
and  with  the  cavalry  and  a section  of  Roberts  battery  marched  to  this 
place  last  night,  arriving  at  3 o’clock  this  morning,  tor  the  purpose  ot 
cutting  off  the  enemy’s  cavalry  or  striking  him  a blow  in  any  direction 

that  might  present  itself.  . . , . 

Since  my  arrival  I find  that  Captain  Terrell,  commanding  pickets  at 
this  place,  has  been  furnishing  information  not  reliable,  based  entirely 
upon  rumor.  My  scouts  report  that  the  enemy’s  cavalry  are  not  nor 
never  have  been  making  any  demonstrations  indicating  an  advance  up 
the  Amite  River,  as  stated  in  Captain  Terrell’s  dispatches.  I will  there- 
fore return  with  the  command  to-night  to  Olive  Branch. 

All  the  information  I can  obtain  of  the  enemy’s  advance  in  the  direc- 
tion  of  Ponchatoula  is  that  they  have  some  kind  of  a command  at 
Oivique’s  Perry,  and  are  building  a flat  or  raft,  supposed  to  be  tor  the 
purpose  of  crossing  the  river. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JHO.  L.  LOGAN, 
Colonel , Commanding . 

[General  Gardner.; 


MAY  13,  1863. — Reconnaissance  from  Baton  Rouge,  La. 

Report  of  Col.  N.  A.  M.  Dudley , Thirtieth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Camp  on  MerritVs  Plantation , May  13,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report,  giving  a 
detailed  account  of  the  movements  of  the  troops  of  this  command  to- 
day, in  compliance  with  instructions  from  the  major-general  commanding 

at  Baton  Rouge : _ _ T11.  ■ 

Col.  B.  H.  Grierson,  commanding  the  Sixth  and  Seventh  Illinois 
Cavalry,  started  with  his  command  from  camp  at  this  point  at  5 o clock 
this  morning,  followed  by  the  Second  Louisiana  Volunteers,  four  pieces 
of  Arnold’s  battery,  Colonel  Paine ; Thirtieth  Massachusetts  v olunteers, 


410 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTL 


Col.  William  W.  Bullock;  One  hundred  and  sixty -first  New  York  Volun- 
teers,  Colonel  Harrower;  six  companies  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventy- 
fourth  New  York  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gott,  and  Captain 
Godfrey’s  company  of  cavalry,  and  followed  up  the  Bayou  Sara  road 
toward  Newport;  stationed  on  the  route  at  the  several  cross-roads  lead- 
ing toward  the  Springfield  Landing  and  Port  Hudson  roads  strong 
parties  to  hold  in  check  any  force  that  might  attempt  to  get  in  our 
rear,  leaving  all  baggage,  forage,  and  supplies  in  camp,  guarded  by  four 
companies  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventy-fourth  New  York  Volun- 
teers. 

The  column  proceeded  unmolested  until  the  advance  came  to  the 
opening  of  the  plains,  about  1 mile  west  of  the  road  running  from  Clin- 
ton plank  road  to  Port  Hudson,  when  a brisk  skirmish  was  commenced 
between  Colonel  Grierson’s  advance  guard  and  a body  of  the  enemy’s 
cavalry  full  400  strong.  This  was  kept  up  for  a distance  of  nearly  4 miles 
at  long  range.  On  reaching  the  cross-roads  of  the  main  Port  Hudson 
road  information  was  obtained  that  a body  of  900  infantry  and  two  12- 
pounder  batteries  crossed  from  the  Clinton  plank  road  over  the  Bed  wood 
Toad  last  night  and  took  position  about  a quarter  of  a mile  from  the 
intersection  of  the  main  Port  Hudson  road  with  the  Bayou  Sara  road. 
Colonel  Grierson  sent  a battalion  of  his  command  up  the  road,  which 
was  very  strongly  picketed,  which,  with  other  observations  and  in- 
formation gained,  he  felt  assured  was  strongly  supported.  This  picket 
was  gallantly  driven  in  four  several  times  by  the  Illinois  cavalry.  The 
last  time  reserves  and  all  fell  back  to  a point  within  2J  miles  of  Port 
Hudson,  when  they  moved  off,  taking  a northeasterly  direction,  ap- 
parently for  the  purpose  of  getting  in  front  of  the  main  column. 

While  Colonel  Grierson  was  cautiously  feeling  his  way  through  the 
pickets  of  the  enemy  the  infantry  were  being  posted  on  the  numerous 
cross-roads  leading  both  to  Port  Hudson  and  Clinton  plank  road.  Two 
companies  of  the  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Capt.  H.  C.  Forbes,  were  sta- 
tioned to  watch  the  main  Port  Hudson  road,  while  the  balance  of  the 
cavalry  pushed  forward  toward  the  railroad,  constantly  skirmishing, 
driving  the  enemy’s  pickets  before  them. 

Captain  Forbes  obtained  information  from  reliable  parties  that  a large 
force  had  left  Port  Hudson  to  intercept  this  command  on  its  march.  It 
probably  went  to  the  Clinton  plank  road,  as  all  parties  seemed  to  have 
received  an  idea  that  a large  Federal  force  was  on  that  road. 

The  enemy  was  constantly  in  sight  of  Captain  Forbes’  party  during 
the  time  Colonel  Grierson  was  moving  to  the  front.  When  the  advance 
was  within  half  a mile  of  the  railroad  Colonel  Grierson  received  your 
communication,  and  knowing  that  I did  not  consider  it  proper  to  move 
my  small  infantry  force  farther  to  the  front  than  the  first  cross-roads 
on  the  plains  which  I then  occupied,  he  halted  his  main  force,  and  sent 
a company  forward  to  the  railroad  with  instructions  to  do  all  the  dam- 
age possible  to  the  tracks.  Captain  Pierce,  Company  A,  Sixth  Illinois 
Cavalry,  was  in  command  of  this  party,  and  most  admirably  did  he  and 
his  men  acquit  themselves  of  the  arduous  duty  assigned  them.  In  sight 
of  a large  force  of  the  enemy  on  each  of  his  flanks,  the  one  on  the  Port 
Hudson  side  supported  by  artillery,  he  succeeded  in  destroying  300 
yards  of  the  road  and  cut  the  Clinton  telegraph  wire  in  several  places. 
After  having  accomplished  this  Captain  Pierce  joined  the  balance  of  the 
command. 

On  the  return  march  Colonel  Grierson  discovered  a heard  of  200  beef 
cattle  grazing  off  the  road,  guarded  by  a considerable  cavalry  force  of 
the  enemy.  He  charged  on  the  party,  dispersed  them,  and  succeeded 


up.  XXVII.] 


BATON  ROUGE,  LA. 


411 


driving  the  whole  number  into  camp.  This  evening  near  this  point 
, burned  the  camp  of  a cavalry  regiment,  destroying  all  their  tents, 
mp  and  garrison  equipage,  together  with  a large  amount  of  corn 
eal.  At  this  place  a considerable  mail  was  captured.  On  reaching 
e i unction  of  the  main  Port  Hudson  road,  returning,  they  again  were 
et  by  a large  cavalry  force,  and  for  some  time  forced  to  keep  up  a 
iarp  skirmish,  which  resulted  in  killing  3 of  the  enemy  and  wounding 
large  number,  most  fortunately  without  any  loss  on  the  part  of  the 
bvalry.  The  appearance  of  this  large  force  so  suddenly  in  their  midst 
>eined  to  create  a perfect  panic.  They  invariably  fled  on  the  first  fire 

? the  Illinoisians.  , ... 

Having  carried  out  my  instructions  as  fully  as  possible  with  the  force 
ader  my  command  I retraced  my  march,  reaching  camp  about  3 o’clock 

There  are  no  less  than  seven  or  eight  roads  practicable  for  infantry 
ad  cavalry  between  Alexander’s  plantation  and  the  main  Port  Hudson 
)ad  running  from  the  Springfield  Landing  road  to  tbe  Bayou  Sara 
)ad  Bach  of  these  roads  had  to  be  strongly  guarded,  which  reduced 
iy  infantry  force  so  much  that  I did  not  consider  it  prudent  to  advance 
eyond  the  first  cross-roads  on  the  plains,  which  is  within  4 miles  of 
ort  Hudson.  From  information  obtained  from  contrabands  I had  to 
ike  precaution  against  parties  coming  across  from  the  Clinton  road  as 

ell  as  on  the  other  flank.  „ . „ , ,. 

Neither  Colonel  Grierson  nor  myself  have  full  information  as  to  the 
fcrength  or  character  of  the  forces  on  the  Clinton  road;  and  as  the  com- 
i aiiding  officer  directed  in  his  communication  of  this  morning  that 
e should  accomjdish  this  object,  I respectfully  request  that  I may  be 
irnished  instructions  whether  I shall  return  to  Baton  Bouge  with  my 
rhole  command,  including  the  forces  now  stationed  at  VThite’s  Bayou, 
n the  Clinton  road,  or  proceed  to  the  Clinton  road  in  furtherance  of 
fie  instructions  in  letter  to  Colonel  Grierson  of  this  morning. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  referring  to  the  good  conduct  of 
fie  several  infantry  regiments  of  the  command. 

Compelled  to  march  through  the  heat  of  the  day  over  the  most  dusty 
oads  it  has  ever  been  my  fortune  to  travel,  the  dust  ground  to  a powder 
y the  travel  of  nearly  1,000  horses,  they  have  kept  closed  up,  at  the 
all  of  a bugle  promptly  fell  in,  and  with  alacrity  and  good-will  exe- 
uted  every  command  with  the  promptness  of  veteran  troops.  I am 
specially  indebted  to  Colonel  Paine,  Second  Louisiana  Volunteers,  who 
tas  aided  me  in  every  possible  way  in  forwarding  the  expedition.  Cap- 
aiu  Speed,  assistant  adjutant-general,  has  also  labored  hard  toward  the 
omp'letion  of  the  object  to  be  obtained,  and  well  deserves  my  thanks. 
Captain  Godfrey’s  company  has  been  in  the  saddle  constantly.  This 
oung  officer  seems  to  be  the  happiest  when  annoying  the  enemy  most. 
Vhile  waiting  the  return  of  the  Illinois  Cavalry  he  followed  up  the  Port 
Lidson  road,  drove  the  enemy’s  pickets  in  to  within  1J  miles  of  Port 
ludson,  went  down  the  Springfield  Landing  road  west  side  of  the 
>ayou,  driving  all  the  pickets  oft  the  road,  and  returned  by  the  cross- 
oad  opposite  the  church.  This  evening  he  made  a scout  toward  the 
Mississippi  Elver  as  far  as  the  bottom,  stampeded  two  pickets,  and  cap- 
ured  the  arms  and  complete  equipments  of  4 men. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ [N.  A.  M.  DUDLEY,] 

Colonel  and  Acting  Brigadier- General,  Comdg.  Expedition. 

Captain  Halsted,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


412 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX,,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVI! 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ORDERS,  AND  RETURNS  RELATING  T 
OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  FLORIDA,  SOUTHERN  ALABAMA 
SOUTHERN  MISSISSIPPI,  AND  LOUISIANA  PROM  MAT  1' 
1862,  TO  MAY  14,  1863;  AND  IN  TEXAS,  NEW  MEXICO,  AN 
ARIZONA  PROM  SEPTEMBER  20,  1862,  TO  MAY  14,  1863 


UNION  CORRESIPONEEIISrCH:,  ETC. 

Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts,  Exec.  Dept., 

Boston , November  27,  1861.* 

Capt.  G.  V.  Fox, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Navy : 

Sir:  I wish  to  call  your  especial  attention  to  a subject  which  hi 
been  pressed  upon  my  notice  by  some  of  our  most  practical,  experience 
and  influential  business  men,  and  which  I cannot  but  regard  with  muc 
favor.  It  is  that  the  Federal  Government  should  make  its  next  demoi 
stration  upon  the  coast  of  Texas,  the  State  easiest  to  take  and  hold,  wit 
larger  public  consequences  dependent  upon  such  action  than  any  othei 
Texas  we  virtually  bought;  her  rebellion  makes  her  a dependency  fc 
treatment  under  the  war  power  and  through  Congress. 

The  force  when  landed  should  proclaim  martial  law,  with  referenc, 
to  the  future  action  of  Congress,  when  the  proper  time  arrives  to  fre 
all  the  slaves,  compensating  loyal  owners  if  necessary. 


RESULTS. 


i 


1st.  We  flank  the  whole  rebellion. 

2d.  We  open  a way  out  tor  cotton. 

3d.  We  cut  off  future  annexations  in  the  interest  of  the  rebels,  an' 
demonstrate  to  foreign  powers  that  this  war  is  to  stop  the  spread  c 
slavery. 

4th.  Instead  of  loyal  men  leaving  Texas,  as  they  are  now  doing,  fc 
California  and  elsewhere,  they  will  remain,  and  in  a few  years  will  fi 
Texas  with  a European  emigration,  which  will  demonstrate,  as  the  Gei 
mans  of  Texas  are  now  doing,  that  cotton  can  be  raised  without  slaves 
though  hired  negroes  may  also  be  used. 

5th.  Galveston  is  but  600  miles  from  Lawrence  and  Saint  Joseph,  am 
a railroad  will  be  run  through  Texas  and  Arkansas  to  those  places,  am 
the  question  of  conflict  of  systems  of  labor  and  political  power  will  b 
settled  forever,  leaving  the  question  of  slavery  in  the  cotton  States  fo* 
philosophical  treatment,  unless  it  becomes  necessary  to  settle  it  unde 
the  war  power  before  the  present  war  is  ended. 

These  points  are  urged,  not  in  the  interest  of  Abolitionists,  but  b; 
leading  commercial  men  and  capitalists,  as  fairly  comingunder  the  neces 
sities  and  rules  of  war.  Martial  law  proclaimed,  events  will  no  doub 
educate  the  people  and  the  next  Congress  to  a wise  solution  of  all  ques 
tions  which  may  afterward  arise  in  connection  with  slaves  and  slaver;1 
in  an  exceptional  State  or  dependency  like  Texas. 

By  such  seizure  and  treatment  of  Texas  as  is  briefly  indicated  abov»> 
it  is  urged  that  we  shall  have  at  the  end  of  the  war  material  guaran 
tees  that  will  prevent  any  such  compromise  or  settlement  as  to  make  s 
renewal  of  the  struggle  for  ascendency  or  another  rebellion  possible. 


* Original  received  too  late  for  publication  in  Series  I,  Vol.  VI. 


ap.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


413 


Please  excuse  this  inroad  upon  your  time,  and  give  to  the  subject  only 
ich  attention  as  you  think  its  intrinsic  importance  demands. 

Yours,  most  faithfully,  

’ ’ JOHN  A.  ANDREW. 


[Indorsement.] 


Governor  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
unication  of  the  27th  instant,  and  have  reason  to  believe  that  this 
’oject  has  already  received  great  attention. 

[G.  V.  FOX, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Navy.] 


Memorandum  for  Mr.  Fox.* 


January  28, 1862. 

Fort  Jackson  is  a bastioned  pentagon,  with  fronts  of  about  110  yards. 

; is  built  of  brick  and  is  in  good  condition.  Its  scarp  walls  are  22  feet 
[gh,  measured  from  the  offset  of  the  foundation,  which  is  pretty  nearly 
le  bottom  of  the  wet  ditch.  The  work  is  surrounded  by  a wet  ditch, 
hich  at  the  lowest  water  of  the  ditches  (the  ditch  water  fluctuates 
bout  16  inches,  standing  1 foot  higher  than  low  water  of  river  and 
bout  32  inches  lower  than  high  water  of  river,  which  rises  and  falls 
ere  5 feet)  is  6 feet  deep  in  the  middle  and  about  5 feet  at  foot  of  scarp 
all.  (There  is  no  counterscarp  wall,  the  wet  ditch  being  reveted 
ith  timber  just  up  to  the  edge  of  the  water,  from  where  the  earth 
.opes  less  than  45°.)  Thus  the  top  of  the  scarp  is  16  feet  above  sur- 
ice  of  water  in  ditch  at  low  water,  and  14  feet  8 inches  at  high  (ditch) 
ater.  The  ditches  are  flanked  by  a 24-pounder  howitzer  in  casemate  in 
ach  of  the  ten  flanks. 

Owing  to  the  fact  that  the  parapets  are  not  carried  around  the  flanks 
nd  faces  of  the  bastions  (for  fear  they  would  not  sustain  the  weight) 
aere  is  not  much  room  for  musketry  fire  on  the  flanks.  A half  dozen 
iflemen  might  be  stationed  behind  the  top  of  the  scarp,  probably,  of 
ach  flank. 

The  faces  of  the  bastions  may  be  lined  with  infantry,  as  the  bastions 
re  hollowed  out,  leaving  the  top  of  the  scarp  to  serve  as  parapet.  The 
acks  of  the  casemate  arches  interfere  very  much  with  this  arrangement 
long  the  flanks. 

The  two  curtains  bearing  on  the  river  are  casemated  for  eight  guns 
ach.  As  the  traverse  of  a casemate  gun  is  but  60°,  it  follows  there  is 
sector  of  12°  in  front  of  the  central  water  bastion  which  is  not  touched 
>y  casemate  fire. 

The  parapets  of  the  two  water  fronts  are  arranged  to  receive  twenty  - 
wo  channel-bearing  guns.  The  parapets  of  the  other  fronts  receive 
ixteen  more  barbette  guns,  a portion  of  which  bear  indirectly  upon  the 
hannel. 

The  three  land  fronts  of  the  work  are  covered  by  a glacis-coup6  with 
b covert  way,  having  places  of  arms  in  front  of  the  curtains.  The  two 
erminating  branches  of  this  covert  way  look  upon  the  channel,  and  are 
arranged  for  eight  or  nine  guns  in  each. 


* Referred  to  in  Barnard’s  letter,  Series  I,  Vol.  VI,  p.  684,  but  not  found  in  time  for 
•ublication  therewith. 


414  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.XXVH 

The  branches  of  the  covert  way  of  the  west  front  bear  well  upon  th< 
channel  above  the  fort,  and  are  arranged  to  receive  thirty-one  guns. 

To  increase  the  fire  down  the  and  in  passing,  an  external  bat 
tery  has  been  constructed,  communicating  with  the  covert  way  of  eas 
front.  The  earthwork  had  been  entirely  completed,  parapets  formed 
&c.,  but  at  the  time  it  went  into  rebel  possession  it  is  believed  thai 
neither  the  breast-height  walls  were  built  nor  the  gun  platforms  laid 
(This  work  has  probably  been  done  since.)  It  had  capacity  to  receive 
twenty-five  guns.  It  is  quite  likely  that  the  rebels  have  armed  this  bat 
tery. 

The  work  is  arranged  therefore  for  armament  as  follows  : 


Casemate  guns 1( 

Barbette  on  two  chaonel  beariDg  faces  of  main  work » . 

Barbette  on  two  extremities  of  glacis-coup^,  having  the  same  bearing  on  the  two 

faces .* 1’ 

Barbette  covert  way  of  west  front  (looking  up  the  channel) 31 

Barbette  exterior  battery 2i 

Total  channel-bearing  guns Ill 

Add  barbette  guns  on  other  fronts If 

Total  heavy  guns 127 


(The  ten  flanking  24-pounder  howitzers  are  not  included  in  this  sum- 
mary.) ( 

At  the  time  the  work  went  into  the  possession  of  the  rebels  there  were 
m it,  of  guns,  sixteen  32-pounder  guns,  twenty-six  24-pounder  guns, 
ten  24-pounder  flanking  howitzers  5 of  carriages,  fourteen  24-poundei 
casemate  carriages,  nine  24-pounder  flank-defense  howitzer  carriages, 
twelve  24-pounder  barbette  carriages. 

It  is  supposed  the  above  carriages  were  in  a very  bad  condition.  The 
sixteen  32-pounders  were  sent  there  to  go  into  the  casemates,  in  which 
24-pounders  had  been  mounted  twenty  years  ago. 

The  report  that  the  work  had  sunk  so  that  the  casemate  guns  would1 
not  fire  over  the  levees  is  one  of  those  canards  which  had  its  flight  long 
ago ; is  a specimen  of  what  reports  malice  or  credulity  will  originate  or 
entertain,  and  is  quite  on  a par  with  some  which  have  been  sanctioned 
by  high  authority,  that  certain  forts  would  fall  down  by  the  discharge 
of  their  artillery. 

When  I took  charge  of  this  work  in  1840  the  report  was  that  the 
whole  work  had  disappeared.  It  had  settled  probably  about  a foot. 
At  that  time  the  soles  of  the  embrasures  were,  say,  6 feet  above  low 
water  of  river  and  1 foot  above  high  water.  The  levee  in  front  (higher 
than  necessary)  was,  say,  1 foot  2 inches  higher  than  the  sole  of  the 
embrasure  (about  on  a level  with  the  muzzle  of  the  gun). 

I cut  out  the  embrasures  and  raised  them  1 foot.  The  work  has 
settled  very  little,  if  at  all,  since  then. 

The  muzzle,  or  rather  the  axis  of  a casemate  gun,  should  therefore  be 
1 foot  higher  than  the  top  of  the  levee,  and  by  cutting  away  1 foot  of 
the  levee  (which  may  be  safely  done  at  all  times)  there  would  be  2 feet 
difference  of  level. 

The  river  rises  and  falls  5 feet,  the  surface  being  7 feet  and  2 inches 
below  the  top  of  the  levee  at  low  and  high  water. 

Occasionally  the  river  falls  1 foot  lower  thau  ordinary  low  water  and 
rises  6 inches  higher  than  ordinary  high  water,  or  has  an  extreme  fluc- 
tuation of  6 feet  6 inches. 

The  glacis-coupe  is  surrounded  by  a wide  wet  ditch.  This  ditch  has 
but  little  over  3 feet  in  it  at  low  (ditch)  water,  and  its  bottom  is  firm 


HAP.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


415 


nough  to  bear  the  weight  of  a man  without  sinking  very  much.  Never- 
heless  it  adds  very  greatly  to  the  strength  of  the  work  against  assault. 

The  salient  of  the  north  bastion  is  about  140  yards  frqm  the  river 
iank,  and  say  110  yards  from  the  levee,  and  the  river  is  about  700  yards 
ride. 

In  the  center  of  Fort  Jackson  is  a defensive  barrack  of  decagonal 
bape.  It  is  intended  to  be  made  bomb-proof  by  covering  the  1-foot- 
quare  timbers  of  the  ceiling  with  earth.  Probably  the  rebel  garrison 
iave  done  this.  This  building  will  accommodate  400  or  500  men.  As 
here  is  besides  a great  deal  of  bomb-proof  shelter  in  the  casemates 
nd  galleries,  the  garrison  is  well  sheltered  from  a bombardment. 

FORT  SAINT  FHILIP. 

Fort*  Saint  Philip  was  partly  built  by  the  Spaniards  and  finished  to 
ts  present  outline  by  us  in  1812-’15.  It  is  very  irregular  in  figure.  It 
ccupies  a quadrilateral  space  of  about  150  by  100  yards. 

The  front  toward  the  river  (first  built)  had  a bastioned  trace ; the 
ither  portions  have  been  added  to  inclose  the  work  and  give  some 
emblance  to  flanking  arrangements.  The  brick  scarp  was  originally 
f slight  relief  and  imperfectly  founded ; was  found  in  very  bad  con  di- 
ion when  I took  charge  in  1841.  Under  my  charge  the  walls  were 
trengthened  by  relieving  arches,  an  additional  thickness  of  masonry 
;iven  to  them,  the  earthen  parapets  extended  all  around  the  work 
there  having  been  a mere  brick  wall  as  parapet  before),  and  the  wet 
[itch  deepened  so  as  to  have  6 feet  depth  at  lowest  water. 

It  may  be  stated,  in  a general  way,  that  the  scarp  wall  on  land  fronts 
Las  16  to  17  feet  height  (from  bottom  Of  ditch),  and  on  water  fronts  about 
4 or  15  feet.  The  part  of  the  ditch  next  the  scarp  walls  is  not  more 
han  2 or  3 feet  deep  at  low  water,  the  deepest  part  of  the  ditch  being 
generally  nearer  the  counterscarp.  (There  is  no  brick  counterscarp ; 
aerely  board  revetment,  as  at  Fort  Jackson.) 

It  was  intended  to  arrange  a low  glacis  with  covert  way  and  reveted 
>reast-height  wall  around  the  work,  but  I believe  this  has  not  been 
lone;  if  not,  one-half  of  the  height  of  the  scarps  would  be  seen  from 
ntside,  and  it  would  require  little  battering  to  bring  them  down. 
?here  is  a postern  and  draw-bridge  in  the  western  face  and  another 
Lear  the  most  northern  angle  of  the  works. 

Two  external  batteries  (earthen)  have  been  built  of  late  years  in  con- 
Lection  with  this  work,  having  wet  ditches  (6  feet  at  low  water),  having 
>arapets  20  feet  thick,  crest  19  feet  above  bottom  of  ditch,  which  is 
0 feet  wide  (at  bottom).  These  batteries  were  intended  for  twenty- 
wo  heavy  guns  each  on  water  faces  and  six  24-pounders  on  extremi- 
ies  and  rear. 

The  sketch  will  exhibit  the  bearing  of  these  batteries  and  their  con- 
lection  with  the  main  work.  It  will  also  exhibit  the  number  of  guns 
>f  the  two  forts  bearing  upon  any  one  point  of  the  river  within  their 
ange. 

The  main  work  of  Saint  Philip  is  arranged  to  receive,  say,  twenty 
leavy  guns,  bearing  directly  upon  the  channel,  besides  some  dozen  or 
aore  bearing  upon  the  land. 

This  armament  of  seventy-two  channel-bearing  guns  (fort  and  exter- 
lal  batteries)  is  all  en  barbette  and  very  low  at  that,  the  crests  (or 
ops)  of  the  parapets  being  but  14  feet  above  low  water  of  the  river 
j md  9 feet  above  ordinary  high  water. 

At  Fort  Jackson  there  are  but  sixteen  guns  in  casemate,  the  remain- 


416 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYH. 

ing  one  hundred  and  five  channel-bearing  guns  being  en  barbette . 
The  exterior  battery  (twenty-five  guns)  has  its  crest  (same  as  Saint 
Philip)  14  feet  above  low  water  of  river.  The  covert-way  batteries 
^ forty-eight  guns)  have  their"  crest  16  feet  above  low  water,  and  the 
erest  of  parapets  of  main  work  (twenty-eight  channel-bearing  guns)  is 
24  feet  above  low  water. 

The  two  works  mount  together  one  hundred  and  seventy-seven  chan- 
nel-bearing guns.  _x  _ 

Of  this  armament  there  was  in  Fort  Jackson  (as  before  stated)  when 
it  went  into  rebel  possession  sixteen  32-pounders  (without  carriages), 
twenty-six  24  pouuders,  with  fourteen  casemate  and  twelve  barbette  car- 
riages ; and  at  Saint  Philip  ten  24-pounders  with  carriages,  or  fifty-two 
guns  in  all  of  not  very  formidable  caliber. 

Whether  they  have  supplied  the  full  armament  or  not  I cannot  judge. 
There  were  in  the  Baton  Rouge  Arsenal  forty  32-pounders  and  three 
8-inch  columbiads,  which,  if  allsent  to  these  works,  would  leave  eighty- 
two  still  to  be  supplied.  . 

Except  Baton  Rouge,  the  Norfolk  navy-yard,  and  their  own  foundenes 
have  been  their  sources,  and  as  it  is  likely  their  founderies  have  been 
mainly  taken  up  with  casting  field  guns,  it  is  probable  that  Norfolk  has 
been  the  source  from  which  forts  have  been  supplied. 

It  is  probable,  therefore,  that,  as  at  Port  Royal  and  Hatteras,  the 
armament,  if  completed,  will  contain  few  guns  over  32-pounders. 

Such  an  armament,  as  much  experience  has  shown,  is  not  very  for- 
midable to  vessels  of  war  or  regular  war  steamers,  unless  through  the 
agency  of  hot  shot  (and  there  are  furnaces  for  nearly  all  the  batteries 
at  both  forts).  Still,  it  is  not  a trifling  undertaking  to  pass  so  large  a 
number  of  guns  at  such  close  quarters.  (Fort  Saint  Philip  is  about  700 
yards  higher  up  the  river  than  Fort  Jackson;  the  distance  between  the 
nearest  salients  of  the  main  works  is  about  1,000  yards.)  From  a point 
in  the  river  l\  miles  from  the  lowest  battery  of  Fort  Jackson  to  another 
H miles  above  the  nearest  upward-bearing  batteries  we  shall  find  a dis- 
tance of  3J  miles  to  be  traversed,  2 miles  of  which  under  the  fire  of 
from  100  to  125  guns,  and  the  other  1£  miles  under  that  of  from  50  to 
100.  Now,  against  the  current  of  the  river  this  distance  will  not  be  per- 
formed by  the  majority  of  steamers  of  a squadron  in  less  than  twenty- 
five  minutes  or  a half  hour.  With  hot  shot  thrown  by  this  armament, 
even  though  but  24  and  32  pounders,  I should  look  upon  the  daylight 
passage  as  too  hazardous  to  be  undertaken.  The  lowness  of  their  bar- 
bette batteries  is  a favorable  circumstance.  At  any  time  between  now 
and  next  August  our  fleet  would  find  the  river  pretty  well  up.  The 
river  is  not  apt  to  be  much  above  low  water  in  February,  but  a rapid 
rise  usually  commences  about  the  1st  March  and  the  river  keeps  up  till 
August,  and  the  decks  of  our  large  steam  frigates  would  command  most 
of  these  batteries,  within  200  or  250  yards  of  which  they  could  be  laid. 
But  to  get  such  positions  the  vessels  would  have  to  endure  1 J or  2 miles 

fire  (raking)  of  100  guns.  , „ , 

Such  an  attempt  should  be  made  at  night,  when  the  distant  fire  must 

be  very  uncertain.  , n 

From  two  to  four  or  more  vessels  for  each  fort,  armed  with  J or  li 
inch  guns,  laid  alongside  of  Fort  Jackson,  and  firing  spherical  case  or 
canister  (the  latter  probably  preferable),  would,  I should  think,  make 
all  these  batteries  untenable,  even  those  of  the  casemates.  Here  is  a 
place  where  armor-clad  vessels  become  particularly  applicable. 

Should  any  obstructions  (such  as  rafts)  be  anchored  in  the  river  (diffi- 
cult, I think,  to  maintain  in  the  high,  or  even  moderately  high,  stages) 


CnAr.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  417 

tlie  forcing  a passage  would  become  almost  impracticable.  Here  again 
iron-clad  vessels  would  be  very  useful  for  reconnoitering  or  destroying 
rafts. 

Would  it  be  prudent,  however,  supposing  these  works  to  be  at  all 
formidably  armed,  to  force  a passage,  leaving  them  behind  intact,  while 
the  fleet  advanced  on  New  Orleans?  I think  not,  unless  perchance  in 
conjunction  with  an  attack  to  be  made  on  the  city  by  a large  land  force 
from  Lake  Borgne  or  Pontchartrain;  but  it  is  as  hard  to  get  a land  force 
from  these  lakes  as  to  take  Ports  Jackson  and  Philip.  A fleet  cannot 
maintain  itself  long  above  those  works  unless  the  city  of  New  Orleans 
is  captured  and  held  by  us.  If  it  should  meet  with  damage  in  passing 
and  serious  reverses  higher  up,  it  would  have  to  pass  the  gauntlet  again 
in  retiring  and  our  loss  become  very  great. 

On  the  other  hand,  to  take  these  works  is  to  open  the  navigation  of 
the  river  up  to  Memphis  to  us  and  to  lay  open  the  whole  country  (as 
well  as  to  take  New  Orleans)  to  the  enterprises  of  our  fleets. 

It  is  the  key  to  all  the  rest,  and  I believe  it  is  an  undertaking  which 
requires  as  little  risk,  as  small  an  outfit,  as  any  there  can  be  designed 
in  this  quarter. 

Before  indicating  how  I would  operate  against  these  works  I will 
make  a few  remarks  about  the  topography.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that 
with  all  the  surveys  we  have  made  and  the  length  of  time  our  officers 
(myself  among  others)  have  been  connected  with  this  place  we  have 
such  uncertain  information  as  to  the  exact  character  of  the  ground  sur- 
rounding these  works.  I state  the  character  to  the  best  of  my  ability. 
The  river  banks  everywhere,  even  down  to  the  mouth,  I believe,  furnish 
a margin  of  firm  ground,  only  overflowed  in  the  higher  stages  of  the 
river.  (Unfortunately  during  the  months  of  March,  April,  May,  and  June 
we  are  certain  to  find  the  river  pretty  well  up  to  high-water  stage.) 
This  strip  of  firm  ground  from  Fort  Jackson  down  for  about  a mile  is 
from  300  to  400  yards,  and  except  where  cleared,  to  open  the  fire  of  the 
guns,  is  wooded  with  cottonwood  and  willow,  the  latter  perhaps  from  1 
to  2 feet  diameter. 

Extending  450  or  500  yards  below  Fort  Jackson  is  old  levee  (made 
at  the  time  of  the  commencement  of  the  work),  having  a return  or  elbow 
running  back  to  the  swamp.  (See  large  map.)  This  return  is  near  400 
yards  long.  It  serves  to  protect  the  rear  of  the  fort  from  the  back- 
water of  overflow.  This  levee  was  repaired,  I think,  under  ray  direc- 
tions. It  is  quite  likely  that  it  has  been  neglected  since,  and  that  there 
are  breaches  in  it,  but  these  could  be  easily  repaired,  and  the  levee 
would  keep  the  space  behind  pretty  dry,  even  at  high  water.  The  level 
of  the  natural  soil  about  Fort  Jackson  near  the  river  is,  say,  a little 
over  3 feet  above  ordinary  low  water.  The  ordinary  rise  of  river  is, 
say,  5 feet,  overtopping  the  banks,  say,  2 feet. 

The  fort  levee  proper  incloses  the  work  and  grounds  (see  map),  passing 
within  about  100  yards  of  the  northern  bastion  salient,  150  from  the 
two  eastern,  and  300  (about)  from  the  two  western  bastion  salients. 

Above  Fort  Jackson  the  high  ground  extends  farther  back  (say  one- 
halt  mile) ; is  leveed,  and  might  be  kept  dry  at  all  stages.  (If  an  attack 
on  these  works  was  feared  and  the  river  up  probably  all  the  levees 
would  be  cut,  but  they  are  easily,  rep  aired.) 

Next  above  Bayou  Denis  is  cleared  and  cultivated  ground,  and 
next  above  Bayou  des  Liards  is  the  Burnt  Settlement,  a hamlet  of 
neat  residences,  with  rice  fields  and  orange  groves. 

27  r r — yol  xy 


418 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL  * 


The  ground  immediately  around  Fort  Saint  Philip  is  as  high,  or  rather 
higher,  than  that  about  Fort  Jackson. 

There  is  quite  a large  triangular  space  of  high  ground  between  the 
river  and  Bayou  Mardi  Gras  (just  below  the  fort),  and  thence  extend- 
ing along  the  river  and  bayou  banks.  The  limit  of  hardest  ground 
passes  about  a hundred  yards  behind  the  rearmost  salient  of  the  fort. 

It  is  called  by  Lieutenant  Smith  (who  surveyed  it)  “practicable  for 
infantry,  cavalry,  or  artillery.”  For  several  hundred  yards  farthei 
back  indeed  the  ground  is  passable  for  footmen,  but  would  be  found 
pretty  soft  and  miry  in  wet  weather,  though  still  supporting  footmen. 

The  banks  of  the  Bayou  Mardi  Gras  are  pretty  high  and  firm  hah 
way  at  least  to  the  Gulf;  the  bayou  itself,  though  narrow,  has  10  to  It 
feet  water  in  it  except  over  its  bar.  Lime  Kiln  Bayou  has  much  the 
same  character.  The  external  waters  of  the  Gulf  are  shoal,  and  I pre- 
sume nothing  can  approach  the  mouths  of  these  bayous  except  boats 
With  these  preliminaries  I will  give  my  ideas  about  the  attack.  1 
should  consider  necessary,  first,  a powerful  fleet,  bearing  from  300  tc 
400  guns  (as  many  11  and  9 inch  guns  as  can  be  had).  Second,  hall 
a dozen  iron-clad  gunboats  (or  as  many  more  as  can  be  had).  Third 
10,000  troops.  (All  these  might  not  be  necessary  in  reducing  the  works, 
but  they  should  be  with  the  expedition,  to  take  immediate  advantage  oi 
its  success.) 


I should  hope  to  reduce  the  works  without  regular  siege  operations 
but  even  if  it  became  necessary  to  resort  to  them,  the  powerful  artillery 
of  the  fleet  would  make  a large  siege  train  unnecessary.  I should  judg( 
that  a dozen  24-pounder  siege  guns,  a dozen  10-inch  siege  mortars,  anc 
as  many  field  guns  (these  to  be  furnished  from  dismounted  batteries! 
attached  to  the  division  of  troops)  would  suffice,  and  the  fleet  shoulc 
be  acconqjanied  by  say  fifteen  or  twenty  mortar  vessels,  such  as  ar( 
now  being  equipped. 

The  difficulties  of  regular  approaches  against  these  works  and  the 
advantages  likely  to  be  derived  from  prompt  and  bold  measures,  whicl 
may  overwhelm  the  works  before  the  defenders  can  get  time  to  accus 
tom  themselves  to  a state  of  siege,  are  so  great  that  I shall  not  sugges 
as  a preliminary  attack  any  land  batteries.  Doubtless  if  it  was  in  th< 
mouth  of  November  or  December  it  would  be  an  important  step  to  lane 
troops  below,  surround  Fort  Jackson  by  skirmishers  (taking  advantage 
of  the  levees),  and  to  establish  batteries  enfilading  all  the  water  bat 
teries  of  this  work  bearing  across  and  down  the  river.  During  tin 
high-water  season  I doubt  the  practicability  of  this,  and  whether  practi 
cable  or  not,  believe  that  the  measure  would  not  justify  the  discourage 
ments  and  delays  arising. 

The  plan  I would  suggest  would  be  based  upon  the  fact  that  th< 
batteries  of  the  forts  are  all,  except  sixteen  guns  of  Fort  Jackson,  ei\ 
barbette;  that  they  are  all  very  low;  that  they  can  be  approached  t< 
within  200  yards,  and  moreover  that,  while  Fort  Jackson  is  a very  strong 
work,  Fort  Saint  Philip  is  comparatively  weak,  and  can  scarcely  be  con 
sidered  as  secure  against  a coup  de  main , and  that  Fort  Saint  Philip  onc< 
fallen  into  our  possession,  its  own  batteries  enfiladed  or  taken  in  reverse 
all  the  downstream-bearing  barbette  batteries  of  Fort  Jackson,  and  tha 
from  a point  200  or  300  yards  below  Fort  Saint  Philip  the  remaining 
barbette  batteries  of  Fort  Jackson  can  be  enfiladed  and  the  scarps  o 
the  two  water  fronts  breached.  From  a point  marked  G,  600  yards  fron 
the  uppermost  batteries  of  Fort  Jackson,  to  a point  marked  D,  600  fron 
the  lower-  batteries,  is  a distance  of  about  1,600  yards.  Along  this  lin< 
l presume  twelve  vessels  can  be  laid  without  danger  of  fouling;  and  i 


Chap.  XXVTL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


419 


they  averaged  ten  guns  to  a broadside  they  would  bring  one  hundred 
and  twenty  guns  to  bear  .on  the  fort,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  they  will 
enfilade  every  barbette  battery  and  take  most  of  them  in  reverse. 

The  nearest  vessels  will  be  about  200  yards  from  the  work. 

The  batteries  of  Saint  Philip  cannot  be  enveloped  and  enfiladed  as 
can  those  of  Fort  Jackson,  but  they  are  so  extremely  low  and  so  near 
the  shore  that  they  are  fearfully  exposed.  Eight  vessels  could  be  laid 
alongside,  the  most  remote  300  yards  from  the  extremes  of  the  two  ex- 
terior batteries,  the  central  ones  within  200  yards  of  the  parapets  of  the 
work. 

I should  not  attempt  to  put  all  these  vessels  in  position  at  once.  I 
should  select  for  the  Fort  Jackson  side  say  four  (iron-clad  if  possible), 
destined  for  position  from  A to  E.  Two  of  these  (iron -clad)  vessels 
should  be  posted  directly  in  front  of  the  two  curtains  of  the  water  fronts, 
to  contend  with  the  casemate  and  barbette  guns  above  them;  these 
vessels  should  have  11-inch  guns  and  fire  nothing  but  canister.  Three 
vessels  should  likewise  be  destined  to  take  positions  in  front  of  Fort 
Saint  Philip. 

The  operation  should  commence  in  the  night,  so  as  to  get  these  ves- 
sels in  position  just  before  daylight— the  vessels  destined  for  Saint 
Philip  to  creep  along  the  left  shore ; those  for  Fort  Jackson  along  the 
right  shore.  The  river  is  too  narrow,  the  current  too  strong,  for  ma- 
neuvering. The  vessels  once  in  positions  would  have  to  keep  them. 
They  should  be  of  such  a character  that  they  might  be  expected  to  do 
so,  from  the  number  of  their  guns  or  from  their  iron  protection.  (Ample 
top-mast  room  should  be  provided  and  filled  with  sharpshooters.) 
Those  on  the  Fort  Jackson  side  would  probably  have  to  make  fast  to  the 
shore;  those  on  Saint  Philip  side  might  anchor. 

At  early  dawn  the  rest  of  the  fleet  should  distribute  itself  along  the 
shores  as  indicated.  The  mortar  vessels  should  then  seek  the  most 
suitable  positions.  If  the  fleet  can  thus  silence  the  fire  of  the  forts 
once  it  can  keep  it  silenced,  and  it  should  take  advantage  of  its  cessa- 
tion to  fire  solid  shot  or  shells  to  injure  the  guns  and  walls.  (The  walls 
of  Saint  Philip  are,  notwithstanding  all  modern  repairs,  of  the  most 
wretched  character  and  much  exposed.)  It  is  likely  a more  or  less 
practicable  breach  could  be  made  in  front  from  the  vessels.  The  fire 
of  the  works  being  subdued,  part  of  the  transports  should  pass  up  and 
troops  be  landed  on  each  side  (taking  immediately  proper  precautions 
to  prevent  being  flooded  by  the  levees  being  cut  above),  and  the  two 
works  at  least  partially  invested  by  skirmishers,  to  whom  the  levees 
would  furnish  great  facilities. 

In  sketching  out  an  operation  of  this  character  it  is  useless  to  attempt 
to  mark  out  beforehand  that  which  must  take  its  shape  from  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  moment.  If  this  naval  operation  can  be  made  suc- 
cessful I can  conceive  the  possibility,  by  a prompt  display  of  land 
force  and  menace  of  assault,  of  obtaining  an  immediate  surrender  of 
Fort  Saint  Philip.  This  possibility  would  be  founded  upon  the  demor- 
alization produced  by  the  naval  assault — the  men  being  driven  from 
guns  and  unable  to  return  to  them,  large  numbers  killed  and  wounded. 
In  the  absence  of  any  bomb-proof  (or  fire-proof)  shelter,  a momentary 
refuge  for  a small  portion  of  the  garrison  might  be  found  under  the 
relieving  arches  of  the  land  fronts;  but  they  are  so  contracted,  so  wet 
and  close,  that  men  could  not  stay  in  them  long.  The  fact  is  that  the 
only  quarters  is  a very  large  pine  building,  which  would  probably  be 
fired  by  shells,  and  during  its  burning  make  the  service  of  guns  in  any 
part  of  the  main  work  impracticable. 


420 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  XXVH 


It  may  be  remarked  too  that  the  permanent  magazines  of  the  work  ( 
and  external  batteries  (the  only  masonry  and  bomb-proof  buildings 
there  are)  would  not  hold  more  than  700  or  S00  barrels  ot  powder 
stowed  in  bulk  (not  much  over  100  rounds  for  the  supposed  armament) ; 
that  there  are  no  filling  rooms,  &c.f  that  there  were  no  other  store, 
rooms  for  provisions  or  other  stores  than  the  wooden  building  men- 
tioned. , . . , , 

I can  conceive  it,  therefore,  possible  that  the  garrison  might  surren- 
der merely  from  the  effects  of  the  cannonade,  accompanied  with  prep- 
arations for  landing  and  assault. 

Should  it  not  do  so  the  landing  must  be  made,  and  we  may  rely  upon 
the  investment  and  continued  cannonade  or  we  may  assault. 

A light  field  gun  would  destroy  the  draw-bridge  and  gates  on  the 
southwest  front,  and  then,  skirmishers  being  advanced  to  keep  down  j 
any  fire  from  the  parapets,  a few  planks  thrown  over  the  draw-bridge 

gap  would  complete  a bridge.  , „ . x . | 

In  previous  pages  I stated  that  the  ditches  had  6 feet  of  water  m them  ; 
so  they  had,  but  I am  told  by  Lieutenant  Weitzel  that  they  have  since  i 
filled  up  very  much;  that  there  is  not  more  than  4 feet  now.  j 

miiaxr  aw  narrow,  varvinsr  from  30  to  40  feet.  A few  guns  irom  land  \ 


| | | ^ y y ^ j p %J(aJ  % J 1 I ^ A L kj  ^ W X*  kj  xvjj.  w v/  / _ 

establish  on  the  river  banks  below,  would  enfilade  every  barbette  bat- 
tery of  Fort  Jackson,  and  breach  the  curtain  and  flanks  ot  the  two  J 
water  fronts;  our  mortar  vessels  would  shower  shells  upon  it,  and  our 
fleet  and  land  forces  would  cut  off  all  supplies.  (This  work,  like  bamt 
Philip,  had  not  magazine  room  enough  for  more  than  100  rounds  ot 
powder  in  barrels,  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  room  m other  case- 

mates  without  destroying  their  efficiency  as  gun-rooms.) 

By  one  means  or  another  the  work  must  soon  surrender,  and  with 
its  surrender  New  Orleans  and  Louisiana  fall,  the  valley  ot  the  Missis- 
sippi is  conquered.  , . ..  , nA 

1 took  up  this  subject  not  foreseeing  the  conclusions  it  would  lead} 
to  in  mv  mind.  If  those  conclusions  are  correct,  there  is  no  operation 
the  Government  can  undertake  which  promises  so  important  results. 
And,  moreover,  these  results  cannot  be  fully  obtained  without  this 

^Toreach  New  Orleans  from  Saint  Louis  implies  the  conquest  of  the 
whole  valley  down,  or,  in  other  words,  it  implies  almost  the  complete 
triumph  of  our  arms  everywhere.  ...  _ 0„nll 

To  capture  New  Orleans  from  the  mouths  is,  without  waiting  any  suck 
problematical  result,  to  take  a great  stride  toward  obtaining  complete 


tW  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION, 


421 


The  operation  against  the  forts  is  recommended  by  the  probability 
that  it  is  not  likely  they  have  expected  an  attempt  of  this  kind. 

The  prevailing  idea  with  the  defenders  probably  has  been  and  is  to 
prevent  the  passage  of  vessels,  not  so  much  to  defend  themselves. 

In  this  project  everything  depends  on  the  success  of  the  naval  part  of 
the  plan.  Can  the  Navy  do  what  I assign  to  it?  If  not,  with  actual 
means  can  it  by  special  preparations  which  will  not  occupy  more  than 
a couple  of  months? 

What  has  been  done  to  these  works  by  the  Confederates  is  not  known 
to  me,  but  I should  think  that  the  blockading  fleet  might  ascertain  with 
much  certainty. 

Should  there  appear  to  be  anything  in  this  memoir  worthy  of  being 
acted  upon  I should  desire  its  submission  to  the  general-in-chief  and  to 
General  Totten,  Chief  Engineer  U.  S.  Army,  whose  thorough  acquaint 
aiice  with  these  works  and  great  experience  would  make  his  counsel 
very  desirable. 

If  the  attack  is  determined  upon  it  would  be  desirable,  if  possible,  to 
avoid  any  retarding  preparations,  but  to  collect  the  squadron  and  land 
force  at  once  from  means  now  available. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

J.  G.  BARNARD, 

Brigadier -General,  and  Chief  Engineer  Army  of  Potomac. 


P.  S. — Two  sheets  of  drawings  accompany  this  paper,  copied  from 
maps  in  the  archives  of  the  Engineer  Department.* 

Whenever  the  use  ceases  these  and  whatever  copies  may  be  taken 
should  be  returned  by  whomsoever  possesses  them  to  the  Engineer  De- 
partment. 

N.  B. — The  operations  indicated  in  this  memoir  should  be  preceded 
by  a bombardment  from  the  water  vessels  and  11  and  9 inch  guns 
mainly  upon  Fort  Jackson.  It  should  be  kept  up  twenty-four  hours  (if 
the  work  does  not  surrender  before  that  time,  which  it  is  quite  likely 
to  do)  without  intermission. 

J.  G.  BARNARD. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  37.  f JSTew  Orleans , May  13,  1862. 

It  appearing  that  the  New  Orleans  Crescent,  a newspaper  published 
n this  city,  is  owned  and  edited  by  J.  O.  Nixon,  a rebel  now  in  arms 
igainst  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  the  commanding  general 
)t  this  department  orders  that  the  publication  of  that  newspaper  be 
suppressed,  and  that  no  publication  by  pamphlet,  handbill,  or  other- 
vise,  in  any  form  whatever,  shall  be  made  from  said  office  after  the 
iromulgation  of  this  order. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

^ No.  39.  f [May  13,  1862.] 

^ The  New  Orleans  Bee  newspaper,  having  published  an  elaborate 

* Not  found. 


422 


W.  ]?LA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  Miss.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

though argument  in  favor  of  the  cotton-burning  mob,  is  hereby 

suppressed.  No  publication  of  any  description  will  issue  from  that 
office  until  further  orders.  j 

II.  The  New  Orleans  Delta  newspaper,  having  in  an  article  ot  to-day  s 
issue  discussed  the  cotton  question  in  a manner  which  violates  the  terms 
of  the  proclamation  of  1st  of  May  instant  from  these  headquarters, 
the  office  of  that  paper  will  be  taken  possession  ot  and  its  business 
conducted  under  the  direction  of  the  United  States  authorities. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler:  ^ q STRONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , May  16,  1862. 


Hon. 


E.  Mn  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sie:  Since  my  dispatch- of  May  8*  I received  information  that  a 
large  amount  of  specie  was  concealed  in  the  liquor  store  of  one  Am. 
Couturee,  who  claims  to  be  consul  for  the  Netherlands.! 


The  necessity  having  now  passed  which  led  me  to  allow  the  tempo- 
rary use  of  Confederate  notes,  I have  ordered  them  suppressed  in  ten 
days  from  to-day.  Please  see  General  Orders,  No.  29,  to  that  effect.  1 
beg  leave  to  call  your  attention  to  the  subject  of  opening  the  port  of 
New  Orleans.  No  measure  could  tend  more  to  change  the  entire  reel- 
ings and  relations  of  the  people  here  than  this.  If  not  opened  to  tor- 


1 


eign  ships  and  ports,  why  not  with  the  Northern  ports  f Have  we  not  a 
right  as  against  aliens  to  carry  our  own  products  from  one  part  ot  our 

own  country  to  the  other  ? . „ 

Nothing  has  tended  so  much  to  the  quiet  acquiescence  ot  the  well- 
disposed  people  here  to  the  rule  of  the  United  States  as  the  opening, 
which  I have  done,  of  postal  facilities  North  and  with  Europe,  under 
proper  restrictions.  It  was  a measure  which  seemed  to  me  so  essential 
and  so  relieved  the  mercantile  portion  of  the  community  that  1 have 
allowed  it,  and  shall  so  do  until  further  orders  from  the  Department. 

Upon  the  same  ground  I have  the  honor  to  urge  the  opening  ot  the 
port  of  New  Orleans  at  least  to  the  limited  extent  above  mentioned. 
As  a question  of  the  supply  of  food  it  is  vital.  A different  state  of 
things  exists  here  from  every  other  point  takenbefore  during  the  war, 
with  the  exception  of  Baltimore.  Here  is  a community,  large  and 
wealthy,  living  and  substantially  quietly  submitting  to,  if  they  all  do 

not  relish,  our  Government.  . T A . . , ,,  _ . 

We  need  their  products ; they  need  ours.  If  we  wish  to  bind  them  to 
us  more  strongly  than  can  be  done  by  the  bayonet,  let  them  again  ee 
the  beneficence  of  the  United  States  Government  as  they  have  seen 
and  are  now  feeling  its  power.  Specially  will  this  affect  favorably  the 
numerous  and  honestly  conducting  foreign  residents  residing  here 
How  does  this  city  now  differ  from  Baltimore  m June  last,  save  that 
it  is  occupied  by  a smaller  force  and  is  more  orderly?  *n*he  Jitter 
of  trade,  importation  and  'exportation,  I cannot  distinguish  the  two. 


tFor  portion  af°l*etter  here  omitted,  and  which  relates  to  seizure  of  the  specie  re- 
ferred to  and  complications  with  other  consuls,  iVvolII 

Secretary  of  State  to  Hon.  Reverdy  Johnson,  June  10, 1862,  Series  III,  Vol.  11. 


3haf.  XX vn.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


423 


It  was  found  absolutely  necessary  to  take  some  measures  in  addi- 
tion to  those  taken  by  the  city  government  to  relieve  the  immediate 
sufferings  of  the  poor  people  from  hunger.  I accordingly  took  the 
action  set  forth  in  General  Orders,  No.  25.  Its  effect  has  been  to  dimm- 
ish much  suffering  and  aid  in  bringing  back  the  citizens  to  a sense 

°f  ^forward  also  copies  of  General  Orders,  27,  28, 29,  which  will  explain 
themselves.  No.  28  became  an  absolute  necessity  from  the  outrageous 
conduct  of  the  secession  women  here,  who  took  every  means  of  insult- 
ing my  soldiers  and  inflaming  the  mob.  _ , 

Here  I am  happy  to  add  that  within  the  city  of  New  Orleans  the  hrst 
instance  of  wrong  or  injury  done  by  any  soldier  to  any  man  or  woman 
or  any  instance  of  plunder  above  a petty  theft  yet  remains  to  be  re- 
ported to  me.  There  is  an  instance  of  gross  outrage  and  plunder  on  the 
part  of  some  of  the  Wisconsin  regiment  at  Kenner,  some  12  miles  above 
here  while  on  the  march  to  possess  ourselves  of  the  Jackson  Kailroad, 
who? when  they  return  will  be  most  exemplarily  punished.  I must 
send  home  some  of  my  transport  ships  in  ballast  by  the  terms  of  their 
charter.  In  accordance  with  the  terms  of  my  order  No.  22  I have 
caused  to  be  bought  a very  considerable  quantity  of  sugar,  but  as  yet 
very  little  cotton.  This  has  gone  very  far  to  reassure  the  planters  and 
factors.  They  are  sending  their  agents  everywhere  into  the  interior 
to  endeavor  to  stop  the  burning  of  the  crops. 

Nobody  can  be  better  aware  than  myself  that  I have  no  right  to  buy  - 
this  property  with  the  money  of  the  United  States,  even  if  I had  any 
of  it,  which  I have  not.  But  I have  bought  it  with  my  own  money  and 
upon  my  individual  credit.  The  articles  are  sugar,  rosin,  and  turpen- 
tine. I have  sent  these  as  ballast  in  the  several  transport  ships,  which 
otherwise  would  have  to  be  sent  to  Ship  Island  tor  sand.  These  arti- 
cles will  be  worth  more  in  New  York  and  Boston  than  I paid  for  them 
here  through  my  agents.  If  the  Government  choose  to  take  them  and 
reimburse  me  for  them  I am  content.  If  not,  I am  quite  content  to 
keep  them  and  pay  the  Government  a reasonable  freight.  Whatever 
may  be  done  the  Government  will  save  by  the  transaction.  I only 
desire  that  neither  motives  nor  action  shall  be  misunderstood. 

I have  sent  General  Williams,  with  two  regiments  and  a light  bat- 
tery, to  accompany  the  flag-officer  up  the  river  to  occupy  or  land  and 
aid  in  taking  any  point  where  resistance  may  be  offered.  Baton  Rouge 
has  already  surrendered  and  the  flag  is  raised  over  it.  The  machines 
from  the  Arsenal  for  making  arms  are  removed  to  a distance,  but  where 
they  cannot  be  at  present  used.  The  naval  forces  with  General  Tv  ill- 
iams  have  gone  above  Natchez,  and  the  gunboats  are  proceeding  to 
Yicksburg,  which  the  rebels  are  endeavoring  to  fortify,  but  I do  not 
believe,  from  all  I learn,  with  any  success.  The  flag-officer  is  aground 
just  below  Natchez  in  the  Hartford,  and  I have  dispatched  two  boats 
to  light  him  off. 

I should  have  sent  more  troops  with  General  Williams,  but  it  was 
impossible  to  get  transportation  for  them.  The  rebels  had  burned  and 
disabled  every  boat  that  they  did  not  hide,  and  then  their  machinists 
refused  to  work  on  their Tepair. 

By  dint  of  the  most  urgent  measures  I have  compelled  repairs,  so 
that  I am  now  getting  some  transportation,  and  have  sent  a boat  to 
Fort  Pickens  for  General  Arnold,  of  which  I understand  him  to  be  in 
the  utmost  need.  I have  sent  into  the  various  bayous  and  have  suc- 
ceeded in  digging  out  of  the  bushes  several  steamers ) one  or  two  very 
good  ones. 


424 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX  , N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Colonel  McMillan,  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  Regiment,  on  Monday 
last,  in  a little  creek  leading  out  of  Berwick  Bay,  some  .80  miles  from  | 
here,  succeeded  with  an  ox-cart  in  cutting  out  the  rebel  steamer  Fox, 
loaded  with  15  tons  of  powder  and.  a large  quantity  of  quicksilver, 
medicines,  and  stores.  The  steamer  was  formerly  the  G.  W.  Whitman, 
of  New  York,  and  has  succeeded  in  running  the  blockade  four  times. 

Colonel  McMillan  is  now  engaged  in  scouring  the  bayous  and  lagoons 
through  which  the  rebels  have  been  supplied  with  ammunition,  causing  j; 
large  quantities  to  be  destroyed  and  capturing  some  where  the  pursuit 
is  quick  enough.  In  no  other  way  can  the  same  amount  of  distress  be 
brought  upon  the  rebel  army,  as  they  are  much  in  want  of  ammunition, 
and  we  are  intercepting  all  supplies.  A very  large  amount  of  ordnance 
and  ordnance  stores  have  been  captured  here  and  are  now  being  cared 
for  and  inventoried. 

Large  numbers  of  Union  men — -Americans,  Germans,  and  French — 
have  desired  to  enlist  in  our  service  . I have  directed  the  regiments  to  fill 
themselves  up  with  these  recruits.  I can  enlist  a regiment  or  more  here, 
if  the  Department  think  it  desirable,  of  true  and  loyal  men.  I do  not 
think,  however,  that  Governor  Moore  would  commission  the  officers. 
Such  a corps  being  desirable,  would  it. not  be  possible  to  have  an  inde- 
pendent  organization,  with  commissions  from . the  President.  These 
troops  would  be  very  useful  in  manning  the  forts  at  Pontchartrain  and 
down  the  river,  which  are  fearfully  unhealthy.  They  might  have  a com- 
pany or  two  of  Northern  soldiers  for  instructors  and  for  fear  of  possible 
accident. 

I shall  have  the  transportation  ready  for  a movement  on  Mobile  as 
soon  as  the  flag-officer  returns  from  up  the  river.  I am  engaged  in  ar- 
ranging for  it.  I will  get  the  transportation,  so  as  to  go  across  the  lake 
by  the  inside  route. 

I have  endeavored  in  several  ways  to  get  communication  with  Gen- 
eral Buell,  so  as  to  co-operate  with  him,  but  as  yet  have  failed.  Although 
I am  not  by  the  terms  of  my  instructions  enjoined  to  penetrate  the  in- 
terior, yet  I shall  do  so  at  once,  if  the  public  service  can  be  aided. 

General  Lovell,  when  he  retreated  from  this  city,  took  with  him  to 
Camp  Moore  between  8,000  and  9,000  men.  He  is  80  miles  away,  and 
such  is  the  height  of  the  water  that  it  is  nearly  impossible  to  march,  he 
having  gone  on  the  railroad  and  taken  all  his  rolling  stock  with  him. 
More  than  one-half  of  that  army  has  left  him,  and  perhaps  one-third  has 
returned  to  this  city,  put  on  citizens’  clothes,  and  are  quiet.  I think 
General  Lovell  is  doing  as  well  as  he  can  for  the  present.  A defeat 
could  hardly  disorganize  his  forces  more  rapidly. 

I trust  my  requisitions  will  be  promptly  forwarded,  especially  for  food 
and  mosquito-nets,  which  are  a prime  necessity. 

The  city  council  have  endeavored  to  excite  the  French  population 
here  and  to  act  by  resolution  upon  the  arrival  of  the  French  war  steamer 
Catina  as  to  induce  the  belief  that  there  was  some  understanding  be- 
tween themselves  and  the  French  Government. 

I append  copy  of  letter  to  the  council  upon  that  subject,  marked  L; 
also  copy  of  letter  to  the  French  consul  as  to  spoliations  at  Kenner, 
marked  M. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major - General , Commanding . 


Chai\  XX vn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  425 

|Inclosures.] 

General  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  25.  j New  Orleans , May  9,  1862. 

The  deplorable  state  of  destitution  and  hunger  of  the  mechanics  and 
working  classes  in  this  city  has  been  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
commanding  general. 

He  has  yielded  to  every  suggestion  made  by  the  city  government, 
and  ordered  every  method  of  furnishing,  food  to  the  people  of  New  Or- 
leans that  government  desired.  No  relief  by  those  officials  has  yet 
been  afforded.  This  hunger  does  not  pinch  the  wealthy  and  influential 
leaders  of  the  rebellion,  who  have  gotten  up  this  war  and  are  now  en- 
deavoring to  prosecute  it  without  regard  to  the  starving  poor,  the  work- 
ing man,  his  wife  and  child.  Unmindful  of  their  suffering  fellow-citizens 
at  home,  they  have  caused  or  suffered  provisions  to  be  carried  out  of  the 
city  for  Confederate  service  since  the  occupation  by  the  United  States 
forces. 

Lafayette  Square,  their  home  of  affluence,  was  made  the  depot  of 
stores  and  munitions  of  war  for  the  rebel  armies,  and  not  of  provisions 
for  their  poor  neighbors.  Striking  hands  with  the  vile,  the  gambler, 
the  idler,  and  the  ruffian,  they  have  destroyed  the  sugar  and  cotton, 
which  might  have  been  exchanged  for  food  for  the  industrious  and  good, 
and  regrated  the  price  of  that  which  is  left  by  discrediting  the  very 
currency  they  had  furnished,  while  they  eloped  with  the  specie,  as  well 
that  stolen  from  the  United  States  as  the  banks,  the  property  of  the 
good  people  of  New  Orleans,  thus  leaving  them  to  ruin  and  starvation. 

Fugitives  from  justice  many  of  them,  and  others  their  associates  stay- 
ing because  too  puerile  and  insignificant  to  be  objects  of  punishment  by 
the  clement  Government  of  the  United  States. 

They  have  betrayed  their  country ; they  have  been  false  to  every 
trust;  they  have  shown  themselves  incapable  of  defending  the  State 
they  had  seized  upon,  although  they  have  forced  every  poor  man’s  child 
into  their  service  as  soldiers  for  that  purpose,  while  they  made  their 
sons  and  nephews  officers. 

They  cannot  protect  those  whom  they  have  ruined,  but  have  left  them 
to  the  mercies  and  assassinations  of  a chronic  mob. 

They  will  not  feed  those  whom  they  are  starving. 

Mostly  without  property  themselves,  they  have  plundered,  stolen,  and 
destroyed  the  means  of  those  who  had  property,  leaving  children  pen- 
niless and  old  age  hopeless. 

Men  of  Louisiana,  workmen,  property-holders,  merchants,  and  citizens 
of  the  LTnited  States,  of  whatever  nation  you  have  had  birth,  how  long 
will  .you  uphold  these  flagrant  wrongs  and  by  inaction  suffer  yourselvdh 
to  be  made  the  serfs  of  these  leaders  ? 

The  United  States  have  sent  land  and  naval  forces  here  to  fight  and 
subdue  rebellious  armies  in  array  against  her  authority.  We  find  sub- 
stantially only  fugitive  masses,  runaway  property-burners,  a whisky- 
drinking  mob,  and  starving  citizens,  with  their  wives  and  children.  It 
is  our  duty  to  call  back  the  first,  to  punish  the  second,  root  out  the  third, 
feed  and  protect  the  last. 

Beady  only  for  war,  we  had  not  prepared  ourselves  to  feed  the  hungry 
and  relieve  the  distressed  with  provisions.  But  to  the  extent  possible 
within  the  power  of  the  commanding  general  it  shall  be  done. 

He  has  captured  a quantity  of  beef  and  sugar  intended  for  the  rebels 
in  (he  field.  A thousand  barrels  of  these  stores  will  be  distributed 
among  the  deserving  poor  of  this  city,  from  whom  the  rebels  had  plun- 


426 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA  , S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TP]X.,  N MEX.  [Chxp.  XXYII. 


dered  it,  even  although  some  of  the  food  will  go  to  supply  the  craving 
wants  of  the  wives  and  children  of  those  now  herding  at  Camp  Moore 
and  elsewhere  in  arms  against  the  United  States. 

Capt.  John  Clark,  acting  chief  commissary  of  subsistence,  will  be 
charged  with  the  execution  of  this  order,  and  will  give  public  notice  of 
the  place  and  manner  of  distribution,  which  will  be  arranged,  as  far  as 
possible,  so  that  the  unworthy  and  dissolute  will  not  share  its  benefits. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

GEO.  Cr  STRONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Chief  of  Staff. 


General  Orders, 
No.  27. 


) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 
y New  Orleans , May  13,  18G2. 

It  having  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  commanding  general  that 
Friday  next  is  proposed  to  be  observed  as  a day  of  fasting  and  prayer, 
in  obedience  to  some  supposed  proclamation  of  one  Jefferson  Davis,  in 
the  several  churches  of  this  city,  it  is  ordered  that  no  such  observance 
be  had. 

“ Churches  and  religious  houses  are  to  be  kept  open  as  in  time  of 
profound  peace,”  but  no  religious  exercises  are  to  be  had  upon  the  sup- 
posed authority  above  mentioned. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler  : 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  28.  1 New  Orleans , May  15,  1862. 

As  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  United  States  have  been  subject  to 
repeated  insults  from  the  women  (calling  themselves  ladies)  of  New 
Orleans  in  return  for  the  most  scrupulous  non-interference  and  courtesy 
on  our  part,  it  is  ordered  that  hereafter  when  any  female  shall  by  word, 
gesture,  or  movement  insult  or  show  contempt  for  any  officer  or  soldier 
of  the  United  States  she  shall  be  regarded  and  held  liable  to  be  treated 
as  a woman  of  the  town  plying  her  avocation. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  and  Chief  of  Staff . 


General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  29.  1 New  Orleans , May  16,  1862. 

I.  It  is  hereby  ordered  that  neither  the  city  of  New  Orleans  nor  the 
banks  thereof  exchange  their  notes,  bills,  or  obligations  for  Confederate 
notes,  bills,  or  bonds,  nor  issue  any  bill,  note,  or  obligation  payable  in 
Confederate  notes. 

II.  On  the  27th  day  of  May  instant  all  circulation  of  or  trade  in 
Confederate  notes  and  bills  wiil  cease  within  this  department ; and  all 
sales  or  transfers  of  property  made  on  or  after  that  day  in  considera- 
tion of  such  notes  or  bills,  directly  or  indirectly,  will  be  void,  and  the 
property  confiscated  to  the  United  States,  one-fourth  thereof  to  go  to 
the  informer. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Chief  of  Staff. 


Chap.  XXVII.1  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  427 

[Inclosure  L.J 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , May  16,  1862. 

To  the  Mayor  and  Gentlemen  of  the  City  Council  of  New  Orleans  : 

In  the  report  of  your  official  action,  published  in  the  Bee  of  the 
16th  instant,  I find  the  following  extracted  resolution,  with  the  action 
of  part  of  your  body  thereon,  viz  : 

The  following  preamble  and  resolution,  offered  by  Mr.  Stith,  were  read  twice  and 
adopted;  the  rules  being  suspended,  were  on  motion  sent  to  the  assistant  board. 

Yeas  : Mr.  De  Labarre,  Forstall,  Huckins,  Rodin,  and  Stith — 5. 

Whereas  it  has  come  to  the  knowledge  of  this  council  that  for  the  first  time  in  the 
history  of  this  city  a large  fleet  of  the  navy  of  France  is  about  to  visit  New  Orleans,  of 
which  fleet  the  Catina,  now  in  our  port,  is  the  pioneer ; this  council  bearing  in  grateful 
remembrance  the  many  ties  of  amity  and  good  feeling  which  unite  the  people  of  this 
city  with  those  of  France,  to  whose  paternal  protection  New  Orleans  owes  its  founda- 
tion and  early  prosperity,  and  to  whom  it  is  especially  grateful  for  the  jealousy  with 
which  in  the  cession  of  the  State  it  guaranteed  all  the  rights  of  property,  person,  and 
religious  freedom  of  its  citizens : Be  it 

Resolved , That  the  freedom  and  hospitality  of  the  city  be  tendered,  through  the 
commander  of  the  Catina,  to  the  French  naval  fleet  during  its  sojourn  in  our  port;  and 
that  a committee  of  five  of  this  council  be  appointed,  together  with  the  mayor,  to 
make  such  tender  and  such  other  arrangements  as  may  be  necessary  to  give  effect  to 
the  same. 

Messrs.  Stith  and  Forstall  were  appointed  on  the  committee  mentioned  in  the  fore- 
going resolution. 

This  action  is  an  insult  as  well  to  the  United  States  as  to  the  friendly, 
powerful,  and  progressive  nation  toward  whose  officers  it  is  directed. 
The  offer  of  the  freedom  of  a captured  city  by  the  captives  would  merit 
letters-patent  for  its  novelty  were  there  not  doubts  of  its  usefulness  as 
an  invention.  The  tender  of  its  hospitalities  by  a government  to  which 
police  duties  and  sanitary  regulations  only  are  intrusted  is  simply  an  in- 
vitation to  the  calaboose  or  the  hospital.  The  United  States  authorities 
are  the  only  ones  here  capable  of  dealing  with  amicable  or  unamicable 
nations,  and  will  see  to  it  that  such  acts  of  courtesy  or  assistance  are  ex- 
tended to  any  armed  vessel  of  the  Emperor  of  France  as  shall  testify 
the  national,  traditional,  and  hereditary  feelings  of  grateful  remembrance 
with  which  the  United  States  Government  and  people  appreciate  the 
^arly  aid  of  France  and  her  many  acts  of  friendly  regard  shown  upon 
so  many  national  and  fitting  occasions. 

The  action  of  the  city  council  in  this  behalf  must  be  reversed. 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  M.j 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , May  16,  1862. 

Sir  : Your  communication,  covering  those  from  sundry  persons  claim- 
ng  to  have  been  injured  in  their  property  by  the  disorderly  acts  of 
United  States  soldiers,  has  been  received. 

My  notice  had  been  brought  to  the  same  subject-matter. 

As  soon  as  the  soldiers  return  by  whom  it  is  alleged  the  wrong  was 
lone  the  matter  will  be  completely  investigated  and  prompt  justice 
idministered. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEUJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

M.  Mejan,  Consul  de  France. 


428 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TLX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


Fort  Saint  Philip,  La.,  May  16, 1862. 

Lieut.  G.  Weitzel, 

TJ.  S.  Engineers , Chief  Engineer  Department  of  the  Gulf: 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  your  orders,  dated  April  30  and  May  13,  I 
reported  to  Col.  E.  F.  Jones,  Twenty-sixth  Regiment  Massachusetts 
Volunteers,  at  Fort  Jackson,  May  6,  and  have  examined  the  condition 
of  the  two  forts  here,  made  a list  of  their  ordnance,  and  given  him  such 
assistance  in  starting  repairs  as  I was  able.  He  will  need  further  in- 
structions from  you,  as  I will  explain  to  you: when  I see  you. 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  a list  of  the  ordnance  of  the  two 
forts  here,  a rough  sketch  of  Fort  Jackson,  giving  the  positions  of  its 
guns,  and  also  a copy  of  a letter  to  Colonel  Jones,  accompanying  a copy 
of  this  sketch. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JOHK  C.  PALFREY, 

First  Lieutenant , United  States  Engineers. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Forts  JacJcson  and  Saint  Philip. 


Forts  passed  morning  of  the  24th  of  April,  1862. 

Bombardment  commenced  on  the  18th  of  April,  1862. 

Forts  surrendered  on  the  28th  of  April,  1862. 

Porter  says  1,800  shells  fell  in  Fort  Jackson.  Eleven  rebel  boats  de- 
stroyed; there  were  eighteen. 

Vessels'  in  right  column,  first  division,  Cayuga,  Mississippi,  Pensa- 
cola, Oneida,  Varuna,  Katahdin,  Kineo,  Wissahickon;  vessels  in  left 
column,  second  division,  Hartford,  Brooklyn,  Richmond,  Itasca,  Wi- 
nona, Kennebec;  third  division,  Sciota,  Iroquois,  Panola;  17  vessels; 
Sable  Island,  12  miles  distant  from  Fort  Saint  Philip,  6 vessels;  total, 
23  vessels. 

Miami  went  within  4J  miles  of  MamePs  Canal. 

Garrison  mutinied  night  of  the  27th ; 250  of  them. 

Total  loss  on  9 vessels,  30  killed,  119  wounded. 

Mortar-flotilla  steamers  were  Harriet  Lane,  Westfield,  Owasco,  Clif- 
ton, Miami,  and  sloop-of  war  Portsmouth.  One  hour  and  eleven  min- 


utes. Flotilla  lost  1 man  killed  and  6 wounded. 


FORT  SAINT  PHILIP. 


Barbette 


10-inch  columbiads 2 

8-inch  columbiads 3 

7- inch  rifle  (108-pounder).... 1 

8- inch  mortars 2 

42-pounders -. 6 

32-pounders 15 

24-pounders - 11 

7-f-inch  howitzer 1 

Total  en  barbette 41 

In  casemate: 

24-pounder  howitzers  (flank) 10 

24-pounder  guns  14 


Total  in  casemate 

One  G-pounder  gun  and  one  12-pounder  howitzer  were  in  the  fort 


Chap.  XXYII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. —UNION. 


429 


In  outer  battery  were  two  32-pounders,  rifled;  one  10-inch  columbiad 
(0.  S.*A.) ; two  8-inch  columbiads,  and  one  10-inch  sea  mortar;  total, 
six.  Total  at  Fort  Jackson,  seventy-three. 

8-inch  columbiads,  2-j-l-f-l  = 4 

24-pounder 

8-inch  single  mortar... 

10-inch  siege  mortar 

Total 

On  parade : 

6-pounder  field  gun 
12-pounder  howitzer 
24-pounder  howitzer 

Total 


6 
9 
4 
1 
1 

Total  in  Fort  Saint  Philip  and  new,  fifty-one  guns. 

There  were  four  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars  in  a field  work  below  and 
northeast  of  the  lower  battery. 

FORT  JACKSON. 

In  the  following  account  of  the  condition  in  which  the  casemates  were 
found  the  casemates  are  designated  as  in  the  accompanying  plan. 

The  first  number  gives  the  number  of  guns  in  the  casemate ; the  sec- 
oud  its  caliber;  the  letter  G shows  that  the  piece  was  in  good  service- 
able condition  ; the  next  number  the  depth  in  inches  of  water  in  the  case- 
mate ; the  next  letter  G that  the  piers  were  sound,  and  next  comes  an 
enumeration  of  the  cracks  in  the  masonry,  and  finally  of  the  shell-holes: 

Casemate  1 — I. 

0-0-0 ; 6 inch ; G;  no  cracks ; one  shell-hole  near  crown,  about  2 
ieet  m diameter  and  8 inches  deep,  from  intrados  up. 

Casemate  1— II. 

1 ; 24-pounder  howitzer  ; G ; 4 inches ; G ; no  cracks ; one  shell-hole 
near  crown,  3 inches  by  4 inches  by  8 inches  deep. 


In  upper  battery : 

24-pounders 

In  lower  battery : 

42-pounders 

32-pounders 

24-pounders 

7- inch  rifled  gun  (108-pounder) 

8- inch  columbiad 


1— III. 


Apparently  uninjured. 


1— IY. 

Main  entrance ; three  shell-holes,  each  about  3 feet  diameter  and  1 
toot  deep ; 2 inches  water  overflow, 


430 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Ciiap.  XXVIL 


1 — Y. 


Magazine  ; uninjured  and  in  good  condition ; dry. 

1— VI. 

0-0  0 ; 2 inch  ; G ; no  cracks ; one  shell-mark,  starting  bricks  in  from 
arch  over,  about  2 feet  by  4 feet. 

i-yn. 

1 ; 24-pounder  howitzer ; G ; 2 inches ; G ; * one  crack  from  embrasure 
to  ventilator,  one  opposite  through  rear  wall ; bricks  started  a little  by 
shell  over  recess  arch  opposite  the  entrance  into  this  gun-room. 

3—1. 

0-0-0;  3 inch;  G;  no  cracks;  no  shell-holes. 

3— II. 

1;  24-pounder  howitzer;  G;  lfoot;  G;  one  crack  through  embrasure 
and  ventilator ; no  shell-hole. 


3— III. 

1 ; 24-pounder  ; G ; 2 inches ; G ; one  crack  parallel  to  scarp  across 
main  arch  and  through  the  crowns  of  the  two  communication  arches, 
and  a second  similar  one  parallel  to  first  and  about '6  feet  in  rear  of  it, 
through  springing  lines  of  communication  arches ; two  shell-holes — one 
4 feet  by  3 feet  by  16  inches  deep,  and  one  4 feet  by  1 foot  by  4 inches 
deep. 

3— IY. 

1 ; 24-j)Ounder ; G ; 1 inch  ; G ; same  cracks  continue,  one-half  inch 
wide;  no  shell-holes. 

3— Y. 

1 ; 24-pounder ; G ; one  inch  ; G ; cracks  as  above ; no  shell-holes. 

3— YI. 

1 ; 24-pounder ; G ; 0 inches ; G ; cracks  as  above ; one  shell-mark 
4 feet  diameter  and  bricks  still  adhering. 

3 — YII. 

1;  24-pounder;  G;  0 inches;  G;  cracks  as  above;  no  shell-holes. 
This  gun  and  all  casemate  guns  from  here  are  mounted  on  wooden 
chassis  and  cast-iron  carriages. 

3 — YIII. 

1 ; 24-pounder ; G ; 1 inch ; G : cracks  as  above ; two  shell-holes — 
one  3 feet  diameter  and  bricks  still  in  ; one  3 feet  by  4 feet  by  4 inches 
deep. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  431 


3 — IX. 


1 ; 24-pounder ; G;  1 inch ; G ; cracks  as  above ; no  shell-holes. 

3 — X. 

1 ; 24-pounder ; G ; 0 inches ; G ; no  cracks ; no  shell-holes. 

3 — XI. 

0-0-0 ; 2 inch ; G ; no  cracks ; no  shell-holes. 

3— XII. 

1 ; 24-pounder  howitzer ; G ; 3 inches  ; G ; two  cracks  through  em 
Erasure  and  ventilator ; three  shell-holes,  all  through  arch,  with  about 
4 feet  diameter  on  intrados  and  16  inches  diameter  on  extrados ; one 
4 feet  by  4 feet  through  rear  wall  of  casemate. 

5—1. 

0-0-0  ; 2 inch  ; G;  no  cracks ; no  shell-holes. 

5— II. 

1 ; 24-pounder  howitzer ; G ; 2 inches ; G ; one  crack  all  along  crown, 
one  at  left  springing  line  and  one  midway  between  these  two,  all  about 
one-half  inch  wide,-  one  shell-hole  5 feet  by  3 feet  by  12  inches,  about. 

5— III. 

0-0-0 ; 0 inches  ; G ; one  crack  parallel  to  scarp  across  main  arch  and 
through  crowns  of  communication  arches,  and  about  one-fourth  inch 
wide ; no  shell  holes. 

5— IY. 


1 ; 24-pounder ; G ; 0 inches ; G ; one  crack  as  above,  but  varying  from 
one-fourth  inch  to  3J  inches  wide ; also  a second  crack  6 feet  in  rear  of 
first,  one-fourth  inch  wide ; no  shell-holes. 

5— Y. 


1 : 24-pounder ; G j 0 inches  ; G ; cracks  as  above,  and  all  one-fourth 
inch  wide ; no  shell-holes. 


, 5— VI. 

1?  24-pounder;  G;  1 inch  ; G;  cracks  as  above;  no  shell-holes. 

5 — VII. 

1 ; 24-pounder ; G ; 1 inch ; G ; first  crack  as  above ; second  crack 
j closed;  bricks  started  by  shells  in  two  places,  viz,  on  crown  4 feet  by  2 
leet,  and  on  groin  4 feet  by  1 foot  by  4 inches  deep. 


432  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

5 — VIII. 

1 ; 24-pounder ; G ; 0 inches  ; G ; first  crack  as  above ; no  shell-holes. 

5-IX. 

1 ; 24-pounder ; G ; 0 inches;  G ; first  crack  as  above:  bricks  started 
by  shell  in  one  place  near  crown  1 foot  by  1 foot. 

5— X. 


0-0-0;  0 inches;  G;  no  cracks;  one  shell-hole  near  springing  line  2 
feet  by  3 feet  and  shored  up ; it  no  doubt  is  through  the  arch. 

5— XI. 

0-0  0;  3 inch ; one  oblique  crack  through  arch  and  pier  from  crown 
to  floor  on  one  side  one-fourth  inch  wide ; two  shell-holes — one  4 feet  by 
2 feet  by  8 inches,  and  one  3 feet  in  diameter  and  bricks  still  adhering. 


5— XII. 

1 ; 24-pounder  howitzer ; G ; 3 inches  ; G ; no  cracks  ; no  shell-holes. 

7—1. 

0-0-0;  3 inch  ; G;  uo  cracks;  one  shell-hole  at  springing  line  4 feet  . 
diameter  and  4 inches  deep. 

7— II. 

1 ; 24-pounder  howitzer  ; G ; 4 feet ; G ; two  cracks  through  embra- 
sure and  ventilator  three-fourths  inch  wide ; no  shell-holes. 

7— III. 

0 0 0;  0 inches;  G;  no  cracks;  one  shell-hole  2 feet  diameter  and 
8 inches  deep  near  crown. 


0-0-0;  15  inch;  G;  one  crack  along  crown  for  10  feet;  three  shell- 
holes — 4 feet  by  3 feet,  4 feet  by  3 feet,  and  3 feet  by  3 feet — each  all 
through  the  arch. 


7— Y. 


1;  24-pounder  howitzer ; G;  4 inches;  G;  one  crack  through  embra- 
sure and  ventilator;  one  shell-hole  3 feet  by  3 feet  and  through  the 
arch.  Eetaining  wall  on  parade  at  8 is  knocked  down. 


9—1. 

0-0-0 ; 4 inch  ; G ; no  cracks ; two  shell-holes — one  2 feet  by  2 feet 
by  6 inches  and  one  2 feet  diameter  and  bricks  still  adhering. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

9— II. 


433 


1 • 24-pounder  howitzer ; G;  3 inches  5 G;  no  cracks;  no  shell-holes. 


9 — III. 


0-0-0 ; 5 inch ; G ; no  cracks ; no  shell-holes. 


9 — IV. 


1 ; 24-pounder  howitzer ; G ; 2 inches ; G ; one  crack  through  em- 
brasure and  ventilator  and  one  opposite  through  rear  of  casemate  ; 
one  shell  hole  through  crown  of  arch  about  3 feet  by  4 feet  and  nearly 
over  howitzer. 

Retaining  wall  on  parade  at  10  is  knocked  down.  In  the  fort  are  one 
6-pounder  field  gun  and  one  12-pounder  field  howitzer. 

I11  the  battery  east  of  the  fort  are  five  guns,  one  circle,  and  one  mor- 
tar, in  the  folio  wing  order,  running  from  the  fort  eastward : Two 
32-pounders,  rifled ; one  10-inch  columbiad  (0.  S.  A.) ; one  8-inch  co- 
lumbiad ; one  columbiad  circle ; one  8-inch  columbiad  in  angle ; one 
10-inch  sea-coast  mortar. 

The  shell-holes  have  been  so  filled  in  with  sand  bags  and  earth  that 
it  is  impossible  to  tell  accurately  how  many  shell  fell  inside  the  fort. 
Those  which  struck  the  thin  (20-inch)  wall  of  the  citadel  went  through  ; 
four  or  five  struck  the  lower  wall  (4  feet),  and  made  the  usual  hole  of 
some  18  inches  deep.  The  masonry  of  the  plank  casemates  was  not 
covered  by  earth.  A blind  casemate  on  I,  not  known  to  exist,  was> 
opened  by  a shell.  The  ramps  are  in  good  condition.  The  shot  fur- 
naces, except  the  one  in  the  northwest  covered  way,  are  destroyed. 
The  gun  casemates  shake  badly  on  the  discharge  of  the  barbette  guns. 
The  joints  of  the  pieces  show  that  the  scarp  ends  have  settled.  I do 
not  know  whether  the  cracks  in  the  arches  parallel  to  the  scarp  noted 
above  existed  before  the  bombardment  or  not.  If  not,  the  strain  caused 
by  the  settling  probably  did,  and  the  vibration  of  the  discharges  opened 
them.  I think  this  mischief  was  increased  by  the  explosion  of  shells 
in  the  ditch  under  the  foundations.  The  efiect  of  the  shells  of  the  ma- 
sonry seems  to  be  confined  to  the  vicinity  of  the  impact.  A traverse 
was  put  up  at  the  right  end  of  3,  and  the  second  and  eighth  guns  in 
barbette  on  this  face  were  dismounted  ; also  one  on  9 ; and  an  8-inch 
siege  howitzer  in  the  northwest  covered  way.  The  second  gun  on  5 in 
barbette  was  a 7 -inch  rifled  gun,  with  a jacket  around  the  breech  like 
Parrott’s,  and  throwing  a 108-pound  shell.  It  is  similar  to  a broken 
guu  in  the  lower  battery  of  Fort  Saint  Philip.  Its  carriage  was  some- 
thing like  our  columbiad  carriages,  but  with  a peculiar  elevating  appa- 
ratus. Another  platform,  evidently  for  a similar  gun,  was  constructed 
by  its  side. 

Many  of  the  flank  howitzers  and  some  of  the  barbette  guns  were  left 
loaded  with  shell  fuse  end  in.  Whether  this  arose  from  accident  or 
design,  it  must  have  been  advantageous  to  our  side.  The  more  the 
fort  is  examined  the  more  the  conviction  grows  that  it  was  not  desper- 
ately or  even  faithfully  defended,  and  that  its  present  efficiency  is  con- 
siderable. 

Respectfully  submitted, 

JOHE  O.  PALFREY, 

First  Lieutenant , United  States  Engineers, 


28  R R — VOL  XV 


FORT  JACKSON,  LA. 


Chap.  XXVn.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Fort  Saint  Philip. 


435 


This  fort  sustained  the  following  damage  before  its  surrender : 

In  the  western  battery  two  guns  dismounted,  one  of  them  being 
broken  by  a round  shot.  On  covered  way  opposite  face  8 a 13-inch 
mortar  broke  its  own  carriage  and  was  dismounted. 

In  eastern  or  lower  battery  a 7-inch  rifled  gun  burst  or  was  broken. 
In  two  places  the  retaining  wall  of  the  exterior  slope  was  damaged  by 
shells;  also  there  are  several  holes  made  by  shells  in  the  parade  terre- 
pleins  and  parapets. 

The  fort  is  as  efficient  as  before  the  attack.  Its  armament  is  as  fol- 
lows, viz:  On  face  8,  running  from  7,  are  two  8-inch  columbiads,  one 
columbiad  platform  without  rails,  one  8-inch  columbiad,  one  columbiad, 
one  columbiad  platform  complete. 

Ou  salient  15-16  is  one  24-pounder.  On  covered-way  face  10  are  one 
8-inch  and  one  10  inch  siege  mortar  on  beds  and  platforms  all  in  good 
condition.  On  covered-way  face  8 is  one  13-inch  sea-coast  mortar  with 
broken  carriage  and  good  platform.  This  is  iron. 

In  the  upper  battery,  starting  at  the  fort  and  running  west  along  the 
river  face,  are  one  circle,  eight  24-pounder  guns;  one  circle,  two  24-pound- 
ers; one  circle,  three  24-pounders;  one  circle  (with  its  carriage  broken 
by  shot),  one  24-pounder;  one  circle,  one  24-pounder;  one  circle  (gun 
broken  by  ball  and  carriage  gone)  (in  angle),  one  24-pounder;  (on  end 
running  northwest  three  circles;  (on  return  running  northeast)  three 
circles;  making  sixteen  24-pounders  and  provision  for  twelve  more. 

In  the  lower  battery,  running  northeast  from  fort,  are  five  circles,  nine 
32-pounders,  six  42-pounders,  one  7-inch  rifled  gun  (broken)  (in  anglek 
one  8-inch  columbiad  (on  end);  one  circle,  two  24-pounders  (in  angle); 
one  circle  (on  return),  two  24-pounders ; making  one  broken  gun,  twenty 
guns,  and  provision  for  seven  more. 

In  another  battery  still  farther  northeast  are  four  heavy  10-inch  mor- 
tars in  good  order,  with  a shelter  by  them. 

The  broken  rifle  gun  in  the  northeast  battery  no  doubt  burst.  It  is  an 
old  42-pounder  gun  with  a jacket  shrunk  on/  Its  marks  are  U.  S W 
P.  F.,  1837,  No.  56.  ’ 

The  108-pounder  rifle  at  Fort  Jackson  has  a similar  jacket,  but  a 
plain  tapering  reinforce  and  chase,  without  chase-ring  or  swell  of 

muzzle. 

Respectfully  submitted. 


JOHN  0.  PALFREY, 
First  Lieutenant,  United  States  Engineers. 


In  this  fort  were  one  6-pounder  gun  and  one  12-pounder  and  one 

*4-pounder  field  howitzer. 


[Iuclosure  No.  4.] 


Fort  Saint  Philip,  La.,  May  14,  1862. 

Ool.  E.  F.  Jones, 

Twenty-sixth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers , Gomdg.  : 

Colonel:  In  compliance  with  your  orders  I have  examined  Fort 
acKsou  with  a view  to  ils  efficiency  for  defense,  and  have  the  honor  to 
ransmit  herewith  a rough  sketch  of  the  work,  giving  the  state  of  its 
mnament  after  its  surrender. 


436 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTL 


A similar  drawing  will  be  sent  to  Lieut.  G.  Weitzel,  chief  engineer, 
Department  of  the  Gulf,  and  it  is  hoped  the  copy  in  your  hands  will 
prove  useful  for  reference  when  further  instructions  are  sent  you.  The 
guns  are  arranged  to  resist  an  attack  coming  up  the  river.  To  secure 
the  fort  against  an  attack  in  the  opposite  direction  their  positions  will 
have  to  be  changed. 

When  their  new  arrangement  has  been  approved  by  Lieutenant 
Weitzel  a drawing  of  it  will  probably  be  sent  to  you.  This  work  of 
mounting,  dismounting,  and  moving  guns  belongs  to  the  Ordnance 
Department  of  the  Army,  and  should  be  superintended  by  one  of  its 
officers  in  person.  If,  however,  the  exigencies  of  the  service  should 
throw  this  duty  on  your  regiment,  you  will  find  detailed  instructions 
for  the  maneuvers  in  the  heavy  artillery,  and  the  necessary  gins,  sling- 
carts,  and  pulleys  are  in  the  fort.  If  new  gun  circles  have  to  be  set,- 
they  should  be  superintended  by  an  engineer  officer  or  else  detailed 
instructions  about  them  sent  to  you.  Not  much  need  be  added  to  the 
directions  already  given  you.  by  General  Butler.  All  posterns  and  sally- 
ports should  have  their  gates  hung  and  be  furnished  with  bolts  or 
braces  in  perfect  order  for  instant  use,  and  when  there  are  bridges  m 
front  draws  lifting  with  ordinary  ease  should  be  provided.  Next  to 
this,  all  walls  retaining  earth  should  be  built  up  with  the  original  j 
material,  carefully  bonded  into  the  remaining  work,  and  after  the  ma^  j 
sonry  has  properly  set  clean  earth  should  be  rammed  hard  and  compact 
behind  it  and  the  surface  planted  with  grass  seed  and  watered  till  a 
strong  growth  is  obtained.  While  the  carpenters  and  masons  are  en- 
gaged on  this  work  the  laborers  should  collect  and  burn  the  rubbish 
inside  the  fort.  Much  of  this  might  be  burned  without  the  delay  of 
moving  it  outside  of  the  fort.  All  the  lumber  should  be  piled  outside 
the  fort,  so  as  to  be  protected  from  the  sun  and  not  compromise  the 

safety  of  the  fort.  , 

Everything  combustible  should  be  moved  outside  of  the  fort,  and  noth- 
ing else  of  that  nature,  buildings,  quarters,  or  anything  else,  allowed 
inside  Probably  no  method  better  than  the  present  can  be  round  to 
lower  the  water  in  the  fort  till  the  steam-pump  arrives.  In  the  mean 
time  care  should  be  taken  that  no  filth  or  refuse  is  thrown  into  the 
water,  and  lime  should  occasionally  be  thrown  into  the  puddles.  I he 
casemates  should  be  kept  as  empty  as  possible.  Spoiled  provisions 
might  be  moved  out  of  the  fort,  even  when  they  would  be  exposed  to 
the  weather.  The  magazine  which  is  open  is  m good  condition,  lhe 
other  should  be  opened,  and  all  the  ammunition  possible  should  be  with- 
drawn from  the  casemates  and  put  into  these.  Where  the  arches  have 
been  broken  by  shells  elaborate  repairs  will  be  needed,  tor  which  de- 
tailed instructions  will  be  necessary.  . . 

The  scarp  and  piers  are  still  in  good  condition,  and  the  injury  to  the 
arches  seems  to  be  mostly  confined  to  the  vicinity  of  the  point  of  nnpac 
In  many  cases  the  extrados  or  outside  of  the  brick  arch  has  probably 
been  injured  when  there  is  no  corresponding  mark  ou  the  mtrados  or 

]UTo6enable  the  repairs  to  be  thorough,  therefore,  the  striking  point 
of  every  shell  on  the  surfaces,  indicated  by  a depression,  hole,  the 
absence  of  grass,  or  the  presence  of  sand  bags,  should  be  carcluliy 
marked  by  a firmly-driven  stake,  or  some  other  sufficient  and  perma- 

lieFinaby,  at  such  times  as  the  other  work  allows  the  walls  of  the  citadel 
should  lie  1 brown  down  and  the  good  bricks  cleaned,  piled,  and  kept  lor 
repairs,  and  lhe  rest  used  for  making  a good  road  to  the  binding  aim 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


CHAP.  XXVII.] 


\ 


437 


repairing  the  levee  around  the  fort  and  distributed  elsewhere  in  a man- 
ner to  afford  no  facility  of  approach  to  an  enemy. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JOHN  0.  PALFREY, 

First  Lieutenant , United  States  Engineer. 


General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  30.  f New  Orleans , May  19,  1862. 

It  is  represented  to  the  commanding  general  that  great  distress,  pri- 
vation, suffering,  hunger,  and  even  starvation,  have  been  brought  upon 
the  people  of  New  Orleans  and  vicinage  by  the  course  taken  bjr  the 
banks  and  dealers  of  currency. 

He  has  been  urged  to  take  measures  to  provide  as  far  as  may  be  for 
the  relief  of  the  citizens,  so  that  the  loss  may  fall  in  part  at  least  on 
those  who  have  caused  and  ought  to  bear  it.  The  general  sees  with  re- 
gret that  the  banks  and  ^bankers  causelessly  suspended  specie  pay- 
ments in  September  last,  in  contravention  of  the  laws  of  the  State  and 
of  the  United  States.  Having  done  so,  they  introduced  Confederate 
notes  as  currency,  which  they  bought  at  a discount  in  place  of  their 
own  bills,  receiving  them  on  deposit,  paying  them  out  for  their  dis- 
counts, and  collecting  their  customers’  notes  and  drafts  as  theirs  in  mon- 
ey, sometimes  even  against  their  will,  thus  giving  these  notes  credit 
and  a wide  general  circulation,  so  that  they  were  substituted  in  the 
hands  of  the  middle-men,  the  poor,  and  unwary  as  currency,  in  place 
of  that  provided  by  the  Constitution  and  laws  of  the  country  or  of 
any  valuable  equivalent. 

The  banks  and  bankers  now  endeavor  to  take  advantage  of  the  re- 
establishment of  the  authority  of  the  United  States  here  to  throw  the 
depreciation  and  loss  from  this  worthless  stuff  of  their  own  creation 
and  fostering  upon  their  creditors,  depositors,  and  bill-holders.  They 
refuse  to  receive  these  bills,  while  they  pay  them  over  their  counters. 
They  require  their  depositors  to  take  them.  They  change  the  obliga- 
tion of  contracts  by  stamping  their  bills  “Redeemable  in  Confederate 
notes.”  They  have  invested  the  savings  of  labor  and  the  pittance  of  the 
widow  in  this  paper.  They  sent  away  or  hid  their  specie  so  that  the 
people  could  have  nothing  but  these  notes — which  they  now  depreciate — 
with  which  to  buy  bread. 

All  other  property  has  become  nearly  valueless  from  the  calamities 
of  this  iniquitous  and  unjust  war,  begun  by  rebellious  guns  turned  on  the 
flag  of  our  prosperous  and  happy  country  floating  over  Fort  Sumter. 
Saved  from  the  general  ruin  by  this  system  of  financiering,  bank  stocks 
alone  are  now  selling  at  great  premiums  in  the  market,  while  the  stock- 
holders have  received  large  dividends. 

To  equalize  as  far  as  may  be  this  general  loss,  to  have  it  fall  at  least 
in  part  where  it  ought  to  lie,  to  enable  the  people  of  this  city  and  vicinage 
to  have  a currency  which  shall  at  least  be  a semblance  to  that  which 
the  wisdom  of  the  Constitution  provides  for  all  citizens  of  the  United 
States,  it  is  therefore  ordered — 

I.  That  the  several  incorporated  banks  pay  out  no  more  Confederate 
notes  to  their  depositors  or  creditors,  but  that  all  deposits  be  paid  in 
the  bills  of  the  bank,  United  States  Treasury  notes,  gold,  or  silver. 

II.  That  all  private  bankers  receiving  deposits  pay  out  to  their  de- 
positors only  the  current  bills  of  city  banks  or  United  States  Treasury 
notes,  gold,  or  silver. 


438  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA,,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

III.  That  the  savings  banks  pay  to  their  depositors  or  creditors  only 
gold,  silver,  or  United  States  Treasury  notes,  current  bills  of  city  banks, 
or  their  own  bills  to  an  amount  not  exceeding  one-third  of  their  de- 
posits, and  of  denominations  not  less  than  one  dollar,  which  they  are 
authorized  to  issue,  and  for  the  redemption  of  which  their  assets  shall 
be  held  liable. 

IY.  The  incorporated  banks  are  authorized  to  issue  bills  of  a less 
denomination  than  five  dollars,  but  not  less  than  one  dollar,  anything 
in  their  charters  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding,  and  are  authorized 
to  receive  Confederate  notes  for  any  of  their  bills  until  the  27th  day  of 
May  instant. 

Y.  That  all  persons  and  firms  having  issued  small  notes  or  u shin- 
plasters,”  so  called,  are  required  to  redeem  them  on  presentation  at 
their  places  of  business,  between  the  hours  of  9 a.  m.  to  3 p.  m.,  either 
in  gold,  silver,  United  States  Treasury  notes,  or  current  bills  of  city 
banks,  under  penalty  of  confiscation  of  their  property  and  sale  thereof 
for  the  purpose  of  redemption  of  the  notes  so  issued  or  imprisonment 
for  a term  of  hard  labor. 

YI.  Private  bankers  may  issue  notes  of  denominations  not  less  than 
one  nor  more  than  ten  dollars  to  two-thirds  of  the  amount  of  specie 
which  they  show  to  a commissioner,  appointed  from  these  headquarters, 
in  their  vaults,  and  actually  kept  there  for  the  purpose  of  redemption 
of  such  notes. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

May  22,  1862. 

W.  Newton  Mercer,  Esq.,  I 

President  pro  tempore  Bank  of  Louisiana  : 

Sir  : I have  received  your  communication  of  the  directors  of  the 
Bank  of  Louisiana,  covering  their  unanimous  action. 

To  their  request  that  I would  appoint  a commission  to  examine  the 
affairs  of  the  bank  I cannot  accede.  With  the  mismanagement,  on  the 
contrary,  of  the  bank  I have  nothing  to  do,  except  so  far  as  either 
affects  the  interests  of  the  United  States. 

The  assigned  reason  for  the  call  for  this  examination,  that  u the  in- 
tegrity and  good  faith  of  the  directors  have  been  impugned,”  will  not 
move  me,  if  you  refer  to  General  Orders,  No.  30,  which  speaks  of  acts 
and  facts,  not  motives.  Your  note  says  that  the  directors  own  but  one- 
tenth  of  the  capital  stock  of  the  bank.  Without  consulting  the  owners 
of  the  other  nine-tenths,  nearly  three  millions  of  dollars,  this  one-tenth 
took  this  immense  wealth  from  its  legal  place  of  deposit,  flying  over  the 
country  in  company  with  fugitive  property-burners,  among  the  masses 
of  a disorganized,  retreating,  and  starving  army,  whence  it  is  more  than 
likely  never  to  return  again.  The  time  it  would  take  to  make  an  inves- 
tigation which  would  show  the  good  management,  to  say  nothing  of 
the  purity  of  motive  of  such  a transaction,  cannot  be  spared  by  any 
officer  of  my  command.  Ex  uno  disce  omnes. 

The  directors  of  the  Bank  of  Louisiana  have  all  seen  General  Orders, 
No.  30,  and  have  acted  upon  it  as  a corporation,  so  your  note  shows. 
They  will  now  advise  themselves  whether  they  will  act  in  accordance 


Chap.  XX VG.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


439 


with  its  requirement  upon  the  corporate  and  individual  peril,  and  in- 
form me  within  six  hours  after  the  receipt  of  this  of  their  determination. 
I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  42.  j New  Orleans , May  24,  1862. 

The  New  Orleans  Estafette  du  Sud  newspaper,  having*  published 
an  article  on  the  21st  instant  which  violates  the  terms  of  the  proclama- 
tion of  1st  of  May  from  these  headquarters,  said  paper  is  hereby  sup- 
pressed. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  0.  STRONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , May  25,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : In  matters  pertaining  to  the  conduct  of  affairs  in  my  own  de- 
partment which  affect  that  alone  I will  trouble  you  for  instructions  as 
little  as  possible,  but  in  those  which  affect  the  administrative  policy  of 
the  country. I- beg  leave  to  refer  to  the  head  of  the  War  Department 
for  advice  and  direction.  The  question  now  pressing  me  is  the  state 
of  negro  property  here  and  the  condition  of  the  negroes  as  men.  It  has 
a gravity  as  regards  both  white  and  black  appalling  as  the  mind  follows 
out  the  logical  necessities  of  different  lines  of  action.  Ethnological  in 
its  proportions  and  demands  for  investigation,  it  requires  active  admin- 
istrative operations  immediately  upon  the  individual  in  his  daily  life, 
his  social,  political,  and  religious  status  as  a human  being,  while  some 
of  the  larger  deductions  of  political  economy  are  to  be  at  once  worked 
out  by  any  given  course  of  conduct.  It  cannot  be  solved  therefore 
without  thought  or  discussion  by  a phrase  or  a paragraph.  The  ques- 
tion now  comes  to  me  in  a different  form  from  that  in  which  it  has  pre- 
sented itself  to  any  other  military  commander. 

At  Fortress  Monroe  during  the  last  summer  I found  the  negro  de- 
serted by  his  master  or  having  been  forced  by  him  into  the  fortifica- 
tion as  the  builder  and  thus  made  to  aid  in  the  rebellion.  The  rights 
of  property  under  that  condition  of  things  could  be  easily  settled.  The 
man  was  to  be  treated  as  a human  being  wrecked  upon  a civilized  coast, 
all  his  social  ties  and  means  of  living  gone,  to  be  cared  for  because  he 
was  a man.  My  action  thereupon  is  well  known  and  was  approved  by 
the  Government. 

At  Port  Royal  the  same  condition  of  things  substantially  obtained 
and  I suppose  will  be  dealt  with  in  like  manner.  Here,  however,  an 
entirely  different  state  of  the  question  is  disclosed. 

The  general  commanding  finds  himself  in  possession  of  a tract  of 
country  larger  than  some  States  of  the  Union.  This  has  submitted  to 
the  Government  of  the  United  States;  a community  with  whom  by 
proclamation  the  President  is  about  opening  commercial  relations 
with  all  the  world  except  for  that  which  is  contraband  of  war;  rich  in 


440 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


fertile  lands ; in  it  a city  of  the  first  class,  wherein  its  inhabitants  by 
a large  majority  are  attending  to  their  usual  avocations  and  endeavor- 
ing in  good  faith  to  live  quietly  under  the  laws  of  the  Union,  and  who- 
ever does  not  do  so  is  speedily  punished  and  his  compeers  thereby 
admonished. 

To  this  city  and  vicinage  has  been  pledged  the  governmental  pro- 
tection and  inviolability  of  the  rights  of  property  under  the  laws  of  the 
United  States  so  long  as  these  conditions  of  peace  and  quiet  shall  be 
preserved,  and  that  pledge  has  been  accepted  by  the  good,  loyal,  and 
peaceful,  and  the  power  of  the  Union  is  respected  by  the  wicked,  so  that 
they  have  become  peaceful,  if  not  loyal.  It  is  found  that  a large  portion 
of  property  held  here  is  in  slaves.  They  till  the  soil,  raise  the  sugar, 
corn,  and  cotton,  load  and  unload  the  ships  5 they  perform  every  domestic 
office,  and  are  permeated  through  every  branch  of  industry  and  peaceful 
calling. 

In  a large  degree  the  owners  of  the  soil,  planters,  farmers,  mechanics,- 
and  small  traders  have  been  passive  rather  than  active  in  the  rebellion. 
All  that  had  real  property  at  stake  have  been  the  led  rather  than  the 
leaders  in  this  outbreak  against  law  and  order.  In  the  destruction  of 
cotton  and  sugar  even,  which  has  been  so  largely  effected,  the  owners 
and  producers  have  not  been  the  destroyers,  but  in  many  cases  the  re- 
sistants  of  destruction. 

There  is  still  another  class.  Those  actively  in  arms  and  those  who 
for  motives  of  gain  or  worse  have  aided  the  rebellion  in  their  several 
spheres. 

The  property  of  these  I am  hunting  out  and  holding  for  confiscation 
under  the  laws.  There  is  in  most  cases  no  military  necessity  for  its 
immediate  confiscation.  Such  act,  if  done,  would  in  many  instances 
work  injustice  to  the  bona  fide  loyal  creditor,  whose  interest  the  Gov- 
ernment will  doubtless  consider.  I am  only  confiscating  in  fact  in 
cases  where  there  is  a breach  of  a positive  order,  for  the  purpose  of  pun- 
ishment and  example.  In  all  these  cases  I have  no  hesitation  as  to  the 
kinds  of  property  or  rights  of  property  which  shall  be  confiscated,  and 
make  no  distinctions,  save  that  where  that  property  consists  in  the 
services  of  slaves  I shall  not  sell  it  until  so  ordered. 

JStow,  many  negroes  (slaves)  have  come  within  my  lines.  Many  have 
sought  to  be  kept,  fed,  and  to  live  in  the  quarters  with  my  troops. 
Loyal  and  disloyal  masters  have  lost  them  alike.  I have  caused  as 
many  to  be  employed  as  I have  use  for.  I have  directed  all  not  em- 
ployed to  be  sent  out  of  my  lines,  leaving  them  subject  to  the  ordinary 
laws  of  the  community  in  that  behalf. 

I annex  all  orders  and  communications  to  my  officers  upon  this  mat- 
ter up  to  the  date  of  the  transmission  of  this  dispatch. 

Uow,  what  am  I to  do?  Unless  all  personal  property  of  all  rebels  is 
to  be  confiscated  (of  the  policy  of  which  a military  commander  has  no 
right  to  an  opinion)  it  is  manifestly  unjust  to  make  a virtual  confisca- 
tion of  this  particular  species  of  property.  Indeed  it  makes  an  actual 
confiscation  of  all  property,  both  real  and  personal,  of  the  planter  if  we 
take  away  or  allow  to  run  away  his  negroes  as  his  crop  is  just  growing, 
it  being  impossible  to  supply  the  labor  necessary  to  preserve  it.  Again, 
if  a portion  of  these  slaves  only  are  to  be  taken  withiu  my  lines,  and  if 
to  be  so  taken  is  a benefit  to  them,  it  is  unjust  to  those  that  are  not 
taken.  Those  that  come  early  to  us  are  by  no  means  the  best  men 
and  women.  With  them,  as  with  the  whites,  it  is  the  worse  class  that 
rebel  against  and  evade  the  laws  that  govern  them.  The  vicious  and 
unthrifty  have  felt  punishment  of  their  masters  as  a rule,  the  exception 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  441 

being  where  the  cruel  master  abuses  the  industrious  and  well-behaved 
slave,  and  the  first  to  come  are  those  that  feel  particular  grievances. 

It  is  a physical  impossibility  to  take  all.  I cannot  feed  the  white 
men  within  my  lines.  Women  and  children  are  actually  starving  in 
spite  of  all  that  I can  do.  Ay,  and  they  too  without  fault  on  their 
part.  What  would  be  the  state  of  things  if  I allowed  all  the  slaves 
from  the  plantations  to  quit  their  employment  and  come  within  the 
lines  is  not  to  be  conceived  by  the  imagination. 

Am  I then  to  take  of  these  blacks  only  the  adventurers,  the  shiftless, 
and  wicked,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  good  and  quiet  ? If  coming  within 
our  lines  is  equivalent  to  freedom,  and  liberty  is  a boon,  is  it  to  be 
obtained  only  by  the  first  that  apply? 

I had  written  thus  far  when  by  the  Ocean  Queen  I received  a copy 
of  an  order  of  Major-General  Hunter  upon  this  subject  in  the  Depart- 
ment of  the  South.  Whether  I assent  or  dissent  from  the  course  of 
action  therein  taken  it  is  not  my  province  to  criticise  it. 

I desire,  however,  to  call  attention  to  the  grounds  upon  which  it 
seems  to  be  based  and  to  examine  how  far  they  may  be  applicable  here. 

The  military  necessity  does  not  exist  here  for  the  employment  of  ne- 
groes in  arms,  in  order  that  we  may  have  an  acclimated  force.  If  the 
War  Department  desires,  and  will  permit,  I can  have  5,000  able  bodied 
white  citizens  enlisted  within  60  days,  all  of  whom  have  lived  here 
many  years,  and  many  of  them  drilled  soldiers,  to  be  commanded  by 
intelligent  loyal  officers.  Besides,  I hope  and  believe  that  this  war  will 
be  ended  before  any  body  of  negroes  could  be  organized,  armed,  and 
drilled  so  as  to  be  efficient. 

The  negro  here,  by  long  habit  and  training,  has  acquired  a great 
horror  of  fire-arms,  sometimes  ludicrous  in  the  extreme  when  the  weapon 
is  in  his  own  hand.  I am  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  John  Brown  was 
right  in  his  idea  of  arming  the  negro  with  a pike  or  spear  instead  of  a 
musket,  if  they  are  to  be  armed  at  all.  Of  this  I say  nothing,  because 
a measure  of  governmental  policy  is  not  to  be  discussed  in  the  dispatch 
of  a subordinate  military  officer. 

In  this  connection  it  might  not  be  inopportune  to  call  to  mind  the 
fact  that  a main  cause  of  the  failure  of  the  British  in  their  attack  on 
New  Orleans  was  the  employment  of  a regiment  of  blacks  brought  with 
them  from  the  West  Indies.  This  regiment  was  charged  with  the  duty 
of  carrying  the  facines  with  which  the  ditch  in  front  of  Jackson’s  line 
was  tt>  be  filled  up  and  the  ladders  for  scaling  the  embankment. 
When  the  attacking  column  reached  the  point  of  assault  the  facines 
and  ladders  were  not  there.  Upon  looking  around  for  them  it  was  found 
that  their  black  guardians  had  very  prudently  laid  themselves  down 
upon  the  plain  in  the  rear  and  protected  their  heads  from  the  whistling 
shot  with  the  facines  which  should  have  been  to  the  front  in  a different 
sense. 

I am  further  inclined  to  believe  that  the  idea  that  our  men  here  can- 
not stand  the  climate,  and  therefore  the  negroes  must  be  freed  and 
armed  as  an  acclimated  force,  admits  of  serious  debate. 

My  command  has  been  either  here  or  on  the  way  here  from  Ship 
Island  since  the  1st  of  May;  some  of  them  on  shipboard  in  the  river 
since  the  17th  of  April.  All  the  deaths  in  the  general  hospital  in  this 
city  since  we  have  been  here  are  only  13  from  all  causes,  2 of  these 
being  accidental,  as  will  appear  from  Surgeon  Smith’s  report,  herewith 
submitted.  From  diseases  at  all  peculiar  to  the  climate  I do  not  believe 
we  have  lost  in  the  last  thirty  days  one-fifth  of  one  per  cent,  in  the 
whole  command;  taking  into  the  account  also  the  infirm  and  debili- 


442 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MTSS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chal>.  XXVII.. 

tated,  who  ought  never  to  have  passed  the  surgeon’s  examination  aDd 
come  here. 

Certain  it  is,  if  we  admit  the  proposition  that  white  men  cannot  be 
soldiers  in  this  climate,  we  go  very  far  toward  asserting  the  dogma  that 
white  men  cannot  labor  here,  and  therefore  establish  the  necessity  for 
exclusively  black  labor,  which  has  ever  been  the  corner-stone  of  African 
slavery. 

We  have  heard  much  in  the  newspapers  of  the  free-negro  corps  of 
this  city  organized  for  the  defense  of  the  South.  From  this  a very 
erroneous  idea  may  have  been  derived.  The  officers  of  that  company 
called  upon  me  the  other  day  upon  the  question  of  the  continuance  of 
their  organization  and  to  learn  what  disposition  they  would  be  re- 
quired to  make  of  their  arms;  and  in  color,  nay,  also  in  conduct,  they 
had  much  more  the  appearance  of  white  gentlemen  than  some  of  those 
who  have  favored  me  with  their  presence  claiming  to  be  the  “ chivalry 
of  the  South.” 

I have  satisfied  myself,  if  I have  failed  to  satisfy  the  Department, 
that  no  military  necessity  exists  to  change  the  policy  of  the  Govern- 
ment in  this  respect  within  my  command. 

I have  given  hurriedly  amidst  the  press  of  other  cares  some  of  the 
considerations  that  seem  to  me  to  bear  upon  the  question.  I only  add 
as  a fact  that  those  well-disposed  to  the  Union  here  represent  that  the 
supposed  policy  of  the  Government,  as  indicated  by  General  Hunter’s 
order,  is  used  by  our  enemies  to  paralyze  all  the  efforts  to  co- operate 
with  us. 

Reared  in  the  full  belief  that  slavery  is  a curse  to  a nation,  which  my 
further  acquaintance  with  it  only  deepens  and  widens,  from  its  baleful 
effects  upon  the  master,  because  as  under  it  he  cannot  lift  the  negro 
up  in  the  scale  of  humanity  therefore  the  negro  drags  him  down,  I 
have  no  fear  that  my  views  will  be  anywhere  misunderstood.  I only 
accept  the  fact  of  its  present  existence,  the  “ tares  among  the  wheat,” 
and  have  asked  the  direction  of  the  Department,  “lest  while  I gather 
up  the  tares  I root  up  also  the  wheat  with  them,”  or  shall  I “let  both 
grow  together  till  the  harvest?” 

Respectfully,  &c., 

BE^J.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


[In  closures.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , May  9,  1862. 

General  Phelps: 

Mr.  J.  B.  G.  Armand  says  that  a boy  by  name  of  Irwin  Pardon,  whose 
services  he  claims,  has  come  within  your  lines.  The  course  which  I 
have  adopted  in  such  cases  is  this:  If  I have  any  use  for  the  services 
of  such  a boy  I employ  him  without  any  scruple;  if  I have  not  I do 
not  harbor  him,  as  my  subsistence  would  by  no  means  serve  for  so  many 
extra  men  that  I do  not  need.  If  you  have  any  use  for  him  use  him;  if 
not,  is  he'  not  like  any  other  vagrant  about  the  camp. 

Respectfully, 


BEHJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


443 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , May  10,  1862. 

General  Phelps: 

I commend  to  you  the  bearers  of  this  note,  Peter  Saure  and  P.  Soniat, 
gentlemen  and  planters  of  Jefferson,  just  above  your  lines.  They  will 
make  the  statement  of  facts  to  you  which  they  have  made  to  me,  and 
which  from  their  characters  I am  bound  to  believe.  You  will  see  the 
need  of  giving  them  every  aid  in  your  power  to  save  and  protect  the 
levee,  even  to  returning  their  own  negroes  and  adding  others  if  need 
be  to  their  forces. 

This  is  outside  of  the  question  of  returning  negroes.  You  should 
send  your  soldiers,  let  alone  allowing  the  men  who  are  protecting  us 
all  from  the  Mississippi  to  have  their  workmen  who  are  accustomed  to 
this  service. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEE, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , May  21,  1862. 

Brigadier- General  Phelps, 

Commanding  Camp  Parapet  : 

General  : Your  provost-marshal  did  not  report  to  me.  He  is  sup- 
posed to  have  come  down  to  New  Orleans,  as  I found  on  my  table  a list 
of  17  negroes,  uu signed,  uncertified  to,  and  unknown.  While  I was 
attending  to  other  duties  the  person  who  brought  it  went  away,  so  that 
when  I sent  for  him  he  could  not  be  found. 

I attribute  this  to  his  ignorance  of  duty ; you  must  teach  him  better. 

Send  him  down  with  a true  list,  certified  by  you,  of  every  person,  white 
or  black,  remaining,  being  permitted  to  remain  harbored  or  in  any  way 
within  your  pickets,  not  enlisted  men  or  officers  of  the  United  States, 
with  a tabular  statement  of  names,  when  and  by  whom  employed  or 
unemployed,  as  the  case  may  be,  so  that  the  list  may  give  me  every 
person  who  may  be  within  your  lines. 

This  is  necessary  for  public  service,  and  needs  to  be  carefully  attended 
to.  1 desire  it  by  to-morrow’s  boat.  I have  sent  you  the  Time  and  Tide 
instead  of  the  Diana,  which  I need  for  other  service. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEE, 
Major-General , Commanding . * 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Neiv  Orleans , May  23,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Phelps, 

Commanding  Camp  Parapet : 

General  : You  will  cause  all  unemployed  persons,  black  and  white,  to 
be  excluded  from  your  lines. 

You  wall  not  permit  either  black  or  white  persons  to  pass  your  lines, 
not  officers  or  soldiers  or  belonging  to  the  Navy  of  the  United  States, 
without  a pass  from  these  headquarters,  except  they  are  brought  in 
under  guard  as  captured  persons  with  information;  these  to  be  exam- 
ined and  detained  as  prisoners  of  war  if  they  have  been  in  arms  against 
the  United  States  or  dismissed  and  sent  away  at  once,  as  the  case  may 
be.  This  does  not  apply  to  boats  passing  up  the  river  without  landing 
within  lines. 


444 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXV3X 


Provision  dealers  and  market  men  are  to  be  allowed  to  pass  in  with 
provisions  and  their  wares,  but  not  to  remain  overnight.  Persons  hav- 
ing had  their  permanent  residence  within  your  lines  before  the  occupa- 
tion of  our  troops  are  not  to  be  considered  unemployed  persons. 

Your  officers  have  reported  a large  number  of  servants.  Every  offi- 
cer so  reported  employing  servants  will  have  the  allowance  for  servants 
deducted  from  his  pay  roll. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  E.  BUTLER, 
Major-  General , Commanding . 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  44.  1 New  Orleans , May  26,  1862. 

All  females,  white  and  black,  must  be  excluded  from  remaining  in  any 
portion  of  the  United  States  custom-house  after  the  hour  of  4 o’clock 
p.  m.  or  before  the  hour  of  9 a.  m. 

All  persons  not  officers,  soldiers,  or  clerks  in  the  several  departments 
must  have  a written  pass,  signed  by  the  officer  or  person  in  charge  of 
the  department  by  whom  they  are  employed,  or  they  will  be  sent  out  of 
the  custom-house. 

No  sentinel  will  allow  any  person  without  a pass  to  pass  into  the  cus- 
tom-house save  into  the  offices  of  the  commanding  general,  post-office, 
or  of  the  commissary,  or  quartermaster,  or  court-room. 

Upon  no  consideration  are  such  persons  to  be  allowed  to  pass  into 
any  other  part  of  the  building. 

Colonel  Birge  is  charged  with  the  execution  of  this  order,  and  will 
report  to  the  commanding  general  its  thorough  execution  at  sunset  to- 
day. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler,  commanding  Department  of  the 
Gulf: 


R.  S.  DAVIS, 


Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Camp  Parapet,  La.}  May  27,  1862. 

Captain  Page, 

Thirty-first  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers : 

By  the  Diana  this  evening  a number  of  negroes,  mostly  men,  some 
women  and  children,  are  sent  up  to  you  for  the  purpose  of  being  set  at 
work  on  the  levee  or  such  other  worKs  as  there  may  be  to  do  under  your 
guidance  or  that  of  the  officer  in  charge  of  the  work. 

You  will  cause  a roster  or  list  to  be  made  of  them,  their  names,  that 
of  their  owners,  the  amount  of  their  labor,  and  of  any  other  matter  con- 
cerning them  that  ought  to  be  known  at  headquarters ; and  you  will 
communicate  with  general  headquarters  for  any  instructions  relating 
to  them. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler : 

P.  HAGGERTY, 
Captain  and  Aide-de-  Camp. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


445 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , May  27,  1862. 

Captain  Haggerty,  Aide -de-  Camp  : 

You  will  go  to  Camp  Parapet  and  call  on  General  Phelps.  Take  a 
copy  of  the  order  referred  to  in  Captain  Page’s  letter,  which  was  left 
with  General  Phelps.  Make  a thorough  examination  of  Camp  Parapet. 
See  that  that  order  is  fully  enforced.  Call  on  General  Phelps  to  have 
it  done.  Report  to  me  the  number  of  negroes  in  that  camp.  Cause  all 
women  and  children,  both  white  and  black,  who  had  not  their  homes 
within  our  lines  before  the  occupation  of  our  forces,  except  wives  of 
officers  and  soldiers,  to  be  excluded  therefrom. 

You  will  report  to  me  whether  the  letter  of  instruction  of  May  23  to 
General  Phelps  has  been  complied  with  and  see  that  the  same  is  done. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler,  commanding  Department  of  the 
Gulf. 


Saint  James  Hospital,  May  27, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

General  • It  affords  me  pleasure  to  report  to  you  the  state  of  health 
of  the  Federal  troops  since  their  landing  in  New  Orleans  on  the  1st  in- 
stant. 

Agreeably  to  your  orders  this  general  hospital  was  immediately 
opened  for  the  reception  of  all  who  by  sickness  or  casualties  had  been 
or  would  be  disabled  from  the  performance  of  duty.  Since  that  time 
the  admissions  to  the  hospital  have  been  546,  and  the  deaths  from  among 
that  number  up  to  to-day  (including  2,  1 of  whom  was  assassinated  in 
the  street,  and  1 who  died  from  accidental  strangulation)  amount  to 
13.  Eleven  deaths  from  disease  occurring  in  this  general  hospital  for 
your  whole  department  here  is  a condition  of  health  as  gratifying  as  it 
was  unexpected. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBT.  K.  SMITH, 

Surgeon  in  Charge. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  32.  ( New  Orleans , May  27,  1862. 

No  officer  or  soldier  is  permitted  to  take  the  property  of  any  citizen, 
to  shut  up  any  house  or  place  of  business,  without  a special  order  from 
the  provost  judge,  provost-marshal,  quartermaster,  military  command- 
ant, or  from  these  headquarters. 

Any  citizen  whose  property  is  taken  or  annoyed  in  his  property  or 
arrested  by  any  officer  or  soldier  in  contravention  to  this  order  will  at 
once  report  to  these  headquarters,  where  he  will  have  redress. 

All  taking  of  property  by  officers  or  soldiers  for  their  private  use  is 
plunder,  and  will  be  punished  as  such. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

R.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


446 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  45.  f New  Orleans , May  27,  1862. 

All  persons,  black  or  white,  not  officers  or  soldiers  or  belonging  to 
the  Navy  of  the  United  States  or  laborers  actually  employed  by  the 
United  States  or  its  officers,  and  all  women  and  children  not  wives  of 
laborers  actually  employed  in  the  service  of  the  United  States  or  hav- 
ing their  homes  there  before  the  occupation  of  our  troops  or  confined 
as  prisoners,  will  be  forthwith  excluded  from  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint 
Philip  and  the  Quarantine  Grounds. 

All  persons  not  officers,  soldiers,  or  clerks  in  the  several  departments, 
and  prisoners,  must  have  a written  pass,  signed  by  the  officer  or  person 
in  charge  of  the  department  by  whom  they  are  employed,  or  they  will 
be  sent  out  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  or  the  Quarantine  Grounds, 
without  the  permission  of  the  commanding  officer  there  or  from  these 
headquarters  or  passes  as  above  mentioned.  Upon  no  consideration 
are  such  persons  to  be  allowed  to  pass  into  any  part  of  the  lines  held  by 
our  troops  at  the  above  places. 

Col.  E.  F.  Jones,  commanding  the  post,  is  charged  with  the  execution 
of  this  order. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  B.  F.  Butler,  commanding  Department  of 
the  Gulf: 


R.  S.  DAYIS, 
Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , May  28,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  W.  Phelps,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Forces  at  Camp  Parapet , La. : 

General  : I am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  call 
your  attention  to  the  following  communication  and  the  facts  therein 
set  forth : 

Kenner,  (16  miles  above  New  Orleans-),  May  27,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

Sir  : From  orders  issued  to  me  on  May  23  I understood  that  I was  ordered  here  to 
prevent  the  commission  of  excesses  either  on  the  part  of  soldiers  or  laborers.  This, 
sir,  I shall  find  impossible  to  do  if  soldiers  from  Camp  Parapet  are  allowed  to  range 
the  country,  insult  the  planters,  and  entice  negroes  away  from  their  plantations,  and 
I regret  I must  report  this  conduct  on  the  part  of  soldiers  from  that  camp. 

******  # 

If  on  any  of  the  plantations  here  a negro  is  punished  when  he  most  deserves  it,  the 
fact  becoming  known  at  General  Phelps’  camp,  a party  of  soldiers  are  sent  iminedi- 
diately  to  liberate  them  and  with  orders  to  bring  them  to  camp.  A negro  convicted 
of  barmburning,  and  afterward  riotous  conduct  on  the  plantation  of  Mrs.  Butler  Ken- 
ner (a  lady  who  has  from  you  a safeguard,  and  by  which  all  officers  and  soldiers  are 
commanded  to  respect  her  property  and  to  afford  her  every  protection),  was  confined 
in  the  stocks,  that  he  might  at  the  first  opportunity  be  sent  to  the  city  for  trial,  was  [re- 
leased] by  a company  of  soldiers  sent  by  General  Phelps,  and  afterward  taken  to  the 
camp.  Yesterday  an  out-building  on  Mrs.  Fendeair’s  plantation  was  broken  open  by 
theses  oldiers,  and  3 negroes,  confined  there  overnight,  taken  out  and  carried  to  the  camp, 
notwithstanding  the  presence  of  the  owners,  who  protested  against  the  act  as  one  con- 
trary to  all  orders.  The  soldiers  also  broke  into  the  house  and  stole  therefrom  silver 
spoons,  dresses,  and  other  articles.  * * * 

While,  sir,  such  acts  are  permitted  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  call  upon  the  negroes 
for  any  labor,  as  they  say  they  have  only  to  go  to  the  fort  to  be  free,  and  are  therefore 
very  insolent  to  their  masters.  If  these  men  could  be  returned  we  should  need  no 
white  men  on  the  levee,  and  much  expense  might  be  saved  the  Government.  I have 
now  posted  sentinels  to  prevent  any  more  negroes  leaving,  and  shall  continue  that 


Chai\  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION 


447 


duty  until  I receive  further  orders  from  you.  There  is  much  to  he  done  here  for  over 
3 miles  on  the  levee,  and  the  planters  are  willing  to  take  the  whole  work  upon  them- 
selves can  they  have  their  own  necessary  help.  From  information  received  I should 
judge  there  was  from  100  to'  150  contrabands  at  Camp  Parapet. 

Awaiting  orders,  I am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  PAGE,  Jr., 
Captain,  Thirty-first  Regiment. 


Since  writing  the  above  General  Phelps  has  sent  to  me  80  contrabands— men,  women, 
and  children — but  I have  no  provisions,  and  shall  therefore  draw  upon  the  quartermas- 
ter for  them.  * * * 


Having  no  orders  to  dismiss  the  laborers,  they  will  continue  their  duties. 
Respectfully,  yours, 


EDWARD  PAGE,  Jr., 

Captain,  Thirty-first,  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 


And  to  say  that,  by  all  means  and  at  all  hazards,  the  officers  and  men 
of  your  command  must  be  prevented  from  strolling  without  authority 
and  without  right  outside  of  your  lines  and  from  interfering  (under 
cover  of  United  States  authority)  without  right  in  the  domestic  affairs 
of  the  people  around  about  you. 

I herewith  send  you  a copy  of  General  Orders,  No.  32,  which  may  not 
have  reached  you,  wherein  this  subject  is  considered. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

P.  HAGGERTY, 
Captain  and  Aide-de-Camp. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  35.  f New  Orleans , May  28,  1862. 

In  view  of  the  arrival  of  stores  from  New  York,  and  the  speedy  open- 
ing of  this  port,  reducing  the  price  of  provisions,  and  for  the  speedy 
relief  of  the  poor,  the  chief  commissary  of  subsistence  will  sell  to  fami- 
lies for  consumption,  in  small  quantities,  until  further  orders,  flour  and, 
salt  meats,  viz,  pork,  beef,  ham,  and  bacon,  from  the  stores  of  the  Army, 
at  7£  cents  per  pound  for  flour  and  10  cents  for  meats. 

Place  of  sale  designated  hereafter.  City  bank  notes,  gold,  silver,  or 
Treasury  notes  to  be  taken  in  payment. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

R.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


[May  31,  1862. — For  Butler  to  Stanton  in  reference  to  arrest  of  Pierre 

Soul6,  see  Series  II.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 


New  Orleans , June  1,  1862. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  the  official  report  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Keith,  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  Regiment,  of  his  action  in. 
redressing  the  murders  at  Houma.  His  conduct  meets  most  fully  my 
approval  and  his  report  is  a very  creditable  one.  There  is  one  circum- 


448 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXm 


stance,  however,  connected  with  the  murders  that  deserves  to  be  more 
fully  brought  out.  The  men  killed  were  sick  and  were  lying  asleep  in 
the  wagon  when  waylaid. 

Also  please  find  inclosed  report  of  Brigadier-General  Williams,  who 
went  up  the  river  with  the  flag-officer,  marked  A.*  I have  sent  him 
three  additional  regiments  and  a battery  of  artillery  (Kims’),  as  will  be 
seen  by  my  letter  of  this  date,  marked  B.*  General  Williams  was 
mistaken  as  to  the  number  of  the  enemy’s  forces  at  Baton  Kouge,  and 
the  second  day  after  no  person  had  attacked  him.  His  re-enforcements 
have  by  this  time  reached  him.  Starvation  and  demoralization  are 
doing  their  work  so  fast  upon  Lovell’s  forces  that  it  was  hardly  worth 
while  to  disturb  them.  I have  sent  up  to  Baton  Bouge  quite  one-half 
of  my  effective  force,  after  deducting  the  garrison  of  the  forts.  The 
flag-officer  has  returned.  I have  had  a very  full  consultation  with  him. 

I inclose  copy  of  his  letter  to  me  of  the  22d  of  May,  which  was  the  first 
report  I have  of  the  operations  above,  marked  D. 

I am  of  opinion  that  it  is  all-important  that  we  take  Vicksburg,  hold 
it  or  not,  after  the  insulting  letters  sent  back  (copies  of  which  I inclose)! 
by  the  civil  and  military  authorities  there.  Vicksburg  must  be  re- 
duced, to  ashes  if  need  be,  but  reduced.  That  town  out  of  the  way, 
the  river  is  open  to  Memphis  without  opposition,  saving  perhaps  some 
small  works  at  the  mouth  of  the  Arkansas.  This  would  effectively 
keep  the  rebels  from  getting  supplies  across  the  Mississippi  River,  or, 
if  defeated  at  Corinth,  their  retreat  into  Arkansas,  of  which  last  there 
is  only  a probability.  The  flag-officer  agreed  with  my  views  upon  this 
topic  and,  I believe,  has  to-day  ordered  Commander  Porter’s  mortar  fleet 
up  the  river  from  Ship  Island,  where  it  has  been  lying  since  it  left  the 
Mississippi  River  after  the  24th  of  April,  being  the  last  day  on  which  it 
tired  a shot  at  Fort  Jackson.  With  that  force  l have  no  doubt  we  can 
remove  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg.  I shall  co-operate  with  the  flag- 
officer  with  one-half  or  more  of  my  entire  force,  all  that  can  possibly 
be  spared  from  here.  I think  you  will  agree  with  me  in  the  present 
necessity  for  more  men  here,  if  we  are  not  to  be  joined  by  the  armies 
up  the  river. 

I sent  to  Genera!  Brannan,  at  Key  West,  for  the  two  regiments  that 
were  promised  me  by  the  order  of  the  commanding  general,  but  failed 
to  get  them,  for  the  reasons  stated  in  General  Brannan ’s  reply,  which, 
with  my  request,  is  annexed,  by  copies,  marked  E and  F. 

The  Department  will  be  better  able  to  judge  than  myself  of  our  neces- 
sities here.  I have  about  12,000  effective  men  of  all  arms,  and  should  ' 
not  have  had  so  many  save  that  I have  filled  up  my  regiments  by  re- 
cruiting. 

In  the  present  temper  of  the  country  here  it  is  cruel  to  take  posses- 
sion of  any  point  unless  we  continue  to  hold  it  with  an  armed  force,  1 
because  when  we  have  possession  of  any  place  those  well-disposed 
show  us  kindness  and  good  wishes.  The  moment  we  leave  that  place 
a few  ruffians  come  in  and  maltreat  every  person  who  has  not  “ scowled 
at  the  Yankees.”  Therefore  it  is  that  I have  been  very  chary  of  pos- 
sessing myself  of  various  small  points,  which  could  easily  be  done, 
because  I could  not  dissipate  my  forces  into  small  detachments  for 
holding  places  so  taken  possession  of. 

Again,  it  is  nearly  useless  to  go  over  a country  with  a few  thousand 
men  hundreds  of  miles  (and  distances  are  reckoned  here  by  hundreds  of 
miles)  only  to  leave  it  again. 


See  reports,  pp.  22-24, 


t See  reports,  pp.  12-14. 


Chap.  tXttl. j CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  449 

What  I would  recommend  is,  that  I be  allowed  to  raise  here,  and  have 
the  equipment  here  of,  or  have  sent  me,  a force  large  enough  to  hold  by 
armed  occupation  every  place  of  the  slightest  importance,  with  a sup- 
porting force  that  could  not  be  overcome,  and  this  part  of  the  country 
made  to  pay  the  expenses  of  such  occupation.  A few  months  under 
that  regime  would  reduce  this  people  to  order  and  assure  the  Union 
men  that  they  were  not  to  be  given  up  to  rapine  and  murder  in  a few 
days  by  the  retirement  of  our  troops. 

In  their  present  frame  of  mind,  under  the  pressure  of  the  order  of 
General  Lovell  and  the  Confederate  Government  (an  official  copy 
whereof  I inclose,  marked  H)  to  burn  all  the  cotton  and  sugar,  such 
burning  will  take  place  in  advance  of  my  march  wherever  I may  move, 
entailing  great  destruction  of  property  upon  its  innocent  owners,  who 
with  tears  in  their  eyes  have  entreated  me  not  to  advance  into  certain 
sections  of  the  country  lest  their  property  should  be  burned. 

As  an  instance  of  recklessness  of  their  troops  in  arms  take  the  fol- 
lowing: The  river  has  been  unusually  high  and  a crevasse  opening  at 
certain  points  would  do  an  immensity  of  damage.  A party  of  40  rebels 
surprised  the  train  on  the  Opelousas  Railroad,  ran  down  to  within  13 
miles  of  the  city  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river,  and  there  deliberately 
cut  the  levee  in  six  different  places.  If  their  design  had  been  carried 
out  they  would  have  drowned  out  every  plantation  between  New  Or- 
leans and  Fort  Jackson  for  70  miles,  but  not  injured  the  United  States. 
All  this  was  done  because  the  planters  were  supposed  to  favor  us. 
Prompt  measures  were  taken  by  me  to  prevent  the  injury  before  it  be- 
came irreparable,  which  were  successful. 

I also  inclose  a report  made  me  by  Lieutenant  Weitzel,  of  the  En- 
gineers, to  which  I desire  attention,  so  that  some  measure  may  be  taken 
to  secure  certain  co-operation  by  all  the  officers  of  the  Navy  in  the  de- 
fenses of  New  Orleans,  which  I have  always  received  from  Flag-Officer 
Farragut  when  he  is  present. 

I have  read  Commander  Porter’s  official  report  of  the  surrender  of 
the  forts,  and  here  permit  me,  for  the  sake  of  my  brave  and  enduring 
soldiers  of  the  Twenty-sixth  Massachusetts  and  Fourth  Wisconsin 
Regiments,  who  waded  in  the  swamps  in  the  rear  of  Fort  Saint  Philip 
up  to  their  armpits  in  water  in  order  to  cut  off  its  garrison  and  get  ready 
to  assault  the  enemy’s  works,  to  put  the  truth  of  history  right  before 
the  War  Department  and  the  country  by  the  simple  enumeration  of 
the  fact  that  it  was  due  to  their  efforts  and  that  of  their  comrades,  and 
to  those  alone,  that  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip  surrendered  when 
they  did.  No  naval  vessel  or  one  of  the  mortar  fleet  had  fired  a shot 
at  the  forts  for  three  days  before  the  surrender  and  not  one  of  the 
mortar  boats  was  within  25  miles  at  that  time,  they  having  sailed  out 
of  the  river  from  prudent  consideration  of  the  prowess  of  the  ram  Louis- 
iana, which  was  supposed  to  be  “lively”  near  the  forts.  A majority 
of  the  garrison  of  Fort  Jackson  had  surrendered  to  my  pickets  the 
night  before  the  officers  made  a surrender  to  Commander  Porter  and 
obtained  from  him  better  terms  than  has  been  or  ought  to  be  given 
during  the  war  to  a rebel  officer  or  soldier,  and  under  those  terms  the 
rebel  General  Duncan  claims  a right  to  be  and  is  in  the  army  of  Beau- 
regard, giving  “ aid  and  comfort,”  and  only  holding  himself  “not  to  serve 
in  arms,”  which  are  the  terms  of  his  parole.  I send  a copy  of  the  terms 
of  capitulation.  I do  not  wish  to  take  from  the  well-earned  and  well- 
deserved  consideration  due  to  the  Navy  for  their  brilliant  exploit  in 
running  past  Forts  Saint  Philip  and  Jackson.  I have  borne  and  shall 
ever  bear  testimony  to  their  courage  and  gallantry  on  that  occasion, 

29  R R— YOL  XY 


450 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chaf.XXVIL 

but  after  that  no  shot  was  fired  until  the  surrender,  and  the  forts  could 
have  been  held  for  weeks,  if  not  months,  so  far  as  the  bombardment 
was  concerned;  for  in  the  judgment  of  the  best  engineering  skill  they 
were  then  as  defensible  as  before  the  bombardment.  I will  not  permit 
too  great  meed  of  praise  on  the  part  of  anybody  to  take  away  the 
merit  fairly  due  my  brave  solders,  who  endured  so  much  hardship  and 
showed  as  much  bravery  as  the  most  gallant  tar  of  them  all,  for  we 
landed  within  5 miles  above  the  forts  and  “ lively  ram,”  protected  by 
only  two  gunboats,  while  the  mortar  boats,  protected  by  seven  gun- 
boats, retreated  25  miles  below  the  forts  and  out  of  the  river. 

In  this  connection  I must  ask  to  have  justice  done  to  a meritorious 
officer  to  whom  the  country  owes  as  much  as  any  other,  whatever  may 
be  his  rank,  for  our  success  at  New  Orleans.  Lieutenant  Weitzel,  of 
the  Engineer  Corps,  by  his  advice  and  accurate  knowledge  of  the  local- 
ities, freely  communicated  both  to  the  fleet  and  army,  enabled  the  op- 
erations of  both  to  be  conducted  to  the  present  result.  He  made  a 
report  to  me  on  the  22d  day  of  March  at  Ship  Island,  setting  forth  the 
same  process  of  landing  and  turning  Fort  Saint  Philip  which  was  in 
fact  adopted,  and  it  was  the  want  of  light-draught  transportation  which 
prevented  it  from  being  done  before  it  was  done. 

I have  caused  to  be  tried  six  men  who  have  broken  their  parole,  and 
inclose  a copy  of  the  order  for  their  execution,  marked  L. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEB, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


[Indorsement.] 


No  copy  of  the  order 
was  inclosed.* 


for  the  execution  of  the  men  who  broke  parole 

C.  P.  WOLCOTT. 


[Inclosnre  No.  l.j 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-first  Begiment  Indiana  Vols., 

Algiers , La .,  May  22,  1862. 

Maj.  Oen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

Sir:  In  obedience  to  your  order  of  the  11th  instant  to  proceed  to  the 
town  of  Houma,  in  the  parish  of  Terre  Bonne,  and  arrest  and  punish 
certain  parties  charged  with  having  fired  upon  4 sick  soldiers  ot  the 
Twenty-first  Indiana  Volunteers,  killing  2 and  wounding  the  others; 
to  execute  the  guilty,  their  aiders  and  abettors,  if  found;  to  confiscate 
and  destroy  the  property  of  all  who  were  in  any  manner  implicated,  I 
left  Algiers  at  9 o’clock  in  the  evening  of  the  day  of  your  order  in  a 
train  of  cars  on  the  Opelousas  Bailroad.  My  force  consisted^  ot  four 
companies  of  infantry,  comprising  240  men,  under  command  of  Captains 
Boy,  Grimsley,  Skelton,  and  McLaflin,  of  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  Vol- 
unteers, and  two  pieces  of  artillery  and  30  men  of  the  Sixth  Massachu- 
setts Battery,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Carruth.  We  reached 
Terre  Bonne  Station,  55  miles  from  Algiers,  about  2 o’clock  in  the  morn- 
ing of  the  12th  instant,  where  we  found  Captain  Bose,  with  65  men  ot 
our  regiment,  previously  sent  down  to  recapture  Private  Miller,  one  of 
the  men  fired  upon  and  wounded,  who  had  been  made  a prisoner  at  this 


For  order,  see  Butler  to  Stanton,  Juue  10  (General  Orders,  No.  36). 


CHAP.XXVn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  451 

point,  and  sent  17  miles  farther  back  into  the  country.  Here  we  also 
found  Private  Morris,  •another  of  the  party,  who  had  been  attacked, 
captured,  and  imprisoned,  and  subsequently  released,  the  circumstances 
of  which  are  hereinafter  detailed.  With  the  additional  force  of  Cap- 
tain Rose,  leaving  a guard  to  protect  the  train  and  having  secured  all 
necessary  transportation,  we  took  up  the  line  of  march  for  Houma,  dis- 
tant 13  miles,  where  we  arrived  at  10  o’clock  a.  m.  Such  persons  as 
we  found  traveling  on  the  road  were  arrested  to  prevent  information 
being  conveyed  of  our  approach.  On  reaching  Houma  all  necessary 
measures  to  guard  against  the  escape  of  the  criminals,  if  there,  were 
taken.  I found  the  town  almost  deserted,  at  least  three-fourths  of  the 
citizens  having  fled  upon  the  previous  day,  many  of  them  taking  such 
of  their  effects  as  they  could  readily  move,  whilst  others,  in  their  haste 
to  escape,  left  all  their  property  behind  and  entirely  unprotected. 
Those  remaining  were  indisposed  to  have  any  intercourse  with  me 
whatever,  much  less  to  furnish  such  information  as  they  possessed  and 
I required.  Having  secured  the  necessary  quarters  I proceeded  to  in- 
vestigate the  circumstances  relating  to  the  murder  of  our  men,  of  the 
disposition  made  of  their  bodies,  and  ascertained  the  following  facts: 
That  about  2 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  9th  inst.  Col.  J.  W.  Mc- 
Millan, of  this  regiment,  with  65  men,  had  passed  through  the  town  of 
Houma  upon  an  expedition  to  capture  the  rebel  steamer  Fox,  which  he 
had  been  informed  was  then  in  Grand  [Caillou]  Bayou,  some  30  miles  be- 
yond that  place.  This  fact  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  Colonels  Bis- 
land  and  Robinson,  they,  or  one  of  them,  issued  an  order,  in  pursuance 
of  which  the  militia  of  that  parish  assembled  in  Houma  at  an  early 
hour  ot  the  same  morning.  The  object  of  this  meeting  was  to  devise 
means  to  prevent  the  capture  of  the  above-named  vessel  or  to  recap- 
ture her  should  she  be  taken.  The  subject  being  fullv  canvassed, 
and  a great  want  of  unanimity  being  manifest,  Colonel  Bislaud  aban- 
doned his  purpose  and  adjourned  the  meeting.  Still  later,  upon  the 
same  day,  a band  of  armed  men,  variously  estimated  from  15  to  20  in 
number,  proceeded  upon  the  same  road  taken  by  Colonel  McMillan,  but 
afterward  returned,  as  they  said,  for  recruits.  Late  in  the  evening  they 
again  sallied  forth  in  the  same  direction,  and  having  obtained  infor- 
mation of  the  approach  of  two  wagons  driven  by  negroes,  each  contain- 
ing two  soldiers  of  Colonel  McMillan’s  command,  sent  back  by  him  and 
who  were  on  their  way  to  the  railroad  station,  as  the  wagons  were  pass- 
ing they  secreted  themselves  in  a thicket  by  the  road-side  1£  miles  below 
the  town,  and  in  the  dusk  of  evening*  fired  upon  them  with  guns  loaded 
with  buck-shot,  instantly  killing  2 of  the  men,  one  in  each  wagon,  and 
wounding  the  others.  The  negroes,  being  mounted  upon  the  horses, 
escaped  unhurt.  The  killed  were  Sergt.  [Jesse]  Frakes,  of  Co.  E,  and 
Private  [Charles]  Gei  send  order,  of  Co.  G;  the  wounded  were  Privates 
Miller,  of  Co.  F,  and  Morris,  of  Co.  I,  the  former  being  shot  in  the 
shoulder  and  thigh  and  the  latter  in  the  forehead,  neither  seriously  in- 
jured. By  order  of  the  wounded  men  the  negroes  drove  rapidly  on 
and  escaped  further  danger  from  the  firing.  "The  wagon  containing 
I rivate  Miller  and  the  body  of  Gtisendorfifer  succeeded  in  passing 
through  the  town,  but  the  other  wagon,  iii  which  were  Private  Morris  and 
the  body  of  Sergeant  Frakes,  was  overtaken  before  reaching  it.  Miller 
having  proceeded  1 J miles  beyond  Houma,  in  the  direction  of  the  railroad 
station,  finding  himself  pursued  sprang  from  the  wagon,  taking  with  him 
his  own  gun  and  that  of  his  dead  comrade,  and  concealed  himself  from  his 
PUaS?T*^‘  Tbe  waS0U  was  soou  after  overtaken  and  stopped  in  the  road, 
and  Miller,  under  the  cover  of  darkness,  cautiously  followed  and  over- 


452 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  K.  MEX.  IChap.  XXVIL 

heard  their  plan  for  his  capture.  Secretin#  himself  under  a bridge  he 
saw  armed  men  thrown  out  for  his  capture  or  cutting  off  his  advance. 
About  2 o’clock  in  themorniug  they  retired,  supposing  he  had  effected  his 
escape.  He  then  left  his  comrade’s  gun,  being  unable  in  consequence  of 
his  wounds  to  carry  more  thau  his  own,  and  succeeded  in  reaching  the  sta- 
tion, distant  about  11  miles,  at  4 o’clock.  Here,  greatly  fatigued  and  ex- 
hausted, he  lay  down  to  rest.  About  7 o’clock  2 men  drove  up  from  the 
direction  of  Thibodeaux  and  attempted  to  take  him  prisoner,  but  he  re- 
sisted until  assured  by  them  that  their  object  was  to  protect  him  from  a 
body  of  armed  men,  who  were  pursuing  him  to  take  his  life.  He  accom- 
panied them  to  Thibodeaux,  where  the  shot  was  extracted  from  his 
wound ; after  which  he  was  carried  14  miles  into  the  country  and  delivered 
to  General  Mouton,  where  he  remained  until  late  in  the  evening  of  the 
same  day,  when  Captain  Rose,  who  had  in  the  mean  time  reached  Thibo- 
deaux, demanded  bis  surrender,  which  was  effected  by  one  of  the  par- 
ties who  had  taken  him  away  going  after  and  immediately  returning 
with  him  from  Mouton’s.  The  wagons  containing  Private  Morris  and 
the  bodies  of  the  murdered  men  were  driven  into  Houma.  Morris  was 
taken  into  Berger’s  Hotel,  and  questioned  relative  to  the  assault  and 
murder  and  his  written  statement  under  oath  taken.  He  was  then 
charged  with  having  murdered  his  own  comrades,  and  upon  this  shallow 
pretext  thrown  into  jail,  in  the  same  cell  with  a negro  under  sentence 
of  condemnation  to  the  State  prison  for  life,  first  having  been  deprived 
of  his  arms  and  accouterments.  He  was  detained  through  the  night, 
when,  by  taking  the  oath,  a copy  of  which  is  herewith  transmitted  and 
marked  A,  he  was  liberated  and  furnished  with  the  accompanying  pass- 
port, marked  B,  by  means  of  which  he  was  enabled  to  reach  Terre  Bonne 
Station,  where  he  met  with  Captain  Rose,  as  hereinbefore  stated,  on  his 
return  from  Thibodeaux.  The  bodies  of  the  dead  men  were  robbed  of 
everything  of  value,  even  to  their  caps,  boots,  and  socks;  from  that  of 
Sergeant  Frakes  was  taken  letters  to  General  Butler  and  Major  Hays, 
and  a number  of  private  papers  of  value  only  to  the  dead  and  his  family. 
These  bodies,  after  being  brutally  and  disgustingly  abused,  being  kicked 
and  beaten,  the  face  of  Sergeant  Frakes  scarcely  retaining  the  semblance 
of  a human  being,  the  proposition  was  then  made  to  cast  the  bodies 
into  the  bayou,  but  more  humane  counsel  prevailing,  they  were  handed 
over  to  negroes  for  disposal.  They,  under  direction,  dug  a hole  some  -» 
feet  deep  in  the  open  public  square  a few  feet  from  the  market-house 
stalls,  directly  in  front  of  the  court-house,  and  in  the  most  frequented 
place  of  the  town.  Into  this  hole,  without  a coffin  or  box,  and  with  but 
a single  blanket  thrown  over  them,  they  were  unceremoniously  tossed 
and  hastily  covered  up.  The  unsightly  mound  produced  by  the  piling 
in  of  the  loose  earth  was  the  only  monument  of  their  resting-place,  but 
this  was  sufficiently  conspicuous  to  attract  the  attention  not  only  of 
every  resident  of  the  town  but  all  who  might  pass  through  it. 

The  facts  thus  far  narrated  were  ascertained  with  more  or  less  diffi- 
culty soon  after  my  arrival  at  Houma,  but  the  names  of  the  perpetra- 
tors of  these  outrages  and  other  circumstances  connected  with  them  we 
were  unable  for  some  days  to  obtain,  and  then  only  by  a resort  to  the 
measures  hereinafter  described.  One  of  my  first  cares  was  to  make 
provision  for  the  exhumation  and  decent  interment  of  our  murdered  HieiL 
Accordingly  the  citizens  were  required  to  furnish  respectable  coffins 
and  prepare  graves  in  one  of  their  most  prominent  church-yards.  This 
done,  on  the  morning  after  our  arrival  we  took  with  us  a number  of  the 
leading  citizens,  who  were  arrested  on  the  previous  day  and  still  held 
in  custody  and  such  others  as  we  found  upon  the  streets,  to  where  our 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


453 


dead  men  had  been  thrown,  and  compelled  the  most  promiuent  of  them 
to  disinter  their  bodies  and  carefully  deposit  them  iu  the  coffins  they 
had  provided  in  presence  of  the  battalion.  The  funeral  procession  was 
then  formed  and  the  remains  conveyed  to  the  burial  place  of  the  Cath- 
olic church,  where  with  appropriate  religious  ceremonies,  performed  by 
Captain  Eose  and  with  the  honors  of  war,  their  coffins  enshrouded  with 
the  flag  of  their  country,  we  solemnly  committed  them  to  the  earth.  In 
the  mean  time,  assisted  by  the  officers  under  my  command,  no  possible 
means  were  spared  to  ferret  out  the  guilty.  Failing  to  obtain  satisfac- 
tory information  from  any  of  the  citizens  of  the  murderers  and  their 
whereabouts,  and  satisfied  that  they  were  known  and  their  place  of 
concealment  purposely  withheld  from  me,  I determined  to  hold  them 
personally  responsible  for  the  outrages  committed,  and  therefore  pre- 
pared a proclamation,  marked  C,  and  made  every  necessary  arrange- 
ment to  carry  its  provisions  into  effect.  The  evidence  of  my  intention 
being  made  apparent  I was  sent  for  by  the  prisoners  and  informed  that 
they  had  concluded  to  furnish  all  the  information  in  their  possession 
and  render  all  the  assistance  in  their  power,  joined  with  the  efforts  of 
their  friends,  to  discover,  secure,  and  bring  to  punishment  those  di- 
rectly implicated  in  the  crime.  They  gave  me  the  following  as  the 
most  prominent  of  the  guilty  parties  (all  of  whom  had  fled  from  town 
and  vicinity  before  our  arrival),  viz:  Albert  Wood,  lawyer  and  editor  of 
the  Houma  Ceres  ; Morelle,  formerly  a lieuteuant  in  the  rebel  army ; 
E.  N.  Du  trail,  deputy  parish  clerk ; B.  Cooper,  blacksmith  ; Gilbert 
Hatch,  son  of  a planter;  D.  W.  Crewell,  carpenter  (working  on  planta- 
tion of  Connelly);  Edwards,  overseer  (on  Connelly’s  plantation)  ■ How- 
ard Bond,  a druggist;  W.  Bond,  a lad,  brother  of  Howard,  and  both 
living  with  their  father,  a wealthy  planter  near  Houma,  overseer  on 
Bond’s  plantation;  F.  Gatewood,  living  on  plantation  8 miles  from 
Houma;  Doc.  J.  L.  Jennings,  Houma;  William  H.  Hornsby,  son  of  S.  H. 
Hornsby,  grocer  in  Houma  (the  latter  being  also  indirectly  implicated). 
These,  together  with  other  parties  unknown,  were  the  active  partici- 
pants, so  far  as  the  people  of  Houma  eould  determine,  in  the  tragic 
events  above  related.  Jennings,  Wood,  Morelle,  and  the  Bonds  appear 
to  have  been  the  moving  spirits ; Jennings  was  the  chief  of  those  who 
robbed  and  abused  the  bodies  of  the  dead.  He  it  was,  and  Howard 
Bond,  who  sent  3 boys  on  the  night  of  the  murder  2 miles  on  the  road 
from  Houma  to  Terre  Bonne  Station  to  burn  a bridge  over  a bayou  on 
Larette’s  plantation,  to  delay,  and  if  possible  prevent,  our  troops  from 
reaching  Houma.  This  act  was  prevented  by  Mr.  Larette.  Howard 
Bond  then  attempted  to  destroy  the  bridge  himself,  but  was  also  pre- 
vented by  Mr.  Larette.  The  boys  sent  on  this  errand  were  a brother 
of  Howard  Bond,  William  Hornsby  (whom  I arrested),  and  a lad  whose 
name  was  not  obtained.  It  was  averred  as  a reason  for  sending  these 
boys  that  should  they  be  arrested  their  youth  would  protect  them 
from  punishment.  Col.  J.  B.  Eobinson,  though  not  engaged  iu  the 
killing  of  our  men,  took  an  active  part  on  the  day  of  the  murder  in  in- 
citing parties  to  go  in  pursuit  of  Colonel  McMillan’s  force. 

Having  learned  these  facts  and  that  the  parties  named  had  fled  and 
some  of  them  were  still  secreted  in  the  neighborhood,  detachments  of 
men  -under  efficient  officers  were  sent  out  to  scour  the  surrounding 
country  in  search  of  the  fugitives.  These  detachments  were  out  both 
day  and  night,  accompanied  by  one  or  more  of  the  prisoners  and  other 
citizens  acquainted  with  the  neighborhood  and  who  had  volunteered 
their  aid.  It  having  been  ascertained  that  Jennings  had  taken  refuge 
in  the  house  of  G.  F.  Connelly,  that  place  was  visited  by  a detachment 


454 


W.  FLA  , S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTL 

under  command  of  Lieutenant  Carruth,  whom  I accompanied.  Upon 
observing  our  approach  Jennings  fled  to  an  adjacent  swamp,  leaving 
his  horse  tied  to  a fence  in  front  of  the  house.  The  family,  all  of  whom 
were  present,  did  not  deny  of  having  aided  in  his  escape,  and  frankly 
gave  me  to  understand  that  they  would  not  reveal  to  us  his  hiding  place 
were  it  known  to  them.  It  was,  moreover,  subsequently  ascertained 
that  they  had  purposely  deceived  us  in  regard  to  the  time  of  his  depart- 
ure, in  order  to  give  him  time  to  make  his  escape.  They  furthermore 
declared  that  they  were  deeply  interested  in  the  rebellion  ; that  they 
were  anxious  for  the  frustration  of  the  object  of  Colonel  McMillan’s 
expedition  ; that  with  their  consent  and  approbation  the  men  on  their 
estate  had  engaged  in  the  attempt  to  defeat  him : that  with  their  knowl- 
edge and  assistance  the  men  had  eluded  our  pursuit ; that  they  held  no 
allegiance  to  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  and  neither  desired 
nor  claimed  its  protection.  Thereupon  the  mules,  cattle,  and  horses 
belonging  to  the  plantation,  the  horse  of  Dr.  Jennings,  and  several 
wagon  loads  of  forage  were  taken  and  conveyed  to  Houma.  We  also 
visited  Bond’s  plantation,  and  finding  that  the  criminals  connected 
therewith  had  made  tlaeir  escape,  we  seized  all  the  cattle  on  the  prem- 
ises. A detachment  under  Captain  Rose,  sent  in  quest  of  Colonel  Rob- 
inson, finding  that  he  too  had  fled,  he  took  possession  of  certain  mules, 
horses,  and  other  property  and  returned  to  Houma.  The  reports  of 
other  commanders  of  detachments,  herewith  furnished,  will  exhibit  the 
result  of  their  operations*  Our  efforts  to  secure  the  guilty  parties 
having  proved  fruitless  and  being  convinced  that  further  attempts  at 
the  present  time  would  be  equally  futile,  and  satisfied  that  the  prison- 
ers held  by  me  in  custody  had  used  every  effort,*  joined  to  that  of  their 
friends,  to  secure  them  and  would  continue  to  do  so  in  the  future,  I 
suppressed  the  proclamation  referred  to,  concluding  to  bring  them  with 
me  upon  my  return,  which  I did.  I then  determined  to  destroy  all  the 
property  owned  by  the  guilty  parties  who  had  secured  their  personal 
safety  bv  flight.  I accordingly,  on  the  morning  of  May  16,  issued  an 
order,  a "copy  of  which  is  hereto  attached  and  marked  D.  In  pursuance 
of  said  order  the  following-named  property  was  burned  or  otherwise 
destroyed  or  seized  upon,  viz : 

Property  on  premises  of  Howard  Bond  burned:  One  dwelling-house, 
furniture,  and  contents;  one  sugar  house,  filled  with  sugar;  from  50  to 
100  negro  houses  and  other  outhouses ; one  steam  saw  and  corn  mill ; 
three  stables;  two  corn-houses,  with  contents;  one  cooper-shop  and 
blacksmith-shop,  with  tools  and  other  contents ; one  store-house,  filled 
with  molasses;  two  buggies  and  harness;  stacks  of  hay  and  fodder. 
Taken  from  above  premises,  35  mules,  20  sets  harness,  6 plantation 
wagons,  1 cart,  2 yoke  of  oxen,  and  5 loads  of  forage. 

Property  owned  by  Dr.  Jennings  burned : One  dwelling-house,  other 
outhouses,  barn,  stables,  all  their  contents,  buggy,  and  a valuable 
library  and  other  articles. 

Property  owned  by  E.  N.  Dutrail,  consisting  of  dwelling-house,  sta- 
bles, and  other  outhouses,  with  all  their  contents,  were  torn  down  and 
utterly  destroyed. 

Property  of  A.  Wood,  consisting  of  the  Ceres  newspaper  establish- 
ment, was  completely  destroyed,  the  type  and  other  material  being 
thrown  into  a bayou. 

The  parish  jail  (in  which  Private  Morris  had  been  incarcerated),  a 
strong  brick  building,  by  means  of  a battering-ram  was  demolished. 


* Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  455 

The  property  of  Crewell,  consisting  of  a light  one-horse  wagon,  chest 
of  carpenter  tools,  was  seized  upon. 

The  personal  property  of  A.  S.  Hornsby  (groceries),  of  which  there 
was  but  little,  was  either  taken  and  used  or  destroyed.  The  other 
guilty  parties  escaped  all  punishment,  as  they  possessed  no  property 
which  could  be  seized  or  destroyed. 

It  is  here  worthy  of  remark  that  a number  of  citizens,  before  we  left 
the  town,  assigned  as  their  reason  for  withholding  from  us  information 
in  their  possession  when  first  demanded  that  their  own  lives  and  prop- 
erty would  be  endangered  by  the  parties  implicated  by  their  so  doing, 
and  some  of  them  even  requested  that  troops  should  remain  there  for 
their  protection.  I caused  the  national  flag  to  be  planted  upon  the  top 
of  the  court-house,  in  presence  of  the  battalion  and  a large  number  of 
citizens,  assuring  the  latter  that  it  mast  there  remain,  under  penalty 
of  the  destruction  of  the  town  in  case  of  its  removal.  They  were  also 
warned  of  the  terrible  consequences  that  would  result  from  any  further 
disturbance  of  the  graves  of  the  murdered  soldiers. 

Finding  a number  of  the  inhabitants  in  a poor  and  suffering  condi- 
tion, we  furnished  them  with  food  during  our  stay,  and  left  on  our 
departure  enough  cattle  and  other  provisions  to  supply  their  imme- 
diate wants. 

On  the  15th  instant  Captain  Slatton,  in  command  of  the  launch 
which  was  to  have  pursued  with  a view  to  the  capture  of  Colonel  Mc- 
Millan, voluntarily  came  in  and  surrendered  himself  a prisoner  of  war, 
declaring  that  he  had  been  deserted  by  the  men  who  had  pledged  them- 
selves to  sustain  him. 

Before  leaving  Houma  I made  a demand  of  $200  upon  the  treasury 
of  the  parish  to  pay  certain  expenses  attending  the  expedition,  which 
was  promptly  handed  over  in  Confederate  notes,  and  was  by  me  paid 
out  to  the  parties  to  whom  it  was  due. 

About  uoon  of  Saturday,  the  17th  instant,  we  took  up  our  line  of 
march  from  Houma  to  Terre  Bonne  Station,  reaching  the  last-named 
place  at  3 o’clock  p.  m.  Here  we  found  in  waiting  a train  of  cars,  in 
which  we  proceeded  to  Algiers,  leaving  behind  Lieuts.  T.  D.  Bryant 
and  J.  W.  Connelly,  with  a detachment  of  men,  in  charge  of  the  cap- 
tured property,  with  orders  to  follow  on  the  next  train,  which  they  did 
on  the  following  day  and  delivered  over  the  property  left  in  their  charge. 
This  property  consisted  in  the  main  of  85  mules,  61  head  of  cattle,  8 
horses,  43  sheep,  6 wagons,  2 carts,  1 spring-wagon,  and  2 carriages, 
with  other  articles,  all  of  which  were  turned  over  to  Lieut.  W . S.  Hinkle, 
quartermaster  of  Twenty-first  Regiment  Indiana  V olunteers.  I brought 
with  me  as  prisoners  the  following-named  residents  of  Houma  and 
vicinity,  all  of  whom  were  promptly  handed  over  to  the  proper  author- 
ities, namely:  Lieutenant- Colonel  Minor,  Captain  Slatton,  Recorder 
De  Laporte,  Sheriff  Larette,  Dr.  Helmick,  Captain  Gayne,  Messrs. 
Ernest,  Guano,  Larette,  Wright,  Delaspit,  Gentre,  Hornsby,  and  one 
other. 

To  Captains  Roy,  Rose,  Skelton,  and  McLaflin,  and  to  Lieutenants 
Carruth,  Bryant,  Edmiston,  Connelly,  and  Brown  I am  especially  in- 
debted for  the  promptness  and  efficiency  with  which  my  orders  were 
executed.  Lieutenant  McAfee  also  deserves  favorable  mention.  The 
regular  surgeon  of  the  regiment  being  required  to  remain  in  charge  of 
the  hospital  at  Algiers,  Dr.  John  H.  Gihon,  bf  that  place,  volunteered 
to  accompany  the  expedition,  whose  services  to  the  sick,  which  were 
greatly  needed,  were  promptly  rendered,  and  in  so  effective  a manner 


456 


W.  FLA..,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXV XL 

as  to  elicit  for  him  the  approbation  and  thanks  of  the  entire  command, 
embracing  both  officers  and  men. 

Trusting  that  my  efforts  and  those  under  my  command  to  execute 
your  orders  will  meet  your  approbation,  I am  with  respect,  your  obe- 
dient servant, 

JOHN  A.  KEITH, 

Lieut.  Col.  Twenty-first  Indiana  Vols.,  Comdg.  Detachment. 


A. 

I hereby  solemnly  swear  that  I will  not  take  up  arms  against  the 
Confederate  States  (South)  America,  unless  my*  property,  myself,  or 
those  depending  upon  me  should  be  threatened. 

Houma,  May  11,  1862. 

JOSEPHUS  MORRIS. 

Sworn  to  and  subscribed  before  me  this  11th  day  May,  1862. 

H.  NEWELL, 

Clerk  Third  District  Court , Terre  Bonne. 

B. 

J.  Morris,  from  the  State  of  Indiana,  having  given  his  parole  not 
to  take  up  arms  against  the  Confederate  States  (South)  during  the  ex- 
isting war,  has  permission  to  pass  unmolested  to  Terre  Bonne  Station, 
on  his  way  to  New  Orleans. 

Houma,  May  11,  1862. 

H.  NEWELL. 

F.  GAYNE. 

A.  S.  HELMICK. 

S.  H.  HORNSBY. 

B.  COOPER. 

C. 


PROCLAMATION. 

# 

A foul  and  unnatural  murder  of  two  American  soldiers,  repugnant 
alike  to  the  instincts  of  humanity  and.the  practice  of  civilized  warfare, 
has  caused  the  presence  of  this  portion  of  the  U.  S.  Army  among  you, 
for  the  sole  purpose  of  bringing  to  justice  the  guilty.  Although  the 
cowardly  miscreants  may  have  fled,  fearing  the  swift  and  righteous 
retribution  which  should  follow  the  perpetration  of  their  horrible  crime, 
they  are  known  to  the  citizens  of  this  place.  By  withholding  the  names 
of  the  guilty  parties  and  their  present  hiding  places  they  make  them- 
selves parties  to  the  crime,  liable  both  in  law  and  justice  to  suffer  the 
penalties  of  the  same. 

A prompt,  full,  and  free  communication  of  the  names  of  these  wretches 
on  the  part  of  the  citizens  of  Houma,  with  such  other  information  as 
will  lead  to  their  speedy  capture,  can  alone  save  the  town  and  neigh- 
boring country  from  the  severe  punishment  so  justly  merited.  The 
atrocious  nature  of  the  crime  itself— the  indecent,  shameless,  and  un- 
Christian-like  burial  and  robbery  of  the  dead— taken  in  connection  with 
the  unseemly  conduct  of  prominent  citizens  on  the  occasion,  and  the 
vile  indignities  offered  to  the  mutilated  bodies  of  these  two  soldiers, 
have  forever  disgraced  the  town  of  Houma,  which  disgrace  can  only  he 


457 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

obliterated  by  a prompt  co-operation  of  its  citizens  in  bringing  the 
guilty  to  justice. 

In"  view  of  the  disposition  manifested  by  citizens  of  the  town  and 
parish  to  harbor  and  screen  the  offenders,  therefore  I,  John  A.  Keith, 
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Twenty-first  Regiment  Indiana  Volunteers, 
being  armed  with  proper  authority  from  General  Butler,  do  hereby 
solemnly  declare  and  proclaim  that  unless  the  names  of  these  murder- 
ers are  given  up  within  forty-eight  hours,  with  such  information  of  their 
hiding  places  as  will  lead  to  their  speedy  apprehension,  not  a vestige 
of  the  town  of  Houma  shall  be  left  to  identify  its  former  location,  and 
the  plantations  in  the  parish  of  Terre  Bonne  shall  suffer  in  a like  degree. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  innocent  and  worthy  persons  may  suffer  in 
this  event,  but  a terrible  example  is  necessary  to  teach  the  people  of 
Louisiana  that  interest,  if  not  humanity,  should  prompt  them  to  dis- 
courage acts  of  cold-blooded  assassination. 

The  United  States  troops  will  quarter  in  Terre  Bonne  Parish  until 
these  murderers  are  brought  to  justice  or  it  becomes  evident  they  can- 
not be  found ; in  which  case  prominent  citizens  of  Houma,  known  to 
have  been  sympathizers,  some  of  whom  have  already  been  arrested, 
will  be  publicly  executed  as  murderers. 

JOHK  A.  KEITH, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Twenty -first  Indiana  Volunteers. 

Houma,  La.,  May  14, 1862. 

D. 

Hdqrs.  Detachment  Twenty-first  Indiana  Vols., 

• Houma , La .,  May  16,  1862. 

In  compliance  with  an  order  from  Major-General  Butler  I hereby 
order  the  following  property  of  the  parties  hereinafter  named  destroyed 
by  fire  or  otherwise,  but  in  such  a manner  as  not  to  endanger  or  destroy 
adjacent  property  owned  by  parties  not  herein  named — said  property 
all  situated  in  the  parish  of  Terre  Bonne,  to  wit: 

Buildings,  out-buildings  and  personal  property  of  Howard  Bond 
near  the  town  of  Houma;  buildings  on  the  premises  of  Colonel  Robin- 
son; property  of  F.  Gatewood;  real  and  personal  property  of  Dr. 
Jennings;  property  of  A.  Wood;  the  Ceres  newspaper  establishment; 
parish  jail ; property  of  B.  Cooper;  property  of  Gilbert  Hatch ; house  of 
E.  N.  Dutrail;  property  of Ore  well. 

The  parties  above  named,  and  whose  property  is  to  be  destroyed,  are 
known  to  be  identified  in  a greater  or  less  degree  in  the  murder  of  two 
soldiers  and  wounding  of  two  others  belonging  to  the  Twenty-first  In- 
diana Volunteers,  on  the day  of  May,  near  Houma.  The  jail  is  to 

be  destroyed  because  permitted  to  be  used  as  a place  of  confinement  of 
one  of  the  wounded  men. 

JOHK  A.  KEITH, 

Lieut  Col.  Twenty  first  Ind.  Vols.,  Comdg.  Detachment. 

[Inclosure  D.] 

United  States  Gunboat  Kennebec, 

Below  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  22,  1862. 

Dear  General  : I received  your  kind  note,  together  with  the  mail, 
by  the  steamer  Fox.  My  ship  has  got  off,  and  was  about  40  or  50  miles 
below  Vicksburg,  at  Grand  Gulf,  which  is  the  most  dangerous  part  of 
the  river,  and  beyond  which  I am  unwilling  to  risk  the  larger  ships, 


458 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYTL 


when  the  steamer  Fox  passed  here.  It  appears  to  be  the  general  opin- 
ion among  the  officers  here,  General  Williams  included,  that  there  is 
very  little  use  in  attacking  Vicksburg,  as  the  guns  on  the  heights  are 
so  elevated  that  our  fire  will  not  be  felt  by  them ; as  they  have  so  large 
a force  of  soldiers  here,  several  thousand  in  and  about  the  town,  and 
the  facility  of  bringing  in  20,000  in  an  hour  by  railroad  from  Jackson, 
altogether  think  it  would  be  useless  to  bombard  it,  as  we  could  not  hold 
it  if  we  took  it.  Therefore  we  have  determined  to  blockade  it  and  occa- 
sionally harass  them  with  fire  until  the  battle  of  Corinth  shall  decide 
its  fate.  General  Williams  is  going  up  the  Bed  Biver,  where  he  thinks 
he  may  be  more  useful,  and  I have  given  him  a gunboat  to  accompany 
him.  I shall  soon  drop  down  the  river  again,  as  I consider  my  services 
indispensably  necessary  on  the  seaboard.  I am  greatly  obliged  to  you 
for  your  kindness  in  towing  up  my  coal  vessels.  I have  already  sup- 
plied your  troops  with  as  much  bjead  as  I could  spare,  as  well  as  pork. 
They  have  been  able  thus  far  I think  to  get  fresh  beef,  but  are  much 
in  want  of  bread  and  flour.  I don’t  see  that  I can  be  of  any  service 
here,  and  I do  not  see  as  General  Williams  will  be  of  any  use  here  with 
the  small  force  he  has. 

I shall  endeavor  to  get  down  as  soon  as  possible. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ D.  G.  FAKKAGUT, 

Flag-Officer . 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

JJ.  S.  Army , Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans , La. 


[Inclosure  E.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , May  16,  1862. 

General  : The  contingency  has  arisen,  in  my  judgment,  when,  with- 
out detriment  to  the  public  service,  I may  call  on  you  for  the  two  regi- 
ments contemplated  in  the  letter  of  the  general  commanding.  They 
will  be  necessary  for  operations  here.  I would  desire  Colonel  Put- 
nam’s Seventh  New  Hampshire  and  any  other  you  may  choose.  I hope 
to  return  them  to  you  soon.  I send  transport  steamer  Mississippi  for 
them.  She  has  carried  1,900  men  in  twelve  days,  and  I have  been  on 
board.  May  I wish  as  much  haste  as  possible.  Learning  that  you  have 
ample  supplies,  and  fearing  in  the  present  state  of  matters  at  New  Or- 
leans I may  come  short,  I desire,  if  possible,  500,000  rations,  a large 
portion  of  which  can  be  put  on  board  the  Mississippi.  A large  propor- 
tion of  pork,  flour,  and  rice  would  be  acceptable.  I know  the  natural 
reluctance  a general  has  in  sending  anything  out  of  his  department, 
but  I rely  on  your  well-known  patriotism  for  this  aid. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEB, 
Mayor- General^  Commanding. 

General  Brannan,  Comdg.  Department  of  Key  West. 

[Inclosure  F.] 

Hdqrs.  Southern  Dist.,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Key  West , Fla .,  May  21,  1862. 

General  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans , La.: 

General  : Your  communication  of  the  16th  instant  is  this  moment 
received.  Since  the  letter  of  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  Army  of 


Chap.  XXYXL] 


459 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

February  23,  authorizing  you  to  call  upon  me  for  aid  in  case  of  emer- 
gency. the  Department  of  Key  West  has  been  broken  up  and  placed 
under  command  of  Major-General  Hunter,  commanding  Department  of 
the  South,  extending  to  Pensacola.  I have  already  (on  yesterday)  sent 
one  regiment  to  Brigadier-General  Arnold,  commanding  Western  Dis- 
trict, Department  of  the  South,  on  his  urgent  request  that  his  position 
was  dangerous  and  expecting  an  attack.  I therefore  do  not  feel  justi- 
fied or  authorized  to  send  any  more  troops  from  my  command,  and  par- 
ticularly out  of  the  department,  without  authority  from  Major-General 
Hunter.  The  rations  asked  for  will  be  sent  you  as  far  as  it  can  be  done 
consistently  with  my  duty  as  commander  of  this  district. 

1 am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ S J.  M.  BKANNAN, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

[InclosTire  H.] 


Confederate  Army  Orders. 

[Telegraph  from  Richmond,  Va.,  to  General  Lovell,  May  2,  1862.] 

The  following  dispatch  was  sent  to  you  on  the  25th  ultimo. 

8 A.  T.  BLEDSOE, 

, Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


It  has  been  determined  to  burn  all  the  cotton  and  tobacco,  whether  foreign  or  our 
own,  to  prevent  it  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

You  will  therefore  destroy  it  all  if  necessary  to  prevent  them  from  getting  it. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  No.  1,  0.  S.  A., 

Nfo.  17.  j Camp  Moore , La .,  May  3, 1862. 

The  enemy,  by  an  overwhelming  naval  force,  having  succeeded  in 
passing  the  defenses  and  gaining  possession  of  the  city  of  New  Orleans, 
are  jubilant  in  the  boast  that  the  struggle  which  a gallant  people  are 
making  from  a bondage  to  which  death  would  be  preferable  is  rapidly 
closing  in  disgrace  and  humiliation  to  the  South.  They  claim  that,  the 
great  valley  of  the  West  being  opened,  the  remotest  commercial  interest* 
of  the  civilized  world  will  have  cause  to  side  with  them  in  the  iron- 
handed  controversy  which  they  are  now  waging  upon  us,  for  the  reason 
that  cotton  will  now  flow  from  every  tributary  of  the  Mississippi  to  seek 
a market  under  their  protection  in  the  ports  of  Europe ; for  without 
that  staple  they  know  full  well  that  a brief  period  will  put  an  end  to 
their  attempt  to  conquer  the  South.  It  is  with  the  people  to  decide  this 
question  for  themselves.  If  you  are  resolved  to  be  free ; if  you  are 
worthy  of  the  heroic  blood  that  has  come  down  to  you  through  hal- 
lowed generations  j if  you  have  fixed  your  undimmed  eye  upon  the  bright- 
ness that  spreads  out  before  you  and  your  children,  and  are  determined 
to  shake  away  forever  and  ever  all  political  association  with  the  vandal 
horde  that  now  gather  like  a pestilence  about  your  fair  country,  now, 
now,  my  fellow-citizens,  is  the  time  to  strike!  One  sparkling,  living 
touch  of  fire  in  manly  action  for  one  hour  upon  each  cotton  plantation, 
and  the  eternal  seal  of  Southern  independence  is  fired  and  fixed  in  the 
great  heart  of  the  world. 

It  needs  no  argument  to  show  that  with  the  destruction  of  negro 
property  the  cotton  and  sugar  lands  of  the  South  would  be  worthless, 


460 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chaf.  XXVH. 


and  that  the  mighty  effort  of  this  Abolition  war  is  for  that  purpose  is  j 
amply  proved  by  a thousand  evidences  unnecessary  to  refer  to  iu  this  j 
order,  and  which  are  rapidly  culminating  in  the  various  schemes  of  the  , 
Federal  Congress  in  reference  to  the  destruction  of  the  slave-holding  i 
interest  in  all  the  border  States. 

Your  major-general  calls  in  this  hour  of  danger  for  one  heroic  effort,  | 
and  he  feels  consciously  proud  that  he  will  not  call  in  vain.  Let  not  a 
solitary  bale  of  cotton  be  left  as  spoil  for  the  invader  and  all  will  be 
well. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Lovell : 

J.  G.  PICKETT, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

Headquarters  Department  Ko.  1,  C.  S.  A., 

Camp  Moore , La .,  May  3,  1862. 

Col.  William  Wren: 

Sir  : In  pursuance  of  the  act  of  Congress  and  in  obedience  to  in- 
structions from  the  Secretary  of  War  you  are  hereby  authorized  and 
directed  to  take  such  measures  immediately  as  will  insure  the  destruc- 
tion of  all  cotton  on  the  navigable  rivers  in  this  department  and  upon 
all  railroads  accessible  to  the  public  enemy.  You  will  proceed  upon  this 
duty  forthwith,  destroying  such  cotton  first  as  in  your  opinion  may  be 
in  imminent  danger  of  capture,  and  afterward  giving  your  attention  to 
that  more  remotely  removed  from  the  scene  of  their  operations.  The 
majjor-general  commanding,  while  he  has  full  confidence  in  your  sound 
discretion  and  judgment  and  feels  assured  that  you  will  do  nothing  un- 
necessarily affecting  the  material  interest  of  any  one,  cannot  too  strongly 
enforce  upon  you  the  extreme  importance  and  pressing  necessity  of  put- 
ting it  entirely  out  of  the  power  of  the  enemy  to  obtain  one  single  bale 
of  the  staple  within  the  district  in  which  you  are  ordered  to  operate. 
You  will  keep  a careful  account  of  the  number  of  bales  destroyed  by 
your  orders  and  give  proper  receipts  and  vouchers  to  the  owners,  so 
that  a full  reparation  may  be  made  by  the  Confederate  Government. 

You  will  employ  such  assistance  as  you  may  require  to  carry  out  these 
instructions  and  all  expenses  will  be  paid  by  the  Government. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Lovell : 

J.  G.  PICKETT, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[ Inclosure  No.  2.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , May  27,  1862. 

Maj.  George  C.  Strong, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

Major:  I have  heard  from  pretty  good  authority  that  the  steamer 
Calhoun,  now  on  duty  in  Lake  Pontckartrain,  has  been  ordered  to  Pen- 
sacola, and  this  has  compelled  me  to  make  the  following  statement  of 
what  I consider  necessary  for  a thorough  possession  and  defense  of  this 

place.  3 

The  land  forces  must  thoroughly  occupy  the  city  and  hold  securely 
the  lines  above  Carrollton.  I consider  the  present  force  and  its  disposi- 
tion sufficient  for  that  purpose  under  present  circumstances. 

The  naval  forces  must  keep  perfect  control  of  the  river  and  Lake  Pont- 
phartrain.  The  present  disposition  of  the  naval  vessels  is  adequate  to 


hap.  xx  yh.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


461 


eep  the  city  in  subjection  and  protect  our  left  flank  above  Carrollton. 
L few  gunboats  to  keep  tbe  river  clear  above  us  is  all  that  is  necessary 
here,  and  this  is  of  great  importance.  We  have  undoubted  information 
hat  attempts  are  at  this  moment  being  made  to  supply  Beauregard’s 
rmy  with  fresh  beef  from  Alexandria,  La.,  and  in  this  way,  viz,  via 
ted,  Black,  and  Tensas  Rivers,  by  land  to  a point  above  Vicksburg 
nd  then  across  the  river  to  Corinth. 

In  the  lake  there  should  be  one  boat  (say  the  Creole)  continually  at 
’ass  Manchac.  This  was  mentioned  at  Washington  before  we  started 
ven  as  of  the  highest  importance.  The  New  London  and  Calhoun  are 
iot  the  least  more  than  sufficient  to  keep  the  lake  clear  and  well  block- 
ded,  particularly  as  the  draught  of  water  of  the  former  will  often 
ender  her  unserviceable.  I must  therefore  protest  against  the  removal 
f the  Calhoun  from  the  lake  unless  she  is  replaced  by  another  vessel 
f as  light  draught  of  water. 

There  is  no  point  in  the  United  States  which  to  be  held  requires 
uch  a harmonious  co-operation  of  the  land  and  naval  forces  as  this. 
?his  co-operation  will  be  especially  necessary  when  the  requisite  land 
orces  for  the  operations  at  Mobile  are  withdrawn.  I have  therefore 
leemed  it  my  duty  to  submit  this,  and  I request  that  a copy  of  it  be 
uruished  the  flag-officer.  Neither  the  Mississippi,  Pensacola,  nor  Ports 
nouth  can  be  used  at  Mobile  on  account  of  their  draught  of  water. 
Chey  can  nowhere  be  better  employed  than  here.  The  gunboats  em-' 
)loyed  in  scouring  the  river  above  us  and  cutting  the  lines  of  supplies 
md  communication  of  the  enemy  will  undoubtedly  soon  be  relieved  by 
he  gunboats  under  Flag-Officer  Foote. 

Should  the  enemy  by  any  success  be  able  to  detach  a force  sufficient 
o warrant  the  attempt  I have  no  doubt  it  would  be  made.  Under  the 
d)ove  arrangement  of  land  and  naval  forces  it  would  be  futile.  The 
>rize  is  too  important  to  be  endangered  in  the  least  degree,  and  I am 
>erfectly  willing  to  be  considered  overcautious  rather  than  to  have 
leglected  representing  this  matter  in  such  strong  terms. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Lieut. , JJ.  S.  Engineers , and  Chief  Engr.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf. 


[Inclosnre  No.  3.] 

United  States  Steamer  Harriet  Lane, 

Mississippi  River , April  30,  1862. 

Sir:  I inclose  herewith  the  capitulation  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint 
Philip,  which  surrendered  to  the  mortar  flotilla  on  the  28th  day  of  April, 
-862.*  I also  inclose  in  a box,  forwarded  on  this  occasion,  all  the  flags 
aken  in  the  two  forts,  with  the  original  flag  hoisted  on  Fort  Saint 
Philip  when  the  State  of  Louisiana  seceded.  Fort  Jackson  is  a perfect 
vreck.  Everything  in  the  shape  of  a building  in  and  about  it  was 
turned  up  by  the  mortar  shells,  and  over  1,800  shells  fell  in  the  work 
>roper,  to  say  nothing  of  those  which  burst  over  and  around  it.  I de- 
moted but  little  attention  to  Fort  Saint  Philip,  knowing  that  when  Jack- 
son  fell  Saint  Philip  would  ^follow.  The  mortar  flotilla  is  still  fresh, 
rruly  the  backbone  of  the  rebellion  is  broken.  On  the  26th  of  the 
nonth  I sent  six  of  the  mortar  schooners  to  the  back  of  Fort  Jackson 
o block  up  the  bayous  and  prevent  supplies  getting  in.  Three  of  them 
Iritted  over  to  Fort  Livingston,  and  when  they  anchored  the  fort  hung 


See  Series  I,  Vol.  VI,  p.  544. 


462  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXV IL 

out  a white  flag  and  surrendered.  The  Kittatinny,  which  had  been 
blockading  there  for  some  time,  sent  a boat  in  advance  of  the  mortar 
vessels,  and  reaching  the  shore  first,  deprived  them  of  the  pleasure  of 
hoisting  our  flag  over  what  had  surrendered  to  the  mortar  flotilla.  Still 
the  fort  is  ours  and  we  are  satisfied.  I am  happy  to  state  that  officers 
and  crew  are  all  well  and  full  of  spirits. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  D.  PORTER. 

Hon.  Gideon  Welles, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , June  4, 1862. 

Military  Commandant  and  City  Council  of  New  Orleans  : 

General  Shepley  and  Gentlemen  : Painful  necessity  compels 
some  action  in  relation  to  the  unemployed  and  starving  poor  of  New 
Orleans.  Men  willing  to  labor  cannot  get  work  by  which  to  support 
themselves  and  families,  and  are  suffering  for  food.  Because  of  the 
sins  of  their  betrayers,  a worse  than  the  primal  curse  seems  to  have 
fallen  upon  them.  u In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread, 
until  thou  return  unto  the  ground.” 

The  condition  of  the  streets  of  the  city  calls  for  the  promptest  action 
for  a greater  cleanliness  and  more  perfect  sanitary  preparations. 

To  relieve  as  far  as  I may  be  able  to  do  both  difficulties,  I propose  to 
the  city  government  as  follows  : 

1st.  The  city  shall  employ  upon  the  streets,  squares,  and  unoccupied 
lands  in  the  city  a force  of  men,  with  proper  implements  and  under 
competent  direction,  to  the  number  of  2,000,  for  at  least  thirty  working 
days,  in  putting  those  places  in  such  condition  as  with  the  blessings  of 
Providence  shall  insure  the  health  as  well  of  the  citizens  as  my  troops. 
The  necessity  of  military  operations  will  detain  in  the  city  a larger 
number  of  those  who  commonly  leave  it  during  the  summer,  especially 
women  and  children,  than  are  usually  resident  here  during  the  hot 
months.  Their  health  must  be  cared  for  by  you ; I will  care  for  my 
troops.  The  epidemic  so  earnestly  prayed  for  by  the  wicked  will  hardly 
sweep  away  the  strong  man,  although  he  may  be  armed,  and  leave  the 
weaker  women  and  children  untouched. 

2d.  That  each  man  of  this  force  be  paid  by  the  city  from  its  revenues  50 
cents  per  day,  and  a larger  sum  for  skilled  labor,  for  each  day’s  labor  of 
ten  hours,  toward  the  support  of  their  families,  and  that  in  the  selection 
of  laborers  men  with  families,  or  with  families  dependent  on  them,  be 
preferred. 

3d.  That  the  United  States  shall  issue  to  each  laborer  so  employed, 
for  each  day’s  work,  a full  ration  for  a soldier,  containing  over  50  ounces 
of  wholesome  food,  which,  with  economy,  will  support  a man  and  woman. 
This  issue  will  be  fully  equal  in  value,  at  the  present  prices  of  food,  to 
the  sum  paid  by  the  city.  ' 

4th.  That  proper  muster  rolls  be  prepared  of  these  laborers,  and  de- 
tails so  arranged  that  only  those  that  labor,  with  their  families,  shall  be 
fed  from  this  service. 

5th.  No  paroled  soldier  or  person  who  has  served  in  the  Confederate 
forces  be  employed,  unless  he  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United 
States.  I shall  be  glad  to  arrange  the  details  of  this  proposal  through 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


463 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

tlie  aid  of  Colonel  Shaffer,  of  the  quartermaster  department,  and 
Colonel  Turner,  of  the  subsistence  department,  as  soon  as  it  has  been 
acted  on  by  you. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major- General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , June  6,  1862. 

General  Lovell, 

Commanding , Ac.,  Jackson: 

General  : The  communication  by  flag  of  truce  under  charge  of  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Ogden,  of  your  staff,  was  handed  me  this  morning.  I 
take  leave  to  assure  you  that  the  information  upon  which  Mr.  Davis 
acted  was  incorrect,  the  threat  unnecessary,  as  it  would  have  been 
unheeded  had  my  judgment  determined  any  given  course  of  action 
necessary  and  just. 

Major  Van  Benthuysen,  an  officer  in  arms,  holding  a commission 
against  the  United  States,  was  arrested  by  my  order  for  aiding  the 
escape  of  a scoundrel  and  spy,  who  had  at  the  same  time  been  as  false 
to  your  party  as  he  was  to  mine  and  confined  in  Fort  Jackson,  and  told 
that,  asffiis  offense  was  not  the  worst  in  the  rebellion,  if  he  would  pro- 
duce the  spy,  who  I was  informed  was  under  his  control,  he  would  be 
released,  and  so  far  his  offenses  condoned.  Being  afterward  assured 
that  the  spy  had  escaped  in  fact  to  Richmond,  upon  Major  Yan  Ben- 
thuy sen’s  application  he  was  released  some  days  since  upon  his  parole, 
and  is  now,  as  I believe,  quietly  attending  his  ordinary  avocations 
about  the  city  of  New  Orleans. 

To  prevent  the  necessity  of  flags  of  truce  containing  threats  to  me 
hereafter,  allow  me  to  add  that  in  no  degree  will  they  change  the  course 
either  of  punishment  or  justice  which  my  judgment  may  determine. 

I have  failed  to  find  any  other  thing  in  your  note  which  requires 
reply. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  40.  | New  Orleans , June  6,  1862. 

Any  person  who  has  in  his  possession  or  subject  to  his  control  any 
property  of  any  kind  or  description  whatever  of  the  so-called  Confed- 
erate States,  or  who  has  secreted  or  concealed  or  aided  in  the  conceal- 
ment of  such  property,  who  shall  not,  within  three  days  from  the  pub- 
lication of  this  order,  give  full  information  of  the  same  in  writing,  at 
the  headquarters  of  the  military  commandant  in  the  custom-house,  to 
the  assistant  military  commandant,  Godfrey  Weitzel,  shall  be  liable  to 
imprisonment  and  to  have  his  property  confiscated. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

* WM.  H.  WIEGEL, 

First  Lieutenant  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


464 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXm 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , June  7,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Phelps,  TJ.  S.  A., 

Commanding , the.,  a£  Carrollton , La. : 

General:  1 am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  trans- 
scribe  and  send  to  you  for  your  information  the  following  extract  from 
a communication  received  from  Captain  Page,  under  date  of  6fch  instant, 
and  to  ask  you  if  the  facts  therein  stated  are  true : 

* * * I regret  to  report  that  since  my  last  dispatch,  and  since  orders  have  been 

issued  by  you  to  the  contrary,  General  Phelps  has  received  negroes  within  his  lines, 
and  also  allowed  them  to  pass  sentinels  without  passes,  when  the  privilege  has  been 
denied  to  planters.  I would  report  3 negroes  from  P.  Soniat,  2 from  T.  Arnault,  1 
from  Mrs.  Beasanson,  1 from  Mr.  Terrior,  and  5 masters  unknown,  whom  Mr.  Lebere 
noticed  passing  within  the  lines  without  passes. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  HAGGERTY, 
Captain  and  Aide-de-Camp. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  79.  J New  Orleans , June  7,  1862. 

The  folio wiug-named  pilots  are  ordered  to  report  at  once  to  the  flag- 
officer  for  duty : • 

Henry  A.  Ealer,  B.  F.  Litsell,  Byron  Prewitt,  Burdett  Paris,  James 

B.  Smith,  George  A.  Woods,  Isaac  C.  Cable,  Oswald  Carter,  Charles 

C.  Davidson,  Alfred  Sanford,  I.  M.  Broadwell,  W.  C.  Youngblood. 
These  men  are  not  at  liberty  to  refuse,  under  penalty  of  arrest  and 

imprisonment. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler: 

WM.  H.  WIEGEL, 

First  Lieutenant  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


United  States  Steamer  Octorara, 

New  Orleans , June  9,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding  TJ.  S.  Forces  in  Louisiana ; 

General  : The  mortar  fleet  are  all  here  and  will  proceed  up  river 
with  all  dispatch  the  moment  I can  obtain  towage.  I never  like  to 
send  a boy  on  a man’s  errand,  so  instead  of  six  mortars  I bring  nine- 
teen. 

I can  tow  thirteen  with  what  vessels  I have,  and  if  you  will  let  me 
have  two  tug-boats  (say  the  Landis  and  Whetmore)  I can  get  up  with 
all  before  the  flag-officer. 

You  promised  me  every  assistance,  and  I know  you  will  keep  your 
word.  Will  you  give  the  order  for  the  captains  of  the  boats  to  report 
to  me  a-t  once? 

•There  is  an  iron  prow  here  in  New  Orleans,  built  for  one  of  the 
secesh  gunboats;  I want  to  put  it  on  the  Octorara.  Will  you  give  an 
order  for  me  to  get  it;  also  to  have  it  delivered  at  some  wharf  where  I 
can  hoist  it  in?  It  is  at  McCan  & Harrell’s  iron  and  brass  foundery, 
Fulton  street,  between  Julia  and  Notre  Dame  streets. 

1 remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

DAVID  D.  PORTER. 


CHAP.XXVn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — TJNION.  465 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  June  10, 1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : In  my  dispatch  of  the  1st  instant  I informed  the  Department  of 
my  intention  to  co-operate  with  the  fleet  in  a demonstration  upon 
Vicksburg.  Accordingly  dispositions  were  made  and  instructions  given 
General  Williams  under  date  of  June  6,  and  the  troops  therein  men- 
tioned were  put  in  marching  order.  A copy  of  my  instructions  to 
General  Williams  .is  annexed,  marked  A.* 

All  have  gone  except  the  Thirty-first  Massachusetts.  By  the  news 
which  has  come  by  the  late  arrivals  of  the  repulse  of  General  Banks 
and  the  danger  of  the  capital,  now  aided  by  the  exaggerated  reports  of 
the  rout  of  the  forces  under  General  McClellan,  the  city  is  so  much 
moved  that  weakening  my  force  here  too  much  might  possibly  provoke 
a demonstration  which  it  would  be  well  to  avoid.  I take  leave  to  as- 
sure you,  however,  that  no  outward  sign  of  any  joy  or  exultation  has 
been  permitted  or  attempted.  I have  scarcely  3,500  men  in  the  city  fit 
for  duty,  and  to  take  away  a good  regiment  would  be  hazardous. 

We  are  much  crippled  for  river  transportation  yet,  for  all  supply 
ships  must  be  towed  up  the  river,  and  although  we  have  a number  of 
boats,  yet  we  have  not  been  able  to  get  them  in  such  complete  repair 
as  we  could  wish. 

The  Tennessee  naval  supply  ship  got  aground  about  80  miles  above 
here  on  her  way  to  ViGksburg,  and  we  have  been  obliged  to  send  two 
boats  to  her  salvation.  The  mortar  flotilla  requires  two  more  of  our 
best  boats  to  aid  them  in  getting  up  the  stream. 

The  flotilla  is  now  here,  making  ready  to  go  up  the  river.  We  shall 
be  ready  and  upon  the  spot  as  soon  as  they  are  in  position. 

If  you  will  look  at  an  extended  map  of  the  river  it  will  be  seen  that  a 
cut-off  may  be  made  at  the  bend  and  leave  Vicksburg  5 miles  inland. 
If  the  water  shall  be  low  enough  when  we  get  there  I propose  to  have 
it  done.  The  river  has  been  so  high  that  it  could  not  be  done  before, 
because  the  whole  of  the  bend  is  under  water. 

I have  what  I believe  to  be  reliable  intelligence  of  the  evacuation  of 
Fort  Pillow  and  Memphis  on  the  1st  instant,  but  that  will  reach  you  in 
an  authentic  shape  long  before  this  dispatch. 

I did  not  execute  the  six  paroled  soldiers,  according  to  my  order  No. 
36,  for  the  reason,  among  others,  that,  upon  the  examination  of  the 
terms  of  capitulation  given  by  Captain  Porter,  of  which  no  copy  had 
been  furnished  me,  and  I had  not  seen  the  newspaper  copy  till  after  the 
sentence,  I was  fearful  of  the  legal  force  of  the  parole,  the  officers  only 
having  been  paroled  and  they  underwriting  for  the  men.  I was  glad, 
therefore,  to  yield  to  the  suggestions  of  Messrs.  Durant  and  Bozier,  gen- 
tlemen who  enjoy  the  confidence  of  the  community  here,  and  whom  you 
know  to  be  well-disposed  to  the  Union,  and  to  commute  the  sentence. 
Copies  of  the  order  and  correspondence,  marked  B,  C,  D,  are  annexed. 

William  B.  Mumford,  who,  after  the  raising  of  the  flag  of  the  United 
States  upon  the  United  States  Mint  by  Flag-Officer  Farragut,  pulled  it 
down,  dragged  it  through  the  streets,  followed  by  an  excited  mob,  tore 
it  in  shreds,  and  distributed  the  pieces  among  the  gamblers,  assassins, 
and  murderers,  his  comrades,  was  tried,  condemned,  and  executed  on 
Saturday,  the  7th  instant,  on  the  spot  where  he  committed  his  heinous 


* See  reports,  p.  25. 

30  R R — VOL  IV 


466 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX  , N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

crime.  A copy  of  tlie  order  for  his  execution  is  herewith  sent,  marked 
E.  No  words  can  give  the  extent  of  his  guilt  in  the  act  for  which  he 
suffered.  The  lowering  of  the  flag  might,  nay,  ought,  by  every  military 
rule,  to  have  brought  a bombardment  upon  the  city,  resulting  in  no  one 
can  know  what  destruction  of  property  and  life. 

I would  call  attentign  to  the  policy  of  allowing  me  to  assure  within  this 
department  certain  classes  of  persons  who  have  been  in  the  rebellion  of 
a condonation  of  all  political  offenses,  to  whomsoever,  should  they  take 
the  oath  of  allegiance  on  or  before  a given  date,  excepting  those  of  course 
who  have  u sinned  away  the  day  of  grace.”  I am  confident  that  many 
are  tired  and  sick  of  the  war  here,  who  would  gladly  return  to  their  alle-  i 
giance  if  by  some  authoritative  act  they  could  be  assured  that  the  past 
would  be  forgiven.  Men  have' been  so  deceived  as  to  the  intentions  of 
the  Government  that  I have  had  grave  judges,  men  of  business  and  in- 
telligence, and  planters  from  the  country  come  to  me  under  safeguards 
for  assurance  of  their  personal  safety  and  that  of  their  property  from 
confiscation  in  case  they  placed  themselves  within  the  power  of  the 
United  States.  If,  either  under  direct  guidance  and  instructions  of  the 
War  Department  or  if  left  to  my  discretion  as  to  the  terms  to  be  em- 
ployed, a declaration  of  amnesty  under  certain  conditions  could  be  made, 

I will  venture  to  undertake  that  Louisiana  will  within  sixty  days  from 
the  date  of  such  action  return  to  her  allegiance.  * 

In  this  connection  I pray  leave  to  call  the  attention  of  the  War  De- 
partment to  the  fact  that  I have  heard  no  word  from  the  Department 
since  I left  Washington,  either  of  instruction  or  recognition  of  my  exist- 
ence even,  save  the  ordinary  routine  of  official  correspondence  from  the 
subordinate  officers  of  the  Department  furnishing  supplies  and  asking 
for  the  necessary  documentary  evidence  of  their  receipt,  nor  have  I 
received  a single  general  order  issued  to  the  Army  of  the  United  States 
of  later  date  than  March  3.  Thus  leaving  me  to  my  own  discretion  is 
sufficiently  complimentary,  yet  it  is  embarrassing  enough  under  all  the 
responsibilities  of  my  position.  Guided  by  the  best  light  I had,  I have 
taken  the  action  in  regard  to  the  oath  of  allegiance  indicated  in  General 
Orders,  No.  41,  a copy  of  which,  marked  F,  is  annexed.*  I trust  it  will 
meet  with  approval,  and  that  some  action  will  either  be  taken  or  au- 
thorized upon  the  subject  of  opening  a door  for  the  return  of  the  prodi- 
gals who  think  they  have  fed  on  husks  long  enough. 

I beg  to  again  call  attention  to  the  heed  we  have  for  more  men  here. 
Why  cannot  we  have  those  from  Key  West?  With  the  arms  and  equip- 
ments I have  and  have  captured  and  with  an  efficient  ordnance  force 
to  put  them  in  order,  if  the  Department  will  allow  me,  I can  enlist  in 
sixty  days  5,000  men  and  arm  them,  the  uniforms  to  be  supplied  from 
the  North.  To  do  this  some  discretion  must  be  given  me  in  the  matter 
of  officers,  and  also  that  some  of  the  troops  have  the  privilege  of  acting 
as  home  guards,  under  proper  restriction;  also  that  some,  when  raised, 
be  sent  away  to  other  fields  and  their  places  here  supplied  with  men 
from  other  sections;  and  this  for  the  purpose  of  instructing  these  men 
in  the  extent  and  power  of  the  Union,  of  which  they  seem  to  have  now 
little  idea. 

I send  this  dispatch  by  Lieutenant  Kinsman,  a gentleman  who  has 
been  giving  very  efficient  services  to  the  Government  as  a volunteer 
aide  without  pay,  and  has  captured  property,  the  existence  of  which  he 
discovered,  of  more  than  $40,000,  which  has  been  turned  over  to  the 
Government. 


See  inclosure  No.  2 to  Butler  to  Stanton,  June  17,  p.  483. 


chap.  xxvtl] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.- — UNION. 


467 


I wish  that  he  might  be  appointed,  with  the  rank  of  captain,  upon  the 
staff  of  some  other  major-general,  and  then  assigned  to  me  for  service, 
for  by  such  indirection  must  I get  the  necessary  aid  for  my  duties.  My 
staff  is  much  reduced.  I have  four  sick  and  the  rest  are  overworked. 
Mr.  Kinsman  goes  home  from  a bed  of  sickness,  brought  on  by  over- 
exertion, in  the  hope  of  recovering  his  health,  to  return  immediately. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major - General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  B.] 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  36.  j New  Orleans , May  31,  1862. 

Abraham  McLane,  Daniel  Doyle,  Edward  0.  Smith,  Patrick  Kane, 
George  L.  Williams,  and  William  Stanley,  all  enlisted  men  in  the  forces 
of  the  supposed  Confederate  States,  captured  at  the  surrender  of  Forts 
Saint  Philip  and  Jackson,  have  violated  their  parole  of  honor  under 
which  they  as  prisoners  of  war  were  permitted  to  return  to  their  homes 
instead  of  being  confined  in  prison,  as  have  the  unfortunates  of  the 
United  States  soldiers,  who,  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  rebel  chiefs, 
have  languished  for  months  in  the  closest  durance. 

Warned  by  their  officers  that  they  must  not  do  this  thing,  they  de- 
liberately organized  themselves  in  military  array,  chose  themselves  and 
comrades  officers,  relying,  as  they  averred,  upon  promises  of  prominent 
citizens  of  New  Orleans  for  a supply  of  arms  and  equipments.  They 
named  themselves  the  Monroe  Life  Guard,  in  honor  of  the  mayor  of 
New  Orleans. 

They  conspired  together  and  arranged  the  manner  in  which  they 
might  force  the  pickets  of  the  United  States  and  thus  join  the  enemy 
at  Corinth. 

Tried  before  an  impartial  military  commission,  fully  heard  in  their 
defense,  these  facts  appeared  beyond  doubt  or  contradiction,  and  they 
were  convicted. 

There  is  no  one  pledge  more  sacred,  there  is  no  military  cfffense  whose 
punishment  is  better  defined  or  more  deserved.  To  this  crime  but  one 
punishment  has  ever  been  assigned  by  any  nation — death. 

The  sentence  has  been  approved  by  the  commanding  general.  To 
the  end  that  all  others  may  take  warning,  that  solemn  obligations  may 
be  preserved,  that  war  may  not  loose  all  honorable  ties,  that  clemency 
may  not  be  abused,  and  that  justice  be  done: 

It  is  ordered  that  Abraham  McLane,  Dauiel  Doyle,  Edward  C.  Smith, 
Patrick  Kane,  George  L.  Williams,  and  William  Stanley  be  shot  to 
death,  under  the  direction  of  the  provost-marshal,  immediately  after 
reveille,  on  Wednesday,  the  4th  day  of  June  next,  and  for  so  doing  this 
shall  be  the  provost-marsh aPs  sufficient  warrant. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler: 

R.  S.  DAYIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure  C.] 

New  Orleans,  June  3, 1862. 

Major-General  Butler, 

Commanding  the  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

General  : We  have  seen  the  sentence  of  the  six  men,  Abraham 
McLane,  Daniel  Doyle,  Edward  C.  Smith,  Patrick  Kane,  George  L. 


468 


■W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chap.  XXVTT. 


Williams,  and  William  Stanley,  condemned  to  death  for  violating  their 
parole,  given  at  the  surrender  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip,  by 
organizing  a military  company  to  break  the  pickets  of  your  camp  and 
join  the  army  of  Beauregard  at  Corinth. 

Tried  and  convicted  by  a board  of  officers  whose  honor  and  integrity 
are  known  to  all,  these  men  are  justly  liable  to  that  condign  punish- 
ment which  the  military  law  metes  out  to  so  grave  and  heinous  an  offense. 
But  a powerful  government  never  diminishes  its  strength  by  acts  of 
clemency  and  mercy.  No  doubt,  general,  these  men  were  partly  driven 
by  want,  partly  deluded,  and  have  long  been  so,  superior  minds  having 
given  them  heretofore  false  impressions,  and  they  have  been  acting 
under  such  errors  as  have  at  last  brought  them  to  the  threshold  of  the 

grave.  ... 

Unknown  to  us  even  from  report  prior  to  their  trial  and  conviction, 
we  see  in  them  only  men  and  brethren  who  have  erred  and  are  in  danger. 

General,  the  event  has  shown  that  these  men  were  unable  to  resist 
the  force  of  the  Government  or  to  elude  the  vigilance  and  fidelity  of  its 
officers.  They  are  subdued  and  powerless.  Their  case  excites  our 
commiseration  and  that  of  hundreds  of  others.  We  ask  your  mercy 
upon  them. 

At  the  present  moment  the  Government  needs  no  excessive  rigor  to 
enforce  obedience  or  to  command  respect. 

Pardon  their  offense.  The  act  will  restore  them  to  sobriety  of  reason 
and  to  useful  employment.  It  will  fill  them  with  gratitude  to  you  and 
to  the  powerful  Government  you  represent.  It  will  demonstrate  the 
mildness  of  authority,  and  convince  our  fellow- citizens  that  mercy  and 
clemency  no  less  than  force  and  strength  are  essential  attributes  of  the 

power  you  represent.  .. 

General,  receive  this  prayer  for  life  in  the  spirit  which  dictates  it— 
an  earnest  and  heartfelt  desire  to  promote  reconciliation  and  peace. 

We  remain,  general,  with  profound  respect,  your  obedient  servants, 

J.  AD.  ROZLER. 
THOMAS  J.  DURANT. 

In  pursuance  of  this  feeling  petition  and  in  the  interest  of  humanity 
Major-General  Butler  issued  the  following  order : 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New.  Orleans , June  3,  1862. 

J.  Ad.  Rozier,  Esq., 

Thomas  J.  Durant,  Esq.: 

Gentlemen  : Your  communication  to-day  concerning  the  unfortunate 
men  who  are  under  sentence  to  be  executed  to-morrow  has  received,  as 

it  deserved,  most  serious  consideration. 

The  representations  of  gentlemen  of  your  known  probity,  intelligence, 
high  social  positiou,  and  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  character, 
temper,  habits  of  thought,  and  motives  of  action  of  the  people  of  New 
Orleans  ought  to  have  great  determining  weight  with  me,  a stranger 
among  you,  called  upon  to  act  promptly,  under  the  best  lights  I may, 
in  matters  affecting  the  administration  of  justice.  In  addition,  your 
well-known  and  fully  appreciated  unwavering  attachment  to  the  Gov- 
ernment of  the  United  States  renders  it  certain  that  nothing  but  the 
best  interests  of  the  country  could  have  influenced  your  opinions. 

Of  the  justice  which  calls  for  the  death  of  these  men  I nan  have  no 
doubt.  The  mercy  it  would  be  to  others  in  like  cases  tempted  to  offend 


Chap.  XXVH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  469 

to  have  the  terrible  example  of  the  punishment  to  which  these  mis- 
guided men  are  sentenced  is  the  only  matter  left  for  discussion. 

Upon  this  question  you  who  Lave  suffered  for  the  Union,  who  have 
stood  by  it  in  evil  and  good  report ; you  who  have  lived  and  are  here- 
after to  live  in  this  city  at  your  homes  when  all  are  gathered  again  * 
under  that  flag  which  has  been  here  so  foully  outraged  and  to  whose 
wrongs  these  men’s  lives  are  forfeited ; you  who  I have  heard  have 
exerted  your  talents  to  save  the  lives  of  Union  men  in  the  hour  of  true 
peril,  ought  to  have  a determining  weight  when  your  opinions  have 
been  deliberately  formed.  You  ask  for  these  men’s  lives.  You  shall 
have  them.  You  say  that  this  clemency  of  the  Government  is  best  for 
the  good  of  that  cause  we  all  have  at  heart.  Be  it  so.  You  are  more 
likely  to  be  better  informed  upon  this  than  I am.  I have  no  wish  to  do 
anything  but  that  which  will  show  the  men  of  Louisiana  how  great  a 
good  they  were  tempted  to  throw  away  when  they  were  led  to  raise 
their  hands  against  the  Constitution  and  laws  of  the  United  States. 

If  this  example  of  mercy  is  lost  upon  those  situated  in  like  case  swift 
justice  can  overtake  others  in  like  manner  offending. 

I will  cause  the  proper  order  to  go  to  the  pro v6st- marshal  to  suspend 
the  execution  of  the  sentence  of  death  upon  Abraham  McLane,  Daniel 
Doyle,  Edward  C.  Smith,  Patrick  Kane,  George  L.  Williams,  and  Will- 
iam Stanley,  and  shall  commute  their  punishment  to  hard  labor  on  the 
fortifications  at  Ship  Island,  or  the  nearest  military  post,  at  the  pleasure 
of  the  President  of  the  United  States. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  friend  and  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER. 

[Inclosure  D.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

June  3,  1862. 

Capt.  Jonas  H.  French, 

Provost-Marshal , District  of  New  Orleans : 

Captain  : You  will  suspend  the  execution  of  the  sentence  of  death 
upon  Abraham  McLane,  Daniel  Doyle,  Edward  C.  Smith,  Patrick  Kane, 
George  L.  Williams,  and  William  Stanley,  authorized  by  General  Orders, 
No.  36,  and  cause  them,  and  each  of  them,  to  be  confined  at  hard  labor 
upon  the  fortifications  at  Ship  Island,  or  the  nearest  military  post, 
during  the  pleasure  of  the  United  States. 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  E.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  70.  J New  Orleans , June  5,  1862. 

William  B.  Mumford,  a citizen  of  New  Orleans,  having  been  convicted 
before  the  military  commission  of  treason  and  an  overt  act  thereof,  tear- 
ing down  the  United  States  flag  from  a public  building  of  the  United 
States,  for  the  purpose  of  inciting  other  evil-minded  persons  to  further 
resistance  to  the  laws  and  arms  of  the  United  States,  after  said  flag  was 
placed  there  by  Commodore  Farragut,  of  the  United  States  Navy : 

It  is  ordered  that  he  lie  executed  according  to  sentence  of  said  mili- 
tary commission  on  Saturday,  June  7,  inst.,  between  the  hours  of  8 a.  m. 
and  12  m.  under  the  directions  of  the  provost-marshal  of  the  District 
of  New  Orleans,  and  for  so  doing  this  shall  be  his  sufficient  warrant. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler,  commanding  department: 

WM.  H.  WIEGEL, 

First  Lieutenant  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


470 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYH. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , June  10,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  M.  0.  Meigs, 

Quartermaster -General  U.  S.  Army : 

General  : In  the  matter  of  certain  cotton  sent  home  on  the  Black 
Prince,  a Government  transport,  from  Ship  Island,  the  transaction  is 
simply  this : This  cotton  was  captured  by  the  Navy  on  board  a small 
schooner,  which  would  be  unsafe  to  send  to  sea.  I needed  the  schooner 
as  a lighter  and  took  her  from  the  Navy.  What  should  be  done  with 
the  cotton?  A transport  was  going  home  empty;  it  would  cost  the 
United  States  nothing  to  transport  it.  To  whom  should  I send  it  ? To 
my  quartermaster  at  Boston?  But  I supposed  him  on  the  way  here. 
Owing  to  the  delays  of  the  expedition  1 found  all  the  quartermaster’s 
men  and  artisans  on  the  island,  whose  services  on  the  island  were  in- 
dispensable, in  almost  a state  of  mutiny  for  want  of  pay.  There  was 
not  a dollar  of  Government  funds  on  the  island.  I had  $75  of  my  own ; 
the  sutler  had  money ; he  would  lend  it  on  my  draft  on  my  private 
banker.  I borrowed  *>n  such  draft  about  $4,000,  quite  equal  to  the 
value  of  the  cotton  as  I received  it,  and  with  the  money  paid  the  Gov- 
ernment’s debts  to  its  laborers,  so  that  their  wives  and  children  would 
not  starve.  In  order  that  my  draft  should  be  paid  I sent  the  cotton  to 
my  correspondent  at  Boston,  with  directions  to  sell  it,  pay  the  draft  out 
of  the  proceeds,  and  hold  the  rest,  if  any,  subject  to  my  order,  so  that 
upon  an  account  stated  I- might  settle  with  the  Government.  What 
was  done?  The  Government  seized  the  cotton  without  a word  of  ex- 
planation to  me,  kept  it  till  it  depreciated  10  per  cent.,  and  allowed  my 
draft  to  be  dishonored,  and  it  had  to  be  paid  out  of  the  little  fund  I 
have  left  at  home  for  the  support  of  my  children  during  my  absence. 
This,  general,  is  the  only  aid  myself  or  the  forces  under  my  command 
received  from  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  from  the  24th  of  February 
to  the  8th  of  May,  when,  being  in  possession  of  New  Orleans,  where 
there  was  something  to  be  received,  a very  able  and  competent  officer, 
Colonel  Shaffer,  was  sent  me.  But  my  men  are  still  suffering  for  the 
mosquito-nets  you  promised  me  on  the  24th  of  February  and  the  pub- 
lic service  was  much  delayed  by  the  want  of  those  light-draught  steam- 
ers, for  which  I made  requisition  at  or  before  this  date,  but  which  have 
never  come;  but  instead  thereof  I received  an  order  to  send  home  the 
only  steamer  I had  that  had  not  a hole  in  her  bottom  five  inches  square. 

I have  stated  the  facts.  I make  no  complaints;  I ask  no  favors.  I 
have  since  received  from  Colonel  Shaffer  here  the  money  I had  paid 
out  to  the  laborers,  which  was  the  amount  of  my  draft  (losing  the  in- 
terest and  expenses  of  protest,  &c.),  so  that  the  cotton  or  its  proceeds 
now  belongs  to  the  Government,  and  I relinquish  all  claims  upon  it.  I 
" hope  you  will  cause  my  agent  to  be  paid  for  the  trouble  he  has  had 
about  it ; if  not,  well. 

There  was  on  the  same  ship  two  or  three  bales  of  cotton,  which  was 
bought  by  a Mr.  Parker  of  some  person  who  picked  it  up  floating  from 
the  wreck,  partly  damaged.  He  asked  me  the  privilege  of  sending 
home  those  bales,  as  there  was  none  other  than  a Government  trans- 
port at  Ship  Island.  I gave  it.  I hope  they  were  not  seized ; they  can 
be  easily  distinguished.  If  they  were,  they  should  be  given  up,  as  it 
is  neither  just  nor  right  they  should  be  seized  or  held. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEK, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


CHAP.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


471 


War  Department,  Washington , June  10,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding , dte.,  New  Orleans : 

General  : Your  interesting  dispatches,  announcing  the  brilliant 
success  of  your  expedition,  as  well  as  those  sent  by  Colonel  Deming 
and  Mr.  Bouligny,  were  duly  received.  No  event  during  the  war  has 
exercised  an  influence  upon  the  public  mind  so  powerful  as  the  capture 
and  occupation  of  New  Orleans.  To  you  and  to  the  gallant  officers 
and  soldiers  under  your  command  the  Department  tenders  cordial 
thanks.  Your  vigorous  and  able  administration  of  the  government  of 
that  city  also  receives  warm  commendation.  In  order  to  re-establish 
the  authority  of  the  Federal  Government  over  the  State  of  Louisiana 
and  to  secure  to  the  people  protection  until  they  can  establish  a civil 
government  consistent  with  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  the 
President  has  deemed  it  expedient  to  appoint  a military  governor,  as 
in  the  States  of  North  Carolina  and  Tennessee,  and  observing  that 
Colonel  Shepley  has  been  appointed  by  you  mayor  of  the  city  of  New 
Orleans,  he  has  been  selected  for  the  important  office  of  military  gov- 
ernor of  Louisiana.  His  letter  of  appointment  and  instructions  are 
inclosed  herewith  to  your  care  to  be  delivered  to  him. 

You  will  please  detail  a sufficient  military  force  for  the  purposes  of 
police  and  governors  guard,  and  give  to  his  administration  such  sup- 
port as  circumstances  may  require. 

Your  proceedings  in  relation  to  the  consul  of  the  Netherlands  has 
occasioned  a correspondence  between  the  minister  of  that  Government 
and  the  Secretary  of  State,  copies  whereof  are  herewith  transmitted 
to  you.*  No  one  "can  be  more  sensible  than  yourself  of  the  necessity  of 
preserving  harmonious  relations  with  all  foreign  Governments  j and  it 
is  the  desire  of  the  President  that  your  action,  as  well  as  that  of  the 
military  governor  of  Louisiana,  shall  conform  to  the  views  expressed 
by  the  Secretary  to  Baron  von  Limburg  as  the  policy  of  this  Govern- 
ment toward  foreign  nations. 

The  Hon.  Reverdy  Johnson  has  been  appointed  by  the  State  Depart- 
ment as  a special  agent,  to  proceed  to  New  Orleans  and  investigate  and 
report  upon  the  complaints  made  by  foreign  consuls  against  the  late 
, military  proceedings  in  their  respective  cases.  He  is  commended  to 
* your  kind  attention,  and  will  of  course  receive  from  you  every  facility 
in  performing  his  official  duty. 

Tins' Department  feels  the  deepest  interest  in  the  safety  and  success 
of  your  command,  and  all  the  power  of  the  Government  will  be  exerted 
for  your  aid  and  support.  You  will  please  communicate  with  me  as 
often  as  may  be  in  your  power,  and  call  for  whatever  assistance  may 
be  required. 

From  the  public  prints  you  will  learn  the  success  which  in  every 
quarter  is  now  attending  the  Union  cause,  so  that  it  is  needless  for  me 
to  detail  the  military  operations. 

With  admiration  for  your  achievements  and  the  utmost  confidence 
in  your  continued  success,  I remain,  truly,  yours, 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War . 


[June  10,  1862. — For  Stanton  to  Shepley,  transmitting  commission 
as  military  governor  of  Louisiana,  and  correspondence  in  relation 
thereto,  see  Series  III,  Yol.  II.] 


To  appear  in  Series  III,  Vol.  II. 


472 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


Head  quarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  Jime  — , 1862. 

In  the  matter  of  the  appeal  of  W.  N.  Mercer,  president,  and  Auguste 
Montreuil,  cashier,  of  the  Bank  of  Louisiana,  defendants,  from  the 
judgment  of  the  provost  court,  upon  the  complaint  of  A.  Durand, 
complainant. 

This  is  an  application  by  the  defendants,  representing  the  bank,  made 
to  the  general  commanding,  asking  him  to  revise  and  set  aside  the 
judgment  of  the  provost  court  made  in  favor  of  the  plaintiff,  Durand. 

It  is  based  upon  the  legal  theory  that  over  all  matters  within  garri- 
son, camp,  and  perhaps  geographical  military  department  wherein  mar- 
tial law  has  been  declared  the*power  of  the  commanding  general  is 
absolute,  and  that,  looking  to  him  as  the  representative  of  the  martial 
power  of  the  government  here,  all  applications  for  redress  must  be 
made  when  any  wrong  is  supposed  to  have  been  done.  This  view  being 
sound,  as  far  as  I can  see,  I have,  with  the  best  thought  possible  under 
the  circumstances,  re-examined  the  case  and  the  reasons  assigned  for 
the  appeal. 

Error  is  claimed  on  two  grounds  : First,  that  the  provost  court  had 
no.  jurisdiction  of  the  cause  5 and,  second,  that  the  judgment  was  not 
in  accordance  with  the  law  which  should  govern  its  decision. 

The  argument  assumes  that  law  to  be  General  Orders,  No.  30,  and 
does  not  dispute  the  authority  which  made  or  the  effect  of  that  order, 
but  contents  itself  with  endeavoring  to  construe  the  order. 

The  objection  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  court  is  put  upon  two  grounds : 
1st,  that  the  provost  court  has  not  jurisdiction  of  the  subject-matter  5 
2d,  that  the  proper  parties  were  not  before  it,  so  as  to  enable  it  to  act 
with  regard  to  the  rights  of  those  who  were  not  summoned  in  the  case. 

It  is  said  that  this  question,  being  one  of  a right  of  property,  cannot 
be  entertained  by  a court  which  only  acts  to  punish  the  infraction  of 
military  orders  and  police  regulations. 

A technical  answer  to  this  objection,  which  is  in  the  nature  of  a plea 
to  the  jurisdiction,  would  be  that  it  does  not  appear  this  plea  was  put 
in  till  after  the  hearing  upon  the  merits. 

It  is  a familiar  rule  that  a party  shall  not  be  allowed  to  go  into  court 
and  have  a hearing  on  his  case,  take  the  chances  of  ^decision  in  his 
favor,  and  then,  if  adverse,  repudiate  the  court  before  which  he  has 
appeared  and  to  whose  judgment  he  has  submitted  his  cause. 

This  rule  has  been  held  very  strictly,  both  as  to  jurisdiction  over  the 
subject-matter  and  the  parties ; but  in  a court  where  no  technical  rules 
are  allowed  to  work  injustice  a technical  answer  is  not  sufficient.  Of 
what  then  do  the  defendants  complain  ? The  bank  says  the  court  has 
made  an  order  which  takes  away  the  property  of  the  bank  and  gives  it 
to  another,  and  that  the  court  has  no  power  so  to  act.  But  is  that  so  f 
Is  it  not  the  commanding  general’s  order  which  does  that  of  which 
complaint  is  made?  The  bank  nowhere  complains,  that  the  general  has 
not  the  power  to  make  such  an  order,  if  in  his  judgment  it  becomes  a 
military  necessity,  and  that  some  order  on  the  subject-matter  was  so 
made  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  first  question  put  to  him  upon  entering 
the  city  was  what  currency  would  be  provided  for  the  people  to  save 
them  from  starvation  and  bread-riots.  It  has  passed  into  history  that 
he  permitted  a vicious  currency  as  a medium  of  circulation  for  the  pur- 
pose of  meeting  this  exigency.  Again,  it  will  be  remembered* that  the 
bank  now  claims  that  it  is  exempted  from  the  effects  of  this  order  be- 
cause by  order  of  another  military  commander,  in  September  last  (there 
was  no  civil  law  for  it),  it  was  obliged  to  suspend  specie  payments 


Ciiap.  xxvn.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


473 


against  its  will,  and  substitute  Confederate  notes  for  its  daily  currency 
instead  of  its  own  bills.  This  order  was  submitted  to,  if  not  with  joy,  at 
least  not  under  protest,  so  far  as  I am  informed. 

The  order  as  well  as  the  law  of  the  land  then  is  that  the  bank  shall 
pay  its  depositors  in  gold,  silver  coin,  and  United  States  Treasury 
notes,  or  its  own  bills.  A citizen  complains  that  this  order  of  the 
commanding  general  has  not  been  obeyed  to  his  prejudice.  For  what 
then  is  a provost  court  in  military  phrase  constituted  ? Confessedly  to 
inquire  into,  determine,  and  punish  the  infractionof  military  orders. 
To  do  this  the  court  must  act  in  rem  as  well  as  in  personam.  A familiar 
example  would  be,  if  the*  commanding  general  orders  all  arms  to  be 
given  up,  and  some  citizen  neglects  or  refuses  to  obey,  would  it  not  be 
within  the  jurisdiction  of  a provost  court,  although  its  judgment  should 
act  upon  a right  of  property  involving  millions  of  dollars’  worth  of 
muskets  ? 

If  the  act  brought  before  the  court,  therefore,  is  alleged  to  be  an  in- 
fraction of  a military  order,  it  is  determinable  in  a military  court. 
Again,  it  is  said  that  the  court  has  not  jurisdiction  because  the  stock- 
holders of  the  bank  were  not  summoned  in  and  made  parties,  and  that 
their  rights  and  interests  will  be  affected  by  this  decision.  This  is  all 
true ; but  did  the  learned  counsel  for  the  bank  ever  hear  of  a suit 
against  a bank  in  any  court  where  the  stockholders  were  summoned  in, 
unless  it  was  sought  to  charge  them  individually,  which  is  not  the  case 
here?  A corporation  acts  through  its  authorized  agents  and  is  bound 
by  their  acts,  and  is  to  be  charged  upon  notice  to  them.  This  objection 
of  want  of  sufficient  power  in  the  president  and  directors  of  the  Bank 
of  Louisiana  to  pay  the  depositor,  Mr.  Durand,  in  their  own  bills, 
which  is  only  changing  the  form  of  indebtedness  from  a depositor  to  a 
bill-holder,  under  the  order  of  the  provost  court,  without  the  consent 
of  their  stockholders,  would  provoke  a smile  in  a less  serious  discussion, 
when  we  remember  that  this  same  board  of  directors,  without  asking 
leave  of  their  stockholders,  when  against  law  and  right,  put  $3,000,000 
of  its  bullion  out  of  their  hands  and  out  of  the  State,  whence  they  will 
probably  never  see  it  again. 

I am  of  the  opinion  that  these  objections  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
court  are  untenable. 

The  other  objection,  as  to  the  merits  of  the  decision,  can,  it  seems  to 
me,  be  disposed  of  in  a word.  If  the  order  is  a proper  one,  it  must  be 
obeyed.  Its  propriety  cannot  be  discussed  by  me.  It  is  admitted  that 
Durand  is  a depositor  in  the  bank  of  what  the  bank  chose  to  take  as 
money,  treated  as  money,  credited  to  him  as  money,  nay  forced  upon 
the  community  as  money.  He  has  not  been  paid  his  deposits.  The 
bank  should  pay  him  in  specie.  The  decision  following  the  letter  of 
the  order  is  that  the  bank  may  give  him  their  own  bills  instead  of 
money.  Of  that  decision  the  bank  has  no  cause  to  complain.  Durand 
is  now  the  creditor  of  the  bank  as  a depositor.  The  decision  makes 
him  their  creditor  as  a bill  holder.  In  equity  they  have  nothing  to 
complain  of.  He  may  have,  becausehe  does  not  get  his  gold,  to  which  by 
the  laws  of  banking,  laws  of  the  State,  and  the  United  States  he  is  en- 
titled. 

He  does  not  seek  to  reverse  the  decision.  Let  it  stand. 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


[June  11,  1862. — For  Butler  to  Secretary  of  State  in  reference  to  the 

Mexican  consulate  in  New  Orleans,  see  Series  III,  Yol.  II.] 


474 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xxvn. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1,  0.  S.  A., 

Jackson , Miss.,  June  12, 1862. 

Commanding  Officer,  IJ.  S.  N., 

Mississippi  River,  near  Baton  Rouge  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  a letter  received  by  the 
mayor  of  Rodney,  notifying  him  in  substance  that  if  the  vessels  of  the 
United  States  Navy  are  fired  upon  by  our  troops  from  or  near  the  town 
vengeance  will  he  taken  upon  the  women  and  children,  or,  as  the  writer 
is  pleased  to  term  it,  u punishment  for  the  offense  will  be  visited  upon 
the  town,”  and  this,  too,  while  declaring  that  “ we  are  not  here  to  war 
upon  unarmed  or  peaceable  persons.”  Where  two  nations  are  at  war 
it  has  been  customary  among  civilized  people  u to  punish  the  offense  ” 
of  an  attack  of  the  armed  forces  of  one  upon  those  of  the  other  by  a 
combat  with  the  attacking  party.  If  such  attack  be  made  from  a town 
the  assaulting  party  is  not  entitled  to,  and' so  far  as  our  troops  are  con- 
cerned does  not  claim,  any  immunity  by  reason  of  the  presence  of 
women  and  children.  What  we  do  claim,  however,  and  insist  -upon, 
is  that  when  your  vessels  or  transports  are  fired  into  by  our  troops 
they  shall  not  hasten  * to  the  nearest  collection  of  unarmed  and  peace- 
able women  and  children  and  wreak  their  vengeance  upon  them,  as 
was  done  lately  at  Grand  Gulf  by  United  States  vessels  in  retaliation 
for  an  attack  with  which  the  town  had  nothing  more  to  do  than  had 
the  city  of  Saint  Louis. 

My  batteries  are  located  at  such  points  upon  the  river  as  are  deemed 
best  suited  for  the  desired  purposes  and  without  reference  to  or  con- 
nection with  the  people  of  the  town.  Should  the  site  happen  to  fall 
within  a village,  you  of  course  are  at  liberty  to  return  the  fire.  Should 
it  be  in  the  vicinity  of  one,  however,  the  usages  of  civilized  warfare  do 
not  justify  its  destruction,  unless*  demanded  by  the  necessities  of  attack 
or  defense. 

I cannot  bring  myself  to  believe  that  the  barbarous  and  cowardly 
policy  indicated  in  the  inclosed  letter  will  meet  with  the  approval  of  any 
officer  of  rank  or  standing  in  the  United  States  Navy.  I have  therefore 
thought  proper  to  transmit  it  to  you  under  a flag  of  truce,  with  the 
confident  expectation  that  you  will  direct  those  under  your  command 
to  confine  their  offensive  operations  as  far  as  possible  to  our  troops, 
and  forbid  the  wanton  destruction  of  defenseless  towns,  filled  with 
unoffending  non-combatants,  unless  required  by  imperious  military 
necessity.  The  practice  of  slaying  women  and  children  as  an  act  of 
retaliation  has  happily  fallen  into  disuse  in  this  country  with  the  dis- 
appearance of  the  Indian  tribes,  and  I trust  it  will  not  be  revived  by 
the  officers  of  the  United  States  Navy,  but  that  the  demolition  and 
pillage  of  the  unoffending  little  village  of  Grand  Gulf  may  be  permitted 
to  stand  alone  and  without  parallel  upon  record. 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOYELL, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 

[Indorsement.]  a 

Headquarters, 

Baton  Rouge,  La.,  June  14,  1862. 

• This  paper  is  respectfully  referred  to  the  flag-officer,  and  the  officer 
bearing  it  is  directed  to  wait  till  to-morrow  morning  outside  our  pickets 


chap,  xxvn.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — -UNION. 


475 


for  an  answer  or  no  answer.  I think  the  paper  frivolous  and  designed 
to  make  an  investigation  into  our  plans  and  an  observance  of  our  force. 
Respectfully, 

T.  WILLIAMS, 
Brigadier-  General  of  Volunteers. 


[Inclosure.] 

United  States  Steamer  Winona, 

Off  Rodney , Miss.,  June  5r  1862. 

Authorities  of  the  Town  of  Rodney  : 

You  are  doubtless  aware  that  the  town  of  Grand  Gulf  was  fired  upon 
a short  time  since  by  some  of  the  vessels  of  the  United  States  Govern- 
ment as  a punishment  for  permitting  a battery  to  fire  upon  some  of 
our  transport  steamers  while  passing  down.  I deem  it  my  duty  to 
inform  you  that  should  any  battery  or  .artillery  fire  upon  any  of  our 
vessels  while  passing  up  or  down  from  or  near  the  town  of  Rodney 
the  punishment  for  the  offense  will  be  visited  on  the  town.  We  are 
not  here  to  war  upon  unarmed  or  peaceable  persons,  and  we  would 
deprecate  any  event  compelling  us  to  fire  upon  the  property  of  inoffen- 
sive people. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  T.  NICHOLS, 

Lieutenant  Commanding  and  Senior  Officer  Present. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , June  13,  1862. 

The  return  of  the  Citizens’  Bank  to  General  Orders,  No.  40,  has  been 
carefully  examined,  and  the  various  claims  set  up  by  the  bank  to  the 
fuuds  in  its  hands  weighed. 

The  report  finds  that  there  is  to  the  credit  of  the  Confederate  States 
$219,090.94.  This  of  course  is  due  in  prcesenti  from  the  bank.  The  bank 
claims  that  it  holds  an  equal  amount  of  Confederate  Treasury  notes, 
and  desires  to  set  off  those  notes  against  the  amount  so  due  and  paya- 
ble. This  cannot  be  permitted.  Many  answers  might  be  suggested  to 
the  claim  ; one  or  two  are  sufficient 

Confederate  States  Treasury  notes  are  not  due  till  six  months  after 
the  conclusion  of  a treaty  of  peace  between  the  Confederate  States  and 
the  United  States.  When  that  time  comes  it  will  be  in  season  to  set 
off  such  claims.  Again,  the  United  States  being  entitled  to  the  credits 
due  the  Confederate  States  in  the  bank,  that  amount  must  be  paid  in 
money  or  valuable  property.  I cannot  recognize  the  Confederate  notes 
as  either  money  or  property.  The  bank  having  done  so  by  receiving 
them,  issuing  them,  banking  upon  them,  loaning  upon  them,  thus  giving 
them  credit  to  the  injury  of  the  United  States,  is  estopped  to  deny  their 
value. 

The  “tin  box”  belonging  to  an  officer  of  the  supposed  Confederate 
States,  being  a special  deposit,  will  be  turned  over  in  bulk,  whether  its 
contents  are  more  or  less  valuable.  The  bank  is  responsible  only  for 
safe  custody. 

The  several  deposits  of  the  officers  of  the  supposed  Confederate 
States  were  received  in  the  usual  course  of  business ; were  doubtless 
some  of  them,  perhaps  largely,  received  in  Confederate  notes ; but  for 
the  reason  above  stated  can  only  be  paid  to  the  United  States  in  its 
own  constitutional  currency. 


476 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

These  are  in  no  sense  of  language  special  deposits.  They  were  held 
in  general  account,  went  into  the  funds  of  the  bank,  were  paid  out  in  the 
discounts  of  the  bank,  and  if  called  upon  to-day  for  the  identical  notes 
put  into  the  bank,  which  is  the  only  idea  of  a special  deposit,  the  bank 
would  be  utterly  unable  to  produce  them. 

As  well  might  my  private  banker,  with  whom  I have  deposited  my 
neighbor’s  check  or  draft  as  money,  which  has  been  received  as  money 
and  paid  out  as  money  months  afterward,  when  my  neighbor  has  be- 
come bankrupt,  buy  up  other  of  his  checks  and  drafts  at  a discount  and 
pay  them  to  me  instead  of  money  upon  the  ground  that  I had  made  a 
special  deposit. 

The  respectability  of  the  source  from  which  this  claim  of  the  bank 
proceeds  alone  saves  it  from  ridicule. 

The  United  States  can  in  no  form  recognize  any  of  the  sequestrations 
or  confiscation  of  the  supposed  Confederate  States ; therefore  the  ac- 
counts with  the  Bank  of  Kentucky  will  be  made  up,  and  all  its  prop- 
erty will  be  paid  over  and  delivered  as  if  such  attempted  confiscation 
had  never  been  made. 

The  result  is  therefore  upon  the  showing  of  the  bank  by  its  return 
that  there  is  due  and  payable  to  the  Confederate  States,  and  therefore 
now  to  be  paid  to  the  United  States,  the  sums  following : 

$219, 090  94 
12,465  00. 


106, 812  60 
72,084  90 
1, 120  00 
16, 026  52 
6,814  57 
497  30 

Total 434,911  83  * 

This  is  the  legal  result  to  which  the  mind  must  arrive  in  this  discus- 
sion ; but  there  are  other  considerations  which  may  apply  to  the  first 
item  of  the  account. 

Only  the  notes  of  the  Confederate  States  were  deposited  by  the  Treas- 
urer in  the  bank,  and  by  the  order  of  the  ruling  authority  then  here 
the  bank  was  obliged  to  receive  them. 

In  equity  and  good  conscience  the  Confederate  States  could  call  for 
nothing  more  than  they  had  compelled  the  bank  to  take. 

The  United  States  succeed  to  rights  of  the  Confederate  States,  and 
should  only  take  that  which  the  Confederate  States  ought  to  take. 
But  the  United  States,  not  taking  or  recognizing  Confederate  notes,  can 
only  leave  them  with  the  bank  to  be  held  by  it  hereafter  in  special 
deposit  as  so  much  worthless  paper. 

Therefore  I must  direct  all  the  items  but  the  first  to  be  paid  to  my 
order  for  the  United  States  in  gold,  silver,  or  United  States  Treasury 
notes  at  once.  The  first  item  of  $219,090.94  I will  refer  to  the  home 
Government  for  adjudication,  and  in  the  mean  time  the  bank  must  hold 
as  a special  deposit  the  amount  of  Confederate  Treasury  notes  above 
mentioned  and  a like  amount  in  bullion  to  await  the  decisiop. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Ko.  98.  ( New  Orleans , June  13,  1862. 

William  M.  Clary,  late  second  officer  of  the  United  States  steam- 


Confederate  States  Treasurer’s  account . 

Special  accounts 

Deposits  by  officers 

J.  M.  Huger,  receiver 

G.  M.  Ward,  receiver 

J.  C.  Manning,  receiver -- 

M.  L.  Smith 

S.  Macklin 

Richard 


Chap.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  47? 

transport  Saxon,  and  Stanislaus  Eoy,  of  New  Orleans,  on  the  night  of 
the  11th  of  June  instant,  having  forged  a pretended  authority  of  the 
major-general  commanding,  being  armed,  in  company  with  other  evil- 
disposed  persons,  under  false  names  and  in  a pretended  uniform  of 
soldiers  ot  the  United  States,  entered  the  house  of  a peaceable  citizen, 
No.  93  Toulouse  street,  about  the  hour  of  11  o’clock  in  the  night  time, 
and  then,  in  a pretended  search  for  arms  and  treasonable  correspond- 
ence, by  virtue  of  such  forged  authority,  plundered  said  house  and  stole 
therefrom  $1,885  in  current  bank  notes,  one  gold  watch  and  chain,  and 
one  bosom-pin. 

This  outrage  was  reported  to  the  commanding  general  at  11  o’clock 
a.  m.  on  this  12th  day  of  June  instant,  and  by  his  order  Clary  and  Eoy 
were  detected  and  arrested  on  the  same  day,  and  brought  before  the 
commanding  general  at  1 o’clock  p.  m.  of  this  day,  when  and  where  it 
appeared  by  uncontrovertible  evidence  that  the  facts  above  stated  were 
true,  and  all  material  parts  thereof  were  voluntarily  confessed  by  Clary 
and  Eoy. 

It  further  appeared  that  Clary  and  Eoy  had  before  this  occasion 
visited  other  houses  of  peaceable  citizens  in  the  night-time  and  for  like 
purposes  and  under  like  false  pretenses. 

Brass  knuckles,  burglar  keys,  and  a portion  of  the  stolen  property, 
and  other  property  stolen  from  other  parties,  were  found  upon  the 
person  of  Eoy  and  in  his  lodgings.  Whereupon,  after  a full  hearing  of 
the  defense  of  Clary  and  Eoy  and  due  consideration  of  the  evidence,  it 
was  ordered  by  the  commanding  general  that  William  M.  Clary  and 
Stanislaus  Eoy,  for  their  offenses,  be  punished  by  being  hanged  by  the 
neck  until  they  are  dead,  and  this  sentence  be  executed  upon  them 
and  each  of  them  between  the  hours  of  8 o’clock  a.  m.  and  12  m.  on 
Monday,  the  16th  day  of  June  instant,  at  or  near  the  parish  prison,  in 
the  city  of  New  Orleans. 

The  provost-marshal  will  cause  said  sentence  to  be  executed,  and  for 
so  doing  this  order  will  be  his  sufficient  warrant. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

E.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  99.  i New  Orleans , June  14,  1862. 

The  commanding  general,  desiring  to  test  the  vigilance,  alertness 
activity,  and  efficiency  of  his  troops  stationed  in  the  city,  unexpectedly 
caused  the  assembly  to  be  beaten  at  half  past  10  o’clock  last  evening. 
The  general  was  much  gratified  at  the  prompt  manner  in  which  all 
the  troops  performed  their  appropriate  duties.  In  ten  minutes  every 
corps  had  either  reported  for  orders  or  was  on  its  march  to  its  station. 
Soldiers,  your  behavior  in  New  Orleans  has  been  admirable.  Notwith- 
standing the  temptations  of  a great  city,  so  as  to  present  such  disci- 
plined efficiency  is  the  highest  exhibition  of  soldierly  qualities.  You 
have  done  more  than  win  a great  battle.  You  have  conquered  your- 
selves. You  have  convinced  the  people  of  New  Orleans  that  you  are 
worthy  of  the  flag  you  bear  in  triumph.  He  is  more  of  a coward  who 
yields  to  his  own  weakness  than  he  who  surrenders  to  an  enemy.  Go 
on  as  you  have  begun,  true  to  your  New  England  trainings  and  her 
religious  influences,  showing  the  men  and  women  of  the  South  that 


478 


W.  FLA  , S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

where  our  bayonets  are  there  are  peace  and  liberty,  safety  and  order, 
under  the  law. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

R.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  103.  j New  Orleans , June  14, 1862. 

Theodore  Lieb,  of  New  Orleans  5 George  William  Oraig,  late  first  offi- 
cer of  the  ship  City  of  New  York,  and  Frank  Newton,  late  private  in 
the  Thirteenth  Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers,  upon  their  own  con- 
fession and  clear  proof,  after  a full  hearing,  were  convicted  of  being 
members  of  an  organized  gang  of  thieves,  consisting  of  seven  or  more, 
of  which  William  M.  Clary  and  Stanislaus  Roy,  mentioned  in  Special, 
Orders,  No.  98,  and  now  under  sentence  of  death,  were  principals,  bound 
together  by  an  oath  or  obligation,  engaged,  by  means  of  a forged  author- 
ity and  false  uniforms,  in  robbing  the  houses  of  divers  peaceable  citizens 
of  their  moneys,  watches,  jewelry,  and  valuables,  under  pretense  of 
searching  for  arms  and  articles  contraband  of  war,  must  suffer  the 
proper  penalty. 

At  least  eight  houses,  as  appears  by  their  confession,  were  plundered 
by  three  or  more  of  their  gang,  while  others  were  watching  without,  at 
various  times,  and  a large  amount  of  property  carried  off.  A large  por- 
tion has  been  since  recovered. 

The  heinousuess  of  their  offense  is  heightened  by  the  contempt  and 
disgrace  brought  upon  the  uniform,  authority,  and  flag  of  the  United 
States  by  their  fraudulent  acts  in  making  it  cover  their  nefarious  prac- 
tices, and  renders  them  peculiarly  the  subjects  of  prompt  and  condign 
punishment. 

It  is  therefore  ordered  that  George  William  Craig  and  Frank  Newton, 
for  these  offenses  as  aforesaid,  be  hanged  by  the  neck  until  they  and 
each  of  them  are  dead,  and  that  this  sentence  be  executed  upon  them  1 
at  or  near  the  parish  prison,  in  the  city  of  New  Orleans,  on  Monday,  the 
16th  day  of  June  instant,  between  the  hours  of  6 a.  m.  and  12  m.,  under 
the  direction  of  the  provost-marshal,  and  for  so  doing  this  shall  be  his 
sufficient  warrant. 

Theodore  Lieb,  being  a youth  of  eighteen  years,  only  in  consideration 
of  his  tender  years,  has  his  punishment  commuted  to  confinement  at 
hard  labor  on  the  fortifications  at  Ship  Island,  or  the  nearest  military 
post,  during  the  pleasure  of  the  President  of  the  United  States. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

R.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  June  17,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

The  fleet  are  still  at  Baton  Rouge  and  were  to  start  to-day  for  Vicks- 
burg. Brigadier-General  Williams  has  charge  of  the  land  forces,  and 


479 


Chap-  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

will  take  four  regiments  and  ten  pieces  of  artillery,  leaving  two  at  Baton 
Rouge,  La. 

The  mode  of  attack  is  the  one  I indicated  in  my  last  dispatch  by  means 
of  a cut-off.  I inclose  a plan  of  the  operation.*  The  cut-off  will  be 
miles,  through  soft  ground;  may  be  made  6 feet  wide  and  4 deep  by  a 
regiment  in  two  days,  and  then  the  water  will  make  a gunboat  channel 
through  in  three  days.  No  time  has  been  lost,  as  the  water  still  covers 
the  whole  point.  This  city  yet  continues  to  be  healthy.  I am  using  all 
my  endeavors  to  have  it  cleansed  and  at  the  same  time  feeding  the 
poor. 

At  the  opening  of  the  port,  Havana  receiving  the  news  first,  there 
was  an  immediate  clearance  thence  of  vessels  for  New  Orleans.  But 
the  yellow  fever  is  at  Havana,  so  that  I must  maintain  strict  quaran- 
tine. The  desire  of  forestalling  the  market  makes  all  the  vessels  very 
uneasy  under  quarantine  regulations,  so  that  I have  all  manner  of  com- 
plaint and  trouble  with  the  foreign  consuls  representing  their  country- 
men in  that  regard,  but  I shall  maintain  quarantine  at  all  hazards. 

I inclose  herewith  some  correspondence  with  the  supposed  consul  of 
Great  Britain  upon  the  subject  of  my  General  Orders,  No.  41,  which  I 
also  submit  herewith,  and  also  a protest  received  from  the  several  con- 
suls whose  names  are  attached,  with  my  reply.  The  truth  is,  as  a rule, 
all  the  consuls,  with  perhaps  the  exception  of  the  French  consul,  have 
aided  the  rebellion  by  every  means,  and  specially  by  giving  means  of 
transferring  the  Confederate  funds  to  Europe  and  buying  arms  and 
ammunition,  f 

I inclose  also  copies  of  correspondence  in  regard  to  certain  sugars  of 
Mr.  Covas,  which  relate  to  this  subject,  which  will  be  sufficiently  explicit 
in  itself.  | 

I also  inclose  “Reglements  de  la  Legion  Fran 9aise,  for m6e  & la  Nou- 
velle  Orleans,  le  26  avril,  1861,”  and  commend  to  your  special  attention 
the  contents  of  pages  3,  4, 6,  18,  19, 20,  and  specially  the  oath  of  officers 
upon  the  22d  page. 

That  Legion  existed  in  organization  up  to  the  time  of  our  entering  the 
city. 

The  oath  to  support,  protect,  and  maintain  the  Constitution  of  the 
Confederate  States  stamps  it  as  gross  a breach  of  neutrality  as  was 
ever  committed.  It  is  no  answer  that  it  was  to  be  done  only  in  New 
Orleans,  because  there  was  the  vital  heart  of  the  rebellion. 

This  act  was  known  to  and  approved  by  the  French  consul.  The 
other  foreigners  each  made  similar  organizations,  and  the  whole  resulted 
in  a European  brigade,  upon  which  the  Confederates  depended  for  a 
defense  of  the  city  against  iniques  agresseurs  in  the  guerre  imminente  a 
Abraham  Lincoln.” 

I would  recommend  that  the  exequatur  of  each  and  every  one  of  these 
consuls  be  withdrawn,  and  that  the  Government  they  represent  be  told 
that  they  must  find  men  here  not  criminal  toward  us  to  represent  their 
commercial  interests. 

There  is  as  yet  no  strength  of  Union  action  or  courage  here  which 
could  or  would  protect  itself  one  moment. 

I am  remonstrated  with  every  day  upon  the  small  force  I have  kept 
here.  I have  no  fears,  but  you  see  the  inference  as  to  Union  strength 

* Not  found. 

t Inclosures  other  than  General  Orders,  No.  41,  will  he  printed  in  Series  III,  Vol.  II. 

t The  inclosures : Coppell,  Mejan,  and  Benachi  to  Butler,  June  11 ; his  reply  of  Juno 
12;  Coppell  to  Butler,  June  14  ; Haggerty  to  Coppell,  June  14  ; Callejon,  Mejan,  Dey- 
noodt,  Benachi,  Lanata,  Teryaghi,  and  Piaget,  of  June,  and  Butler’s  reply  of  June  16. 
(See  Series  III,  Vol.  II.) 


480 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXTIL 


and  pluck.  The  very  life  and  soul  seems  to  have  been  crushed  out  of 
the  Union  men,  and  at  this  day  there  is  not  a Union  flag  flying  over  a 
single  private  dwelling  in  New  Orleans,  and  that  too  not  from  want  of 
inclination,  but  from  a certain  undefined  fear  that  the  city  will  at  some 
future  time  be  given  over  to  its  former  domestic  rulers  by  the  withdrawal 
of  the  forces  of  the  United  States,  and  that  the  knife  and  the  pistol  will 
do  the  work  of  avenging  the  Confederacy. 

I would  call  attention  again  to  my  remarks  as  to  the  necessity  of  more 
troops  to  occupy  the  various  points  necessary.  The  extent  of  country  is 
fearful  in  its  ramifications  of  bayous  and  rivers,  with  an  entirely  hostile 
population.  There  are  none  left  for  operations  in  the  field  after  we  take 
and  occupy  Vicksburg. 

I would  also  call  attention  to  the  suggestion  made  in  my  last  as  to 
the  effect  of  a political  amnesty. 

Trusting  that  my  services  have  met  the  approval  of  the  Department, 
I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ BESTJ.  F.  BUTLER, 

Major -General,  Commanding . 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Beglements  de  la  LSgion  Frangaise  formee  a la  Nonrelle  OrUans , le  26 

Wavril , 1861. 

[Extraits  du  Code  Civil.] 

Livre  Premier — Titre  Premier. 

10.  Tout  enfant  nS  d’un  Fran9ais  en  pays  stranger  est  Fran§ais. 

Tout  enfant  nS,  en  pays  Stranger,  d’un  Fran§ais  qui  aurait  perdu  la 
quality  de  Fran9ais,  pourra  toujours  recouvrer  cette  quality  en  remplis- 
sant  les  formalitSs  prescrites  par  l’article  9,  C.  20,  47  et  48. 

12.  L’StrangSre  qui  aura  SpousS  un  Fran9ais  suivra  la  condition  de  son 
mari. 

17.  La  qualitS  de  Fran9ais  se  perdra:  1°  par  la  naturalisation  en  pays 
Stranger;  2°  par  Facceptation,  non  autorisSe  par  PEmpereur,  defonc* 
tions  publiques  conferees  par  un  gouvernement  Stranger ; 3°  enfin  par 
tout  Stablissement  fait  en  pays  Stranger,  sans  esprit  de  retour. 

Les  Stablissements  de  commerce  ne  pourront  jamais  etre  considSrSs 
comme  ayant  StS  faits  sans  esprit  de  retour. 

21.  Le  Fran9ais  qui,  sans  autorisation  de  PEmpereur,  prendrait  du  serv- 
ice chez  PStranger,  ou  s’affilierait  & une  corporation  militaire  StrangSre 
perdra  sa  qualitS  de  Frar^ais.  11  ne  pourra  rentrer  en  France  qu’avec 
Pautorisation  de  PEmpereur,  et  recouvrer  la  qualitS  de  Fran^ais  qiPen 
remplissant  les  conditions  imposSes  a PStranger  pour  devenir  citoyen; 
le  tout  sans  prSjudice  des  peines  prononcSes  par  la  loi  criminelle  contre 
les  Fra^ais  qui  ont  ports,  ou  porteront,  les  armes  contre  leur  patrie. 

RMements  de  la  Legion  Frangaise  formee  d la  Nouvelle  OrUans  le  26 

Wavril , 1861. 

Par  ordre  du  chef  de  bataillon  commandant  la  LSgion  Fran9aise  et 
(dans  PintSret  du  service,  ont  StS  rSdigSs  le  prSambule  et  les  rSglements 
suivants  qui  doivent  rSgir  la  dite  lSgion  aussitot  qu’ils  auront  StS 
adoptSs  par  les  membres  qui  la  composent. 


Chap.  XXVTL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  481 

PR^AMBULE. 

Considtrant : 

1°.  Que  la  dissolution  de  l’TTnion  Amtricaine  est  un  fait  accompli. 

2°.  Qu’il  y a aujourd’hui  dans  ce  pays  deux  confederations  bien  dis- 
tinctes,  savoir;  la  Confederation  des  liltats  du  Sud  et  celle  dite  des 
Stats-lJnis  du  Kord. 

3°.  Que  Pattitude  hostile  du  Nord  envers  le  Sud  et  les  proclamations 
d’ Abraham  Lincoln,  President  des  I^tats  du  Nord,  sont  des  indices  non 
equivoques  d’une  guerre  imminente. 

4°.  QiPun  Frangais  ne  doit  jamais  oublier  que  la  devise  de  la  France 
est  “Honneur  et  Patrie;”  que  cette  devise  impose  h tous  ses  enfants 
Pobligation  de  protester  contre  Poppression  et  de  faire  au  moins  des 
voeux  pour  le  triomphe  de  la  noble  politique  inauguree  par  PEmpereur 
NapoMon  III,  et  dont  le  but  est  de  defendre  la  cause  des  nationality  et 
le  droit  de  chaque  peuple  de  se  gouverner  comme  il  Pentend. 

5°.  Que  si,  malgre  leurs  sympathies  pour  la  cause  du  Sud,  les  citoyens 
frangais  n’ont  pas,  comme  tels,  le  droit,  de  s’immiscer  directement  et 
activement  dans  une  guerre  qiPils  deplorent,  mais  a laquelle  ils  doivent 
rester  politiquement  ttrangers,  ils  regardent,  neanmoins,  comme  un  de- 
voir sacrd,  et  ils  ont  le  droit  incontestable  de  payer  de  leurs  personnes 
pour  defendre  contre  d’iniques  agresseurs  leurs  families,  leurs  foyers  et 
la  ville  qui  leur  donne  l’hospitalitt. 

En  consequence,  les  citoyens  frangais,  non  naturalises,  demeurant  a 
la  Nouvelle  Orleans,  ont  resolu  de  se  former  en  compagnies  militaires 
pour  la  defense  de  la  ville  exclusivement. 

Les  dites  compagnies  seront  soumises  aux  r&glements  suivants,  savoir : 

Chapitre  Premier. 

DE  LA  FORMATION. 

Article  I.  Les  citoyens  franqais  non  naturalises,  residant  <4  la 
Nouvelle  Orleans,  forment,  a partir  du  26  avril,  1861,  une  organisation 
militaire  que  prend  le  nom  de  Legion  Franqaise,  laquelle  se  compose 
actuellement  d’un  teataillon;  cette  creation  a lieu  dans  un  but  de  secours 
mutuel  et  pour  defendre  la  dite  ville  contre  toute  agression. 

Art.  II.  Les  Frangais  composant  la  legion  dtclarent  et  proclament 
qiPils  se  considerent  tous  comme  freres,  enfants  de  la  meme  mere;  qu’ils 
veulent  oublier  leurs  griefs  personnels,  reels  on  supposes,  s’il  y en  a,  et 
qu’ils  n’ont  qu’un  cceur,  qu’une  tete,  qu’un  bras  pour  se  defendre  mutuelle- 
ment,  qu’un  but;  repousser  Pennemi  commun. 

Art.  III.  La  politique  et  la  religion  etant  des  causes  de  discorde,  les 
discussions  auxquelles  elles  donnent  lieu  sont  formellement  interdites  & 
la  caserne  et  sous  l’uniforme.  Quiconque  oublierait  la  reserve  que  lui 
imposenb  la  tolerance  due  a tous  et  la  defense  ci-dessus  mention  nee, 
recevra  un  avertissement  pour  la  premiere  fois ; en  cas  de  rdcidive,  le 
d61inquant  sera,  ipso  facto , demissionnaire  et,  comme  tel,  raye  des  con- 
troles.  Le  present  article  est  applicable  a tous  les  perturbateurs. 

Art.  IY.  Nul  ne  sera  admis  a faire  partie  de  la  legion,  s’il  n’est 
citoyen  fran§ais  non  naturalist,  sauf  toutefois,  le  chirurgien -major, 
son  aide,  le  chef  de  musique,  et  les  musiciens.  L’admission  ou  le  rejet 
d’un  postulant  est  laisst  au  capitaine  et  aux  officiers  de  chaque  com- 
pagnie.  Le  postulant,  avant  de  devenir  membre  d’une  compagnie,  devra 
prendre  connaissance  des  reglements  qui  rtgissent  ladegion,  s’engager 
& les  observer  scrupuleusement,  obtir  a ses  superieurs  et  & preter  le 
serment  suivant. 

31  R r— yol  xy 


482 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


SERMENT. 


1.  Je  declare  et  j’afifirme  sur  l’honneur  que  je  suis  citoyen  frangais 
non  naturalist. 

2.  Je  jure  et  promets  soumission  passive  h la  constitution  et  aux 
reglements,  obtissance  et  deference  & mes  suptrieurs,  courtoisie  et  bieu- 
veillance  envers  mes  6gaux  et  mes  inferieur3. 

3.  Je  jure  d’etre  fidele  au  drapeau. 

La  premitre  partie  du  serment  ne  sera  pas  applicable  au  chirurgien- 
major,  a son  aide,  au  chef  de  musique  et  aux  musiciens,  s’ils  ne  sont  pas 
Frangais.* 

# # # * * * * 


Brevets  des  officiers.— fitat  de  la  Louisiane , par  Thomas  Overton  Moore , 

gouverneur  de  VEtat  de  la  Louisiane , et  commandant  en  chef  les  milices 

dudit  JEtat . 

Au  nom  et  sous  Pautorite  de  l’Stat  de  la  Louisiane. 

Savoir : faisons  que — ayant  ttt  dument  et  Itgalement  elu 

de  la  Legion  Frangaise,  premiere  division  de  la  milice  de  l’Etat 

de  la  Louisiane : 

Je  le  nomme r comine  il  est  dit  ci-dessus  et  je  lui  en  remets 

le  brevet  pour,  par  lui,  prendre  rang,  comme  tel,  & partir  du  4eme  jour 
de  juin,  1861. 

II  sera  tenu,  en  consequence,  de  remplir  soigneusement  et  exact ernent 
tous  les  devoirs  de  son  grade  et,  de  faire  executer  tout  ce  qui  sera  de 
son  ressort. 

Et  j’enjoins  particulierement  a tous  les  officiers,  sous-omciers,  et  sol- 

dats  sous  ses  ordres  et  je  les  requiers  de  lui  obtir  comme  a leur 

II  devra  obeir  et  se  conformer  a tels  ordres  et  instructions  qu’il  pourra 
tventuellement  recevoir  de  moi  ou  du  gouverneur  futur  de  PEtat  de- 
la  Louisiane  ou  autres  officiers  superieurs,  en  vertu  des  rtgles  et  or 
donnances  de  guerre  et  conformement  a la  loi.  Cette  legion  ne  sera 
tenue  de  servir  que  dans  les  limites  de  la  ville  dela  Nouvelle  Orleans, 
conformement  a Poffre  qui  en  a tte  faite  au  commandant  en  chef 

En  foi  de  quoi  j’ai  dtlivre  les  presentes  lettres  patentes  et  les  ai  fait 
sceller  du  sceau  de  P^tat. 

Donne  sous  ma  signature  en  la  ville  de  Baton  Rouge  le  quatneme 
iour  de  iuin  de  Pan  de  N.  S.  mil  huit  cent  soixante-un. 

J J THO.  O.  MOORE. 


Par  le  gouverneur : 

, P.  D.  Hardey, 

[l.  s.j  Secretaire  de  VEtat. 


Serment  gue  doivent  preter  tous  les  officiers  de  la  Legion  Frangaise. 


Ftat  de  la  Louisiane, 

Paroisse  de  la  JSfouvelle  Orleans : 

Je, ?jUI>c  solennellement  de  remplir,  autant  qu’il  sera  en 

moi,  les  devoirs  de de  la  Legion  Frangaise  et  je  promets  de  sou- 

tenir,  de  maintenir  et  de  defendre  la  constitution  de  PEtat  et  oelle  des 
Stats  Confederes.  Que  Dieu  me  soit  en  aide. 

Assertement  et  sign6  devant  moi. 


* Petail8  of  organization,  discipline,  & c.,  omitted. 


Chap.  XXVTL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION.  483 

Legion  Frangaise,  pour  laville  de  la  Nouvelle  Orleans , JEtat  de  la  Louisiane. 

Les  soussignes,  sujets  frangais,  demeurant  en  la  ville  de  la  Nouvelle 
Orleans,  s’etant  reunis  pour  former  une  legion  qui  prend  le  nom  de 
u L6gion  Frangaise,”  et  s’etant  mis  & la  disposition  du  gouverneur  de 
l^tat  pour  servir  activement  dans  la  ville  de  la  Nouvelle  Orleans , con- 
viennent  que  Pengagement  suivant  sera  sigue  en  double  expedition  par 
tous  les  membres  de  la  dite  legion — une  expedition  sera  envoy£e  a 
Padjudant-g6n6ral  de  l’Ftat,  Pautre  sera  deposee  aux  archives  de  la  le- 
gion : 

Nous,  soussignes,  officiers,  sous-officiers  et  soldats  de  la 
compagnie,  tous  sujets  frangais,  promettons  par  le  present  aussitot  que 
nos  officiers  auront  regu  leurs  brevets,  de  nous  tenir  prets  a obdir,  en 
tout  temps,  aux  ordres  du  gouverneur  de  PUtat  de  la  Louisiane  et  de 
nos  officiers  supdrieurs,  nous  engageant  a prendre  du  service  aetif, 
lorsque  nous  en  serons  requis,  dans  les  limites  de  la  ville  de  la  Nouvelle 
Orleans. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  41.  ( New  Orleans , June  10,  1862. 

The  Constitution  and  laws  of  the  United  States  require  that  all  mili- 
tary, civil,  judicial,  executive,  and  legislative  officers  of  the  United 
States  and  of  the  several  States  shall  take  an  oath  to  support  the  Con- 
stitution and  laws.  If  a person  desires  to  serve  the  United  States,  or 
to  receive  special  profit  from  a protection  from  the  United  States,  he 
should  take  upon  himself  the  corresponding  obligation.  This  oath  will 
not  be,  as  it  has  never  been,  forced  upon  any.  It  is  too  sacred  an  obliga- 
tion, too  exalted  in  its  tenure,  and  brings  with  it  too  many  benefits  and 
privileges  to  be  profaned  by  unwilling  lip-service.  It  enables  its  Re- 
cipient to  say,  u I am  an  American  citizen,”  the  highest  title  known,  save 
that  of  him  who  can  say  with  Saint  Paul,  “I  was  free  born,”  and  have 
never  renounced  that  freedom. 

Judges,  justices,  sheriffs,  attorneys,  notaries,  and  all  officers  of  the 
law  whatever,  and  all  persons  who  have  ever  been  or  who  have  ever 
claimed  to  be  citizens  of  the  United  States  in  this  department,  who 
therefore  exercise  any  office,  hold  any  place  of  trust  or  calling  whatever, 
which  calls  for  the  doing  of  any  legal  act  whatever,  or  for  the  doing  of 
any  act,  judicial  or  administrative,  which  shall  or  may  affect  any  other 
person  than  the  actor,  must  take  and  subscribe  the  following  oatli : 

I do  solemnly  swear  (or  affirm)  that  I will  hear  true  faith  and  allegiance  to  the 
United  States  of  America  and  will  support  the  Constitution  thereof. 

All  acts,  doings,  deeds,  instruments,  records,  or  certificates,  certified 
or  attested  by,  and  transactions  done,  performed,  or  made  by,  any  of 
the  persons  above  described,  from  and  after  the  15th  day  of  June  in- 
stant, who  shall  not  have  taken  and  subscribed  such  oath,  are  void  and 
of  no  effect.  It  having  become  necessary,  in  the  judgment  of  the  com- 
manding general,  as  a u public  exigency,”  to  distinguish  those  who  are 
well-disposed  toward  the  Government  of  the  United  States  from  those 
who  still  hold  allegiance  to  the  Confederate  States,  and  ample  time 
having  been  given  to  all  citizens  for  reflection  upon  this  subject,  and 
full  protection  to  person  and  property  of  every  law-abiding  citizen 
having  been  afforded,  according  to  the  terms  of  the  proclamation  of 
May  1: 


484 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Be  it  further  ordered,  that  all  persons  ever  heretofore  citizens  of  the 
United  States  asking  or  receiving  any  favor,  protection,  privilege, 
passport,  or  to  have  money  paid  them,  property  or  other  valuable  thing 
whatever  delivered  to  them,  or  any  benefit  of  the  power  of  the  United 
States  extended  to  them,  except  protection  from  personal  violence, 
must  take  and  subscribe  the  oath  above  specified  before  their  request 
can  be  heard  or  any  act  done  in  their  favor  by  any  officer  of  the  United 
States  within  this  department.  And  for  this  purpose  all  persons  shall 
be  deemed  to  have  been  citizens  of  the  United  States  who  shall  have 
been  residents  therein  for  the  space  of  five  years  and  upward,  and,  if 
foreign  born,  shall  not  have  claimed  and  received  a protection  of  their 
Government,  duly  signed  and  registered  by  the  proper  officer,  more  than 
sixty  days  previous  to  the  publication  of  this  order.  It  having  come 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  commanding  general  that  many  persons  resi- 
dent within  this  department  have  heretofore  been  aiding  rebellion  by 
furnishing  arms  and  munitions  of  war,  running  the  blockade,  givingin- 
formation,  concealing  property,  and  abetting  by  other  ways  the  so- 
called  Confederate  States,  in  violation  of  the  laws  of  neutrality  imposed 
upon  them  by  their  sovereigns  as  well  as  the  laws  of  the  United  States, 
and  that  a less  number  are  still  so  engaged,  it  is  therefore  ordered 
that  all  foreigners  claiming  any  of  the  privileges  of  American  citi- 
zens or  protection  or  favor  from  the  Government  of  the  United  States 
(except  protection  from  personal  violence)  shall  previously  take  and 
subscribe  an  oath  in  the  form  following  : 

I, — , clo  solemnly  swear  (or  affirm)  that  so  long  as  my  Government  re- 

mains at  peace  with  the  United  States  I do  no  act,  or  consent  that  any  he  done,  or 
conceal  any  that  has  been  or  is  about  to  be  done,  that  shall  aid  or  comfort  any  of  the 
enemies  or  opposers  of  the  United  States  whatever. 

. , 

Subject  of . 

At  the  city  hall,  at  the  provost  court,  at  the  provost- marshal’s  office, 
and  at  the  several  police  stations  books  will  be  opened  and  a proper 
officer  will  be  present  to  administer  the  proper  oaths  to  any  person  de- 
siring to  take  the  same  and  to  witness  the  subscription  of  the  same  by 
the  party  taking  it.  Such  officer  will  furnish  to  each  person  so  taking 
and  subscribing  a certificate  in  form  following : 

Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , , 1862. 

has  taken  and  subscribed  the  oath  required  by  General  Orders,  No.  41, 

for  a of . 


By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

E.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


United  States  Flag-Ship  Hartford, 

Baton  Rouge,  La .,  June  17,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Commanding  Confederate  States  Troops , Jackson , Miss. : 

Sir  : I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication  of 
the  12th  instant,  together  with  its  inclosure,  in  which  you  are  pleased 
to  say  that  vengeance  will  be  visited  upon  the  women  and  children  of 
Eodney  if  our  vessels  are  fired  upon  from  the  town.  Although  I find 


Chap.  XXVTI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


485 


no  sucli  language  contained  in  the  letter  of  Lieutenant  Commanding 
Nichols,  or  even  any  from  which  such  inference  might  he  drawn,  still 
I shall  meet  your  general  remark  on  your  own  terms.  You  say  you 
locate  your  batteries  at  such  points  on  the  river  as  are  deemed  best 
suited,  &c.,  without  reference  to  the  people  of  the  town,  and  claim  no 
immunity  for  your  troops.  Now,  therefore,  the  violation  is  with  you. 
You  choose  your  own  time  and  place  for  the  attack  upon  our  defense- 
less people,  and  should  therefore  see  that  the  innocent  and  defenseless 
of  your  own  people  are  out  of  the  way  before  you  make  the  attack ; 
for  rest  assured  that  the  fire  will  be  returned,  and  we  will  not  hold  our- 
selves answerable  for  the  death  of  the  innocent.  If  we  have  ever  fired 
upon  your  “women  and  children”  it  was  done  here  at  Baton  Rouge, 
where  an  attempt  was  made  to  kill  one  of  our  officers  landing  in  a 
small  boat  manned  with  four  boys.  They  were,  when  in  the  act  of 
landing,  mostly  wounded  by  the  fire  of  some  30  or  40  horsemen,  who 
chivalrously  galloped  out  of  the  town,  leaving  the  women  and  children 
to  bear  the  brunt  of  our  vengeance.  At  Grand  Gulf  also  our  transports 
were  fired  upon  in  passing,  which  caused  the  place  to  be  shelled — with 
what  effect  I know  not ; but  I do  know  that  the  fate  of  a town  is  at  all 
times  in  the  hands  of  the  military  commandant  who  may  at  pleasure 
draw  the  enemy’s  fire  upon  it,  and  the  community  be  made  to  suffer  for 
the  act  of  its  military. 

The  only  instance  I have  known  where  the  language  of  your  letter 
could  possibly  apply  took  place  at  New  Orleans  on  the  day  we  passed 
up  in  front  of  tie  city,  while  it  was  still  in  your  possession,  by  your 
soldiers  firing  on  the  crowd.  I trust,  however,  that  the  time  is  past 
when  women  and  children  will  be  subjected  by  their  military  men  to 
the  horrors  of  war ; it  is  enough  for  them  to  be  subjected  to  the  inci- 
dental inconveniences,  privations,  and  sufferings.  If  any  such  things 
have  occurred  as  the  slaying  of  women  and  children  or  innocent  people 
I feel  well  assured  that  it  was  caused  by  the  act  of  your  military  and 
much  against  the  will  of  our  officers  ; for,  as  Lieutenant  Commanding 
Nichols  informs  the  mayor,  we  war  not  against  defenseless  persons,  but 
against  those  in  open  rebellion  against  our  country,  and* desire  to  limit 
our  punishment  to  them,  though  it  may  not  always  be  in  our  power  to 
do  so. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  G.  FARRAGUT, 

Flag-Officer,  Comdg.  Western  Gulf  Blockading  Squadron. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , Xa.,  June  18,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : Since  my  last  dispatch  was  written  I have  received  the  accom- 
panying report  from  General  Phelps.  It  is  not  my  duty  to  enter  into 
a discussion  of  the  question  which  it  presents,  i desire,  however,  to 
state  the  information  of  Mr.  Lablanche,  given  me  by  his  friends  and 
neighbors,  and  also  gathered  from  Jack  Lablanche,  his  slave,  who  seems 
to  be  the  leader  of  this  party  of  negroes.  Mr.  Lablanche  I have  not 
seen  ; he,  however,  claims  to  be  loyal  and  to  have  taken  no  part  in  the 
war,  but  to  have  been  quietly  on  his  plantation,  some  12  miles'  above 
New  Orleans,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river.  He  has  a son  in  the 
secession  army,  whose  uniform  and  equipments,  &c.,  are  the  “symbols 


486 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXTTL 

of  secession  ” of  which  General  Phelps  speaks.  Mr.  Lablanche’s  house 
was  searched  by  the  order  of  General  Phelps  for  arms  and  contraband 
of  war,  and  his  neighbors  say  that  his  negroes  were  told  that  they  were 
free  if  they  would  come  to  the  general’s  camp ; that  thereupon  the 
negroes,  under  the  lead  of  Jack,  determined  to  leave,  and  for  that 
purpose  crowded  into  a small  boat,  which  from  overloading  was  in 
danger  of  swamping.  Lablanche  then  told  his  negroes  that  if  they 
were  determined  to  go  they  would  be  drowned  in  that  boat,  and 
he  would  hire  them  a large  boat  to  put  them  across  the  river,  and 
that  they  might  have  their  furniture  if  they  would  go  and  leave  his 
plantation  and  crops  to  ruin.  They  decided  to  go,  and  Lablanche  did 
all  a man  could  to  make  that  going  safe.  The  account  of  General 
Phelps  is  the  negro  side  of  the  story  ; that  above  given  is  the  story  of 
Mr.  Lablanche’s  neighbors,  some  of  whom  I know  to  be  loyal  men. 
An  order  against  negroes  being  allowed  in  camp  is  the  reason  that  they 
are  outside.  Mr.  Lablanche  is  represented  to  be  a humane  man,  and 
did  not  consent  to  the  exodus  of  his  negroes.  General  Phelps,  I 
believe,  intends  making  this  a test  case  for  the  policy  of  the  Govern- 
ment. I wish  it  might  be  so,  for  the  difference  of  our  action  upon  this 
subject  is  a source  of  trouble.  I respect  his  honest  sincerity  of  opin- 
ion, but  I am  a soldier,  bound  to  carry  out  the  wishes  of  my  Govern- 
ment so  long  as  I hold  its  commission,  and  I understand  that  policy  to 
be  the  one  I am  pursuing.  I do  not  feel  at  liberty  to  pursue  any  other. 
If  the  policy  of  the  Government  is  nearly  that  I sketched  in  my  report 
upon  this  subject  as  that  which  I had  ordered  in  this  department,  then 
the  services  of  General  Phelps  are  worse  than  useless  here.  If  the 
views  set  forth  in  his  report  are  to  obtain,  then  he  is  invaluable,  for  his 
whole  soul  is  in  it,  and  he  is  a good  soldier,  of  large  experience,  and  no 
braver  man  lives.  I beg  to  leave  the  whole  Question  with  the  Presi- 
dent, with  perhaps  the  needless  assurance  that  his  wishes  snail  be 
loyally  followed  even  if  not  in  accordance  with  my  own,  as  I have  now 
no  right  to  have  any  upon  the  subject.  I write  in  haste,  as  the  steamer 
Mississippi  is  waiting  this  dispatch. 

Awaiting  the  earliest  possible  instructions,  I have  the  honor  to  be, 
your  most  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BIJTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

[IncloBure.] 

Camp  Parapet, 

Rear  Carrollton , La June  16, 1862. 

Capt.  R.  S.  Davis, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  New  Orleans , La.: 

Sir  : I inclose  herewith,  for  the  information  of  the  major-general  com- 
manding the  department,  a report  of  Major  Peck,  officer  of  the  day,  con- 
cerning a large  number  of  negroes  of  both  sexes  and  all  ages  who  are 
lying  near  our  pickets  with  bag  and  baggage  as  if  they  had  already 
commenced  an  exodus.  Many  of  these  negroes  have  been  sent  away 
from  one  of  the  neighboring  sugar  plautatious  by  their  owner,  a Mr. 
Babbillard  Lablanche,  who  tells  them,  I am  informed,  that  the  “ Yan- 
kees are  king  here  now,  and  that  they  must  go  to  their  king  for  food  and 
shelter.”  They  are  of  that  four  millions  of  our  colored  subjects  who 
have  no  chief  or  king,  nor  in  fact  government,  that  can  secure  to  them 
the  simplest  natural  rights.  They  cannot  even  be  entered  into  treaty 
stipulation  with  and  deported  to  the  East,  as  our  Indian  tribes  have  been 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


487 


to  the  West.  They  have  no  right  to  the  mediation  of  justice  of  the 
peace  or  jury  between  them  and  chains  and  lashes.  They  have  no 
right  to  wages  for  their  labor ; no  right  to  the  Sabbath ; no  right  to  the 
institution  of  marriage ; no  right  to  letters  or  to  self-defense.  A small 
class  of  owners,  rendered  unfeeling  and  even  unconscious  and  unre- 
flecting by  habit,  and  a large  part  of  them  ignorant  and  vicious,  stand 
between  them  and  their  Government,  destroying  its  sovereignty.  This 
Government  has  not  the  power  even  to  regulate  the  number  of  lashes 
that  its  subjects  may  receive.  It  cannot  say  that  they  shall  receive 
thirty-nine  instead  of  forty.  To  a large  and  growing  class  of  its  sub- 
jects" it  can  secure  neither  justice,  moderation,  nor  the  advantages  of 
the  Christian  religion  ; and  if  it  cannot  protect  all  its  subjects  it  can 
protect  none,  either  white  or  black. 

It  is  nearly  a hundred  years  since  our  people  first  declared  to  the 
nations  of  the  world  that  all  men  are  born  free,  and  still  we  have  not 
made  our  declaration  good.  Highly  revolutionary  means  have  since 
then  been  adopted  by  the  admission  of  Missouri  and  the  annexation  of 
Texas  in  favor  of  slavery  by  the  barest  majority  of  votes,  while  the 
highly  conservative  vote  of  two-thirds  has  at  length  been  attained 
against  slavery,  and  still  slavery  exists— even,  moreover,  although  two- 
thirds  of  the  blood  in  the  veins  of  our  slaves  is  from  our  own  race.  If 
we  wait  for  a larger  vote,  or  till  our  slaves’  blood  becomes  more  con- 
sanguined  still  with  our  own,  the  danger  of  a violent  revolution,  over 
which  we  can  have  no  control,  must  become  more  imminent  every  day. 

By  a course  of  undecided  action,  determined  by  no  policy  but  the 
vague  will  of  a war-distracted  people,  we  run  the  risk  of  precipitating 
that  very  revolutionary  violence  which  we  seem  seeking  to  avoid. 

Let  us  regard  for  a moment  the  elements  of  such  a revolution.  Many 
of  the  slaves  here  have  been  sold  away  from  the  border  States  as  a 
punishment,  being  too  refractory  to  be  dealt  with  there  in  the  face  of 
the  civilization  of  the  North.  They  come  here  with  a knowledge  of  the 
Christian  religion,  with  its  germs  planted  and  expanding  as  it  were  in 
the  dark,  rich  soil  of  their  African  nature,  with  a feeling  of  relationship 
with  the  families  from  which  they  came,  and  with  a sense  of  unmerited 
banishment,  as  culprits — all  of  which  tends  to  bring  upon  them  a 
greater  severity  of  treatment  and  a corresponding  disinclination  “to 
receive  punishment.”  They  are  far  superior  beings  to  their  ancestors, 
who  were  brought  from  Africa  two  generations  ago,  and  who  occasion- 
ally rebelled  against  comparatively  less  severe  punishment  than  is 
inflicted  now.  While  rising  in  the  scale  of  Christian  beings  their  treat- 
ment is  being  rendered  more  severe  than  ever.  The  whip,  the  chains, 
the  stocks,  and  imprisonments  are  no  mere  fancies  here;  they  are  used 
to  any  extent  to  which  the  imagination  of  civilized  man  may  reach. 
Many  of  them  are  as  intelligent  as  their  masters  and  far  more  moral ; 
for  while  the  slave  appeals  to  the  moral  law  as  his  vindication,  clinging 
to  it  as  to  the  very  horns  of  the  altar  of  his  safety  and  his  hope,  the 
master  seldom  hesitates  to  wrest  him  from  it  with  violence  and  con- 
tempt. The  slave,  it  is  true,  bears  no  resentment;  he  asks  for  no  pun- 
ishment for  his  master;  he  simply  claims  justice  for  himself;  and  it  is 
this  feature  Of  his  condition  that  promises  more  terror  to  the  retribu- 
tion when  it  comes.  Even  now  the  whites  stand  accused  by  their 
oppression  of  humanity,  being  subject  to  a degree  of  confusion,  chaos, 
and  enslavement  to  error  and  wrong  which  Northern  society  could  not 
credit  or  comprehend. 

Added  to  the  four  millions  of  the  colored  race,  whose  disaffection  is 
increasing  even  more  rapidly  than  their  numbers,  there  are  at  least 


488  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

four  millions  more  of  the  white  race  whose  growing  miseries  will  nat- 
urally seek  companionship  with  those  of  the  blacks.  This  latter  portion 
of  Southern  society  has  its  representatives,  who  swing  from  the  scaffold  i 
with  the  same  desperate  coolness,  though  from  a directly  different  | 
cause,  as  that  which  was  manifested  by  John  Brown.  The  traitor  j 
Mumford,  who  swung  the  other  day  for  trampling  on  the  national  flag, 
had  been  rendered  perfectly  placid  and  indifferent  in  his  desperation  i 
by  a Government  that  either  could  not  or  would  not  secure  to  its  sub- 
jects the  blessings  of  liberty  which  that  flag  imports. 

The  South  cries  for  justice  from  the  Government  as  well  as  the  North, 
though  in  a proud  and  resentful  spirit ; and  in  what  manner  is  that 
justice  to  be  obtained?  Is  it  to  be  secured  by  that  wretched  resource 
of  a set  of  profligate  politicians  called  “ reconstruction?”  No;  it  is  to 
be  obtained  by  the  abolition  of  slavery,  and  by  no  other  course. 

It  is  vain  to  deny  that  the  slave  system  of  labor  is  giving  shape  to 
the  government  of  the  society  where  it  exists,  and  that  that  govern- 
ment is  not  republican  either  in  form  or  spirit.  It  was  through  this 
system  that  .the  leading  conspirators  sought  to  fasten  upon  the  people 
an  aristocracy  or  a despotism ; and  it  is  not  sufficient  that  they  should 
be  merely  defeated  in  their  object  and  the  country  be  rid  of  their  re- 
bellion, fpr  by  our  Constitution  we  are  imperatively  obliged  to  sustain 
the  States  against  the  ambition  of  unprincipled  leaders  and  secure  to 
them  the  republican  form  of  government. 

We  have  positive  duties  to  perform,  and  should  hence  adopt  and  pur- 
sue a positive,  decided  policy.  We  have  services  to  render  to  certain 
States  which  they  cannot  perform  for  themselves.  We  are  in  an  emer- 
gency which  the  framers  of  the  Constitution  might  have  easily  foreseen 
and  for  which  they  have  amply  provided. 

It  is  clear  that  the  public  good  requires  slavery  to  be  abolished;  but 
in  what  manner  is  it  to  be  done?  The  mere  quiet  operation  of  Congres- 
sional law  cannot  deal  with  slavery  as  in  its  former  status  before  the 
war,  because  the  spirit  of  law  is  right  reason,  and  there  is  no  reason  in 
slavery.  A system  so  unreasonable  as  slavery  cannot  be  regulated  by 
reason.  We  can  hardly  expect  the  States  to  adopt  laws  or  measures 
against  their  own  immediate  interests.  We  have  seen  that  they  will 
rather  find  arguments  for  crime  than  seek  measures  for  abolishing  or 
modifying  slavery.  But  there  is  one  principle  which  is  fully  recog- 
nized as  a necessity  in  conditions  like  ours,  and  that  is  that  the  public 
safety  is  the  supreme  law  of  the  state,  and  that  amidst  the  clash  of  arms 
the  laws  of  peace  are  silent. 

It  is  then  for  our  President,  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  our  Armies,  to 
declare  the  abolition  of  slavery,  leaving  it  to  the  wisdom  of  Congress  to 
adopt  measures  to  meet  the  consequences.  This  is  the  usual  course 
pursued  by  a general  or  by  military  power.  That  power  gives  orders 
affecting  complicated  interests  and  millions  of  property,  leaving  it  to 
the  other  functions  of  government  to  adjust  and  regulate  the  effects 
produced.  Let  the  President  abolish  slavery,  and  it  would  be  an  easy 
matter  for  Congress,  through  a well-regulated  system  of  apprenticeship, 
to  adopt  safe  measures  for  effecting  a gradual  transition  from  slavery 
to  freedom.  The  existing  system  of  labor  in  Louisiana  is  unsuited  to 
the  age,  and  by  the  intrusion  of  the  national  forces  it  seems  falling  to 
pieces.  It  is  a system  of  mutual  jealousy  and  suspicion  between  the 
master  and  the  man,  a system  of  violence,  immorality,  and  vice.  The 
fugitive  negro  tells  us  that  our  presence  renders  his  condition  worse 
with  his  master  than  it  was  before,  and  that  we  offer  no  alleviation  in 
return.  The  system  is  impolitic,  because  it  offers  but  one  stimulant  to 


Chat.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


489 


labor  and  effort,  viz,  tbe  lash,  when  another,  viz,  money,  might  be  added 
with  good  effect.  Fear  and  the  other  low  and  bad  qualities  of  the  slave 
are  appealed  to,  but  never  the  good.  The  relation  therefore  between 
capital  and  labor,  which  ought  to  be  generous  and  confiding,  is  dark- 
liug,  suspicious,  unkindly,  full  of  reproachful  threats,  and  without  con- 
cord or  peace.  This  condition  of  things  renders  the  interests  of  society 
a prey  to  politicians.  Politics  cease  to  be  practicable  or  useful. 

The  questions  that  ought  to  have  been  discussed  in  the  late  extraordi- 
nary Convention  of  Louisiana  are,  first,  what  ought  the  State  of  Lou- 
isiana do  to  adapt  her  ancient  system  of  labor  to  the  present  advanced 
spirit  of  the  age;  and,  second,  how  can  the  State  be  assisted  by  the 
General  Government  in  effecting  the  change?  But  instead  of  this,  the 
only  question  before  that  body  was  how  to  vindicate  slavery  by  flogging 
the  Yankees. 

Compromises  hereafter  are  not  to  be  made  with  politicians,  but  with 
sturdy  labor  and  the  right  to  work.  The  interests  of  workingmen  re- 
sent political  trifling.  Our  political  education,  shaped  almost  entirely 
to  the  interests  of  slavery,  has  been  false  and  vicious  in  the  extreme, 
and  it  must  be  corrected  with  as  much  suddenness  almost  as  that  with 
which  the  Salem  witchcraft  came  to  its  end.  The  only  question  that 
remains  to  decide  is  how  the  change  shall  take  place. 

We  are  not  without  examples  and  precedents  in  the  history  of  the 
past.  The  enfranchisement  of  the  people  of  Europe  has  been  and  is 
still  going  on  through  the  instrumentality  of  military  service  ; and  by 
this  means  our  slaves  might  be  raised  in  the  scale  of  civilization  and 
prepared  for  freedom.  Fifty  regiments  might  be  raised  among  them  at 
once,  which  could  be  employed  in  this  climate  to  preserve  order,  and 
thus  prevent  the  necessity  of  retrenching  our  liberties,  as  we  should  do 
by  a large  army  exclusively  of  whites  ; for  it  is  evident  that  a consid- 
erable army  of  whites  would  give  stringency  to  our  Government,  while 
an  army  partly  of  blacks  would  naturally  operate  in  favor  of  freedom 
and  against  those  influences  which  at  present  most  endanger  our  liber- 
ties. At  the  end  of  five  years  they  could  be  sent  to  Africa,  and  their 
places  be  filled  with  new  enlistments. 

There  is  no  practicable  evidence  against  the  effects  of  immediate  aboli- 
tion, even  if  there  is  not  in  its  favor.  I have  witnessed  the  sudden 
abolition  of  flogging  at  will  in  the  Army  and  of  the  legalized  flogging- 
in  the  Navy  against  the  prejudice  and  warped  judgments  of  both,  and 
from  the  beneficial  effects  there  I have  nothing  to  tear  from  the  imme- 
diate abolition  of  slavery.  I fear  rather  the  violent  consequences  from 
a continuance  of  the  evil.  But  should  such  an  act  devastate  the  whole 
State  of  Louisiana  and  render  the  whole  soil  here  but  the  mere  passage- 
way of  the  fruits  of  the  enterprise  and  industry  of  the  Northwest,  it 
would  be  better  for  the  country  at  large  than  it  is  now  as  the  seat  of 
disaffection  and  rebellion. 

When  it  is  remembered  that  not  a word  is  found  in  our  Constitution 
sanctioning  the  buying  and  selling  of  human  beings — a shameless  act, 
which  renders  our  country  the  disgrace  of  Christendom,  and  worse  in 
this  respect  even  than  Africa  herself — we  should  have  less  dread  of  see- 
ing the  degrading  traffic  stopped  at  once  and  forever.  Half  wages  are 
already  virtually  paid  for  slave  labor  in  the  system  of  tasks  which,  in 
an  unwilling  spirit  of  compromise,  most  of  the  slave  States  have  already 
been  compelled  to  adopt.  At  the  end  of  a period  of  five  years  of  ap- 
prenticeship, or  of  fifteen  at  farthest,  full  wages  could  be  paid  to  the 
enfranchised  negro  race  to  the  double  advantage  of  both  master  and 
man.  This  is  just,  for  we  now  hold  the  slaves  of  Louisiana  by  the  same 


490 


W.  FLA.,  a.  ALA.,  8.  MTSS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXV  it 

tenure  that  the  State  can  alone  claim  them,  viz,  by  the  original  right 
of  conquest.  We  have  so  far  conquered  them  that  a proclamation  set- 1 
ting  them  free,  coupled  with  offers  of  protection,  would  devastate  every 
plantation  in  the  State. 

In  conclusion  I may  state  that  Mr.  Lablanche  is,  as  I am  informed, 
a descendant  from  one  of  the  oldest  families  of  Louisiana,  He  is  wealthy; 
and  a man  of  standing,  and  his  act  in  sending  away  his  negroes  to  ourj 
lines  with  tlieir  clothes  and  furniture  appears  to  indicate  the  convictions! 
of  his  own  mind  as  to  the  proper  logical  consequences  and  deductions 
that  should  followT  from  the  present  relative  status  of  the  twm  contend- 
ing parties.  He  seems  to  be  convinced  that  the  proper  result  of  the! 
conflict  is  the  manumission  of  the  slave,  and  he  may  be  safety  regarded 
in  this  respect  as  the  representative  man  of  the  State.  I so  regard  him 
myself,  and  thus  do  I interpret  his  action,  although  my  camp  now  con- 
tains some  of  the  highest  symbols  of  reconnaissance  which  have  been 
taken  by  a party  of  the  Seventh  Vermont  Volunteers  from  his  resi- 
dence. 

In  the  mean  time  the  slaves,  old  and  young,  little  ones  and  all,  are 
suffering  from  exposure  and  uncertainty  as  to  their  future  condition. 
Driven  away  by  their  master  with  threats  of  violence  if  they  return,  and 
with  no  decided  welcome  or  reception  from  us,  what  is  to  be  their  lot? 

Considerations  of  humanity  are  pressing  for  an  immediate  solution 
of  their  difficulties ; and  they  are  but  a small  portion  of  their  race  who 
have  sought  and  are  still  seeking  our  pickets  and  our  military  stations, 
declaring  that  they  cannot  and  w ill  not  any  longer  serve  their  masters, 
and  that  all  they  want  is  work  and  protection  from  us. 

In  such  a state  of  things  the  question  occurs  as  to  my  own  action  in 
the  case.  I cannot  return  them  to  their  masters,  who  not  unfrequently 
come  in  search  of  them,  for  I am  fortunately  prohibited  by  an  article  of 
war  from  doing  that,  even  if  my  own  nature  did  not  revolt  at  it ; I cannot, 
receive  them,  for  I have  neither  work,  shelter,  nor  the  means,  nor  plan 
of  transporting  them  to  Hayti,  nor  of  making  suitable  arrangements 
with  their  masters  until  they  can  be  provided  for.  ; j 

It  is  evident  that  some  plan,  some  policy,  or  some  system  is  neces-^ 
sary  on  the  part  of  the  Government,  without  which  the  agent  can  do 
nothing,  and  all  his  efforts  are  rendered  useless  and  of  no  effect.  This; 
is  no  new  condition  in  which  I find  myself;  it  is  my  experience  duringl 
the  some  twenty-five  years  of  my  public  life  as  a military  officer  of  the 
Government.  The  new  article  of  war  recently  adopted  by  Congress  i 
rendering  it  criminal  in  an  officer  of  the  Army  to  return  fugitives  from 
injustice  is  the  first  support  that  I have  ever  felt  from  the  Government  . 
in  contending  against  those  slave  influences  which  are  opposed  to  its 
character  and  to  its  interests.  But  the  mere  refusal  to  return  fugitives  i 
does  not  now  meet  the  case.  A public  agent  in  the  present  emergency  ! 
must  be  invested  with  wider  and  more  positive  powers  than  this,  or  his 
services  will  prove  as  valueless  to  the  country  as  they  are  unsatisfac-  < 
tory  to  himself. 

Desiring  this  communication  to  be  laid  before  the  President,  and 
leaving  my  commission  at  his  disposal,  I have  the  honor  to  remain,  sir, 
very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  PHELPS, 
Brigadier-  General. 


aAP.XXVn.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  491 

[ Snb-in  closure.  ] 

Camp  Parapet,  June  15,  1862. 

leneral  J.  W.  Phelps: 

Sir:  In  addition  to  the  regular  “post-guard  report”  of  this  date,  re- 
lrned  to  your  headquarters,  I beg  leave  to  call  your  attention  to 
be  large  and  constantly  increasing  number  of  blacks  who  have  con 
regated  near  the  upper  picket  station  on  the  river  road.  I learn  that 
wen  ty -four  hours  ago  they  numbered  about  75/  The  officer  of  the 
uard  reports  to  me  this  morning  that  the  number  has  increased  to 
50  or  more.  The  first  instalment  was  sent  by  a man  named  La- 
lanche,  from  the  other  side  of  the  river,  in  boats,  on  the  night  of  the 
3th,  he  giving  them  the  choice,  according  to  their  statement,  of  leav- 
lg  before  sundown  or  receiving  fifty  lashes  each.  Many  of  these  de- 
ire  to  return  to  their  master,  but  are  prevented  by  fear  of  harsh  treat- 
ment. They  are  of  all  ages  and  physical  condition,  a number  of  infants 
l arms,  many  young  children,  robust  men  and  women,  and  a large 
umber  of  lame,  old,  add  infirm  of  both  sexes.  The  rest  of  them  came 

I singly  and  in  small  parties  from  various  points  up  the  river  within  a 
undred  miles.  They  brought  with  them  boxes,  bedding,  and  luggage  of 

II  sorts,  which  lie  strewn  upon  the  levee  and  the  open  spaces  around 
he  picket.  The  women  and  children,  and  some  feeble  ones  who  needed 
belter,  were  permitted  to  occupy  a deserted  house  just  outside  the 
nes.  They  are  quite  destitute  of  provisions,  many  having  eaten  noth- 
ig  for  days  except  what  our  soldiers  have  given  them  from  their  own 
ations.  In  accordance  with  orders  already  issued  the  guard  was  in- 
truded to  permit  none  of  them  to  enter  the  lines.  As  each  officer  of 
he  day  will  be  called  upon  successively  to  deal  with  the  matter,  I take 
he  liberty  to  suggest  whether  some  further  regulation  in  reference  to 
hese  unfortunate  persons  is  not  necessary  to  enable  him  to  do  his  duty 
itelligently,  as  well  as  for  the  very  apparent  additional  reasons  that 
be  congregation  of  such  large  numbers  in  our  immediate  vicinity  af- 
3rds  inviting  opportunities  for  mischief  to  ourselves,  and  also  that  un- 
3ss  supplied  with  the  means  of  sustaining  life  by  the  benevolence  of 
he  military  authorities  or  of  the  citizens  (which  is  scarcely  supposable) 
bey  must  shortly  be  reduced  to  suffering  and  starvation  in  the  very 
ight  of  the  overflowing  store-houses  of  the  Government. 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

FBANK  H.  PECK, 

Major , Twelfth  Eegt.  Conn.  Vols .,  Field  Officer  of  the  Day. 


[June  19, 1862.— For  Butler  to  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  tran smit- 
ing funds  from  the  New  Orleans  banks,  see  Series  III,  Vol.  II.] 


Ieneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Ko.  42.  f New  Orleans , June  19,  1862. 

The  commanding  general  has  received  information  that  certain  of  the 
oreign  residents  in  this  department,  notwithstanding  the  explanations 
>fthe  terms  of  the  oath  prescribed  in  General  Orders,  No.  41,  contained 
n his  reply  to  the  foreign  consuls,  have  still  scruples  about  taking  that 
>ath.  Anxious  to  relieve  the  consciences  of  all  who  honestly  entertain 


492 


W.  FLA., 


doubts  upon  the  matter,  aud  not  to  embarrass  any,  especially  neutra 
by  his  necessary  military  orders,  the  commanding  general  hereby 

' erS?  "f0,  ,41>  s°  far  as  to  l)ermit  any  foreign  subject,  i 
his  election,  to  take  and  subscribe  the  following  oath  instead  of  the  oa ! 
at  hrst  set  torth : 


I, 


„ , “7 TT">  ,d°  solemnly  swear  that  I will,  to  the  best  of  my  ability  suddJS 

protect,  and  defend  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States.  So  heffi me  God!  PP| 


TRADUCTION. 


Je, 


maintenir  et  de 


solennellement,  autant  qu’il  sera  cn  moi,  de  soutenir.  i 
d&fendre  la  Constitution  des  Ftats  Unis.  Que  Dieu  me  soit  en  ail 


The  general  is  sure  that  no  foreign  subject  can  object  to  this  oath  i 
it  is  in  the  very  words  of  the  oath  taken  by  every  officer  of  the  Em! 
pean  Brigade,  prescribed  more  than  a year  ago,  in  “Les  Beglements  1 
Ioai tgl0n  ^,railSaise>  formee  a la  Nouvelle  Orleans,  le  26  d’Avrj 
i86i  as  will  be  seen  by  the  extract  below  (page  22),  and  claimed  as  I 
act  of  strictest  neutrality  by  the  officers  taking  it,  and  for  more  than 
year  has  passed  by  all  the  foreign  consuls,  so  far  as  he  is  informe 
without  protest. 


Serment  que  doivent  prefer  tons  les  officiers  de  la  Legion  Frangaise . 


State  of  Louisiana, 

Parish  of  Orleans. 

do  solemnly  swear  that  I will,  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  dischar 
“»  ot  the  Trench  Legion,  and  that  I will  sunport,  protect,  and  d 
pon^tuti°n  of  the  State  and  of  the  Confederate  States.  So  help  me  God. 


I. 


the  duties  of 


Sworn  to  and  subscribed  before  me. 


TRADUCTION. 


Je. 


fjTAT  DE  LA  LOUISIANE, 

Paroisse  d’ Orleans. 


devoirs  de 


-,  jure  solennellement  de  remplir,  autant  qu’il  sera  on  moi,  1 
“T  n ~ Ci6  i?  Legion  Frangaise,  et  je  promets  de  soutenir,  de  maintenir  et  < 
defendre  la  Constitution  de  PfHat  et  cello  des  Ftats  Confdddrds.  Que  Dieu  me  so 
en  aide. 

Assermentd  et  signd  devant  moi. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler  : 

_ . B.  S.  DAYIS, 

Captain  md  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  44.  j New  Orleans , June  21,  1862.  I 

Any  \ essel  attempting  to  leave  this  port  and  take  away  anyT  perso; 
of  color  who  did  not  come  here  on  board  of  her  and  has  not  a pas 
from  these  headquarters  will  be  liable  to  confiscation  and  her  maste 
punished  by  imprisonment. 

No  vessel  shall  so  leave  the  port  until  the  master  shall  take  an  oatl 
that  he  has  not  any  such  person  on  board  and  will jnot  allow  any  sucl 
to  come  on  board. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

B.  S.  DAYIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[ap.  xxvn.] 


493 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

eneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  45.  J New  Orleans , June  21,  1862. 

All  correspondence  with  the  Governors  of  States  by  the  officers  of 
is  department  in  relation  to  promotions  and  appointments  of  officers 
the  several  corps  in  this  command  must  be  transmitted  through 
ese  headquarters,  and  not  otherwise,  in  order  that  the  commanding 
rneral  may  add  his  own  testimony  as  to  the  merit  or  demerit  of  the 
>plication. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

R.  S.  DAYIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City,  I).  C.,  Jure  23,  1862. 
aj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

New  Orleans , La.  ; 

General:  Your  dispatch,  dated  the  10th  of  this  month,  and  for- 
irded  by  Lieutenant  Kinsman,  has  just  been  received. 

Some  days  ago  dispatches  were  forwarded  to  you  by  the  Hon.  Rev- 
ly  Johnson,  which  I had  hoped  might  have  reached  you  before  this 
oe,  but  I learn  by  a telegram  received  this  morning  that  he  is  still  in 
*w  York.  Questions  raised  by  the  representatives  of  foreign  govern - 
mts  immediately  after  your  occupation  of  New  Orleans  occasioned 
lay  in  communicating  with  you  until  the  President  should  determine 
lat  course  would  be  taken  with  them. 

Fou  will  have  learned  by  my  former  dispatch  of  the  appointment  of 
lonel  Shepley  as  military  governor  of  Louisiana.  Other  persons  were 
ongly  urged,  but  I believed  that  the  colonel  would  be  more  accepta- 
} to  you  than  any  other  person,  and  accordingly  appointed  him. 

Yon  have  been  troubled  with  no  specific  instructions  from  this  De- 
rtment  because  of  the  confidence  in  your  ability  to  meet  the  exigen- 
s of  your  command  better  upon  your  own  judgment  than  upon 
itructions  from  Washington.  After  the  instructions  sent  by  Mr. 
hnson  were  given,  your  dispatches  of  31st  May  and  1st  instant  were 
:eived,  and  a telegram  was  sent  to  New  York,  of  which  the  following 
a copy : 


ieral  Benjamin  F.  Butler  : 


Adjutant- G-eneral’s  Office, 

June  14,  1862. 


'he  Seerctary  of  War  received  your  dispatches  last  night  too  late  to  write  by  mail, 
authorizes  you  to  raise  5,000  loyal  white  meu,  to  be  organized  in  regiments  and 
cered  by  you.  Arms  and  clothing  will  be  sent  as  soon  as  possible.  There  is  no 
•erieuced  assistant  adjutant-general  who  can  be  sent  to  you.  If  you  will  designate 
ie  one  to  be  appointed  I will  try  to  have  it  done. 

'he  Chief  of  Ordnance  will  be  requested  to  send  an  ordnance  officer  to  you 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-General. 


rhe  authority  thus  given  is  now  repeated  in  answer  to  your  present 

patch.  ’ at 

The  matter  of  your  shipments  to  Mr.  Fay  was  submitted  to  this  De- 
rtment,  and  in  the  desire  to  afford  you  every  aid  and  facility  for 
establishing  trade  and  commerce  in  New  Orleans  an  arrangement 
s made  by  the  Quartermaster-General  which  was  entirely  satisfac- 


494 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXV33! 

tory  to  Mr.  Fay  ; but  such  operations  should  not  be  undertaken  withou 
an  absolute  and  overruling  necessity. 

In  regard  to  military  matters,  the  newspapers  give  you  all  the  new 
possessed  by  the  Department  in  regard  to  other  departments.  Jackl 
son’s  dash  at  Banks  and  the  affair  with  an  advanced  and  exposed  da 
tachment  of  Shields’  command  were  serviceable  to  the  enemy  only  in  rc, 
viving  their  spirits  and  whetting  up  the  edge  of  their  hostility  to  th 
Government.  It  is  hoped  that  General  McClellan  will  make  a decide*] 
and  successful  movement  upon  Bichmond  very  speedily.  Buell  is  ad 
vancing  on  East  Tennessee.  The  news  from  Memphis  you  have  n| 
doubt  heard.  Halleck  telegraphs  that  his  communication  with  that 
city  is  fully  established,  and  he  expects  a battle  between  the  rebels  am 
Buell’s  force  near  Chattanooga. 

Your  suggestion  in  regard  to  Vicksburg  is  one  of  great  importance 
apparently  easy  of  execution,  and  would  be  productive  of  very  imx>oi 
taut  results.  If  your  force  is  strong  enough,  or  if  General  Halleck  coul 
co-operate  with  you,  there  could  be  no  doubt  of  success. 

The  possession  of  New  Orleans  and  cleaning  the  rebels  from  the  Mh 
sissippi,  so  as  to  open  trade  and  commerce  through  that  channe 
with  the  Gulf,  has  always  appeared  to  be  among  the  chief  points  of  thi 
war.  You  have  successfully  accomplished  one,  and  I hope  the  othej 
will  not  be  long  in  its  accomplishment. 

Your  recommendation  of  Lieutenant  Kinsman  will  be  filled  by  hi 
appointment  on  your  staff.  It  will  give  me  pleasure  to  hear  from  yo 
often,  and  you  may  count  with  confidence  upon  the  utmost  aid  of  thi 
Department. 

Yours,  truly, 


EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department, 


Washington  City , D.  O.,  June  23,  1862. 


Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  New  Orleans , La. : 

General  : My  dispatch  to  you  of  this  date  omitted  to  state  that  yo 
are  authorized* to  nominate  the  officers  of  such  forces  as  you  may  find 
necessary  to  raise,  subject  to  approval  by  the  Department,  and  also  hav 
discretionary  power  to  organize  a portion  as  home  guards,  if  you  deei 
it  expedient.  That  class  of  troops  have  been  found  very  embarrassing 
Your  suggestions  as  to  a qualified  condonation  or  amnesty  will  b 
attentively  considered  and  the  President’s  instructions  given  speedil: 
as  possible. 

Yours,  truly, 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War, 


War  Department,  June  23, 1862. 

Major-General  Hallecr,  Corinth: 

If  you  have  not  already  given  your  attention  to  the  practicability  ( 
making  a cut-off  in  the  rear  of  Vicksburg  I beg  to  direct  your  attei 
tion  to  that  point.  It  has  been  represented  to  the  Department  to  l: 
an  undertaking  of  easy  accomplishment,  especially  under  the  prote* 
tiou  of  gunboats.  A dispatch  to-day  received  from  General  Buth 


Chap.  XXVII  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION.  495 

speaks  of  it  as  a project  contemplated  by  him,  but  he  may  not  have  a 
force  to  spare. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  June  23,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : In  the  expedition  to  Pass  Manchac  and  thence  to  Mandeville, 
on  the  shore  of  Lake  Pontchartrain,  Colonel  Putnam,  an  officer  of  the 
Louisiana  Militia,  was  taken  prisoner.  His  horse  stood  saddled  beside 
the  house  while  he  was  hidden  in  the  attic.  From  the  large  number 
of  recruiting  blanks  found  in  the  room  with  him  it  is  supposed  that 
he  was  on  the  recruiting  service.  A sum  of  $5,650,  in  Confederate 
money,  supposed  to  be  for  recruiting  purposes,  was  found  upon  him. 
This  sum  is  herewith  inclosed.  I had  been  informed  of  the  acts  of 
Colonel  Putnam  before  his  capture,  which  was  a grateful  one  because 
of  these  circumstances.  Having  been  commissioned  as  colonel  of  the 
militia  in  this  city,  his  regiment  was  called  together  but  not  armed. 
On  the  day  succeeding  the  passage  of  the  forts  by  the  fleet  he  was 
engaged  in  pressing  teams  and  drays  into  the  service  and  hauling  out 
the  cotton  from  the  cotton-presses  and  sugar  from  the  warehouses  upon 
the  levee,  there  piling  it  up.  This  work  was  begun  about  1 o’clock  on 
the  25th,  and  at  9 o’clock  that  evening  au  immense  amount  of  this 
property  was  set  fire  to  and  burned,  against  the  remonstrances  of  the 
owners. 

Upon  examination  Colonel  Putnam  admitted  these  facts,  but  justified 
under  the  orders  of  the  provost-marshals,  and  produced  the  original 
order,  signed  by  Mr.  Soule  and  Mr.  Mazereau,  which,  with  the  colonel’s 
commission,  I herewith  inclose.  Colonel  Putnam  also  claims  that  he 
did  not  know  when  the  cotton  was  being  hauled  out  that  it  was  to  be 
destroyed,  but  claims  that  the  artful  phrase  in  the  order,  “to  be  used 
in  defense  of  the  city,”  meant  that  the  cotton  was  to  be  used  for  barri- 
cades. Yet  as  Colonel  Putnam  admits  that  the  owners  of  the  several 
cotton-presses  were  pressing  him  to  clear  theirs  first,  so  that  cotton, 
press,  and  all  might  not  be  burned,  and  as  it  was  notorious  that  the 
cotton  was  to  be  burned,  that  defense  will  hardly  avail  him. 

I will  send  Colonel  Putnam  North,  so  that  he  may  be  a witness  in 
any  proceedings  against  Soule  and  Mazereau.  I have  a very  decided 
opinion  as  to  the  course  to  be  pursued  toward  those  who  have  been  the 
cause  of  burning  this  property,  and  if  I had  possessed  the  proof  which 
I now  inclose  I should  not  have  sent  Soule  and  Mazereau  North,  but 
should  have  tried  them  here.  If  the  War  Department  will  send  them 
back,  and  so  direct,  I will  now  bring  them  before  a military  commission 
for  this  atrocious  treason  and  arson. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant,  * 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 

[Inclosures.] 

^ New  Orleans,  April  24,  1862. 

Ben.  Bland,  Esq., 

Col.  James  M.  Putnam  : 

Sirs  : You  are  hereby  commanded  to  have  all  the  cotton  stored  up  in 


496 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


this  city  removed  immediately  to  such  place  as  you  may  select  and  to 
have  it  piled  up  there,  that  it  may  he  turned  to  such  purposes  as  the  j 
defense  of  the  city  may  require;  and  you  are  empowered  and  com- 
manded to  require  such  wagons  as  may  be  pressed  into  immediate  : 
service  to  transport  said  cotton  to  the  place  or  places  thus  selected,  or  \ 
to  pick  such  steamers  as  may  be  in  this  port  for  the  same  service,  ex-  j 
cept  those  impressed  by  the  commanding  general  or  containing  the 
archives  for  removal.  You  are  moreover  required  and  commanded  to 
seize  and  sequester  such  iron  chains  as  may  be  found  within  the  city 
or  its  environs,  and  to  place  them  where  they  may  in  any  time  be  had 
and  used  for  the  public  service.  The  same  in  accordance  with  orders 
from  the  provost-marshals  of  this  city. 

A.  MAZEBEAU,  Chairman. 


Approved. 


PIEBBE  SOULU, 

Provost- Marshal. 


Office  Provost-Marshal, 

New  Orleans , April  24,  1862. 

Col.  J.  M;  Putnam  is  hereby  authorized  to  take  the  horses  and  mules 
of  the  railroad  company,  or  any  other  horses  and  mules,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  hauling  cotton,  as  directed  within. 

A.  BBOTHER, 
Assistant  Provost-Marshal. 


The  same  order  as  above  is  granted  as  to  the  horses  and  mules  be- 
longing to  the  city  railroads  or  wherever  to  be  found. 

H.  D.  OGDEN, 
Provost-Marslial. 

A true  copy.  Attest : 

New  Orleans,  June  23,  1862. 

A.  F.  PUFFER, 

Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  M.  T.,  Maj.  Gen.’s  Office, 

]y0. . ] New  Orleans , April  24,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  J.  Powell,  commanding  Third  Brigade  Louisiana  Mounted 
Troops,  will  forthwith  cause  all  cotton  stored  in  the  various  cotton- 
presses  and  other  places  within  his  brigade  to  be  taken  therefrom,  rolled 
out  into  the  streets  or  other  places,  removed  from  any  danger  to  sur- 
rounding buildings,  and  hold  himself  prepared  at  a moment’s  notice  to 
have  the  same  committed  to  the  flames  and  destroyed ; and  for  this  pur- 
pose he  is  hereby  authorized  to  cause  to  be  broken  open  all  presses  and 
places  where  cotton  is  stored  or  to  be  found. 

By  order  of  John  L.  Lewis,  major-general  commanding : 

J G.  W.  LEWIS,  Aide. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  J.  Powell, 

Comdg.  Third  Brig.  Louisiana  Mounted  Troops. 


I hereby  solemnly  swear  that  the  above  order  was  transmitted  by 
me  to  the  colonels  of  my  brigade  on  the  above  date  and  was  executed 
in  accordance  with  its  provisions. 

A.  J.  POWELL, 

Brigadier- General,  Third  Brigade  Louisiana  M.  T. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  497 

War  Department,  June  24,  1862. 

Col.  Alfred  W.  Ellet, 

Commanding  Ram  Fleet , opposite  Memphis  : 

I regret  that  your  brother’s  illness  deprives  the  Government  of  his 
skillful  and  gallant  services,  but  have  confidence  that  you  will  supply 
his  place  better  than  any  one  else. 

You  will  observe  that  by  his  instructions  the  ram  fleet  was  placed 
under  the  general  command  of  the  commander  of  the  gunboat  squadron. 
The  President  desires  you  to  consider  yourself  in  the  same  position, 
believing  that  co-operative  action  will  tie  more  likely  to  produce  good 
results  than  independent  action,  and  that  the  commander  of  the  gun- 
boats should  hate  chief  command. 

I shall  be  glad  to  have  full  and  frequent  reports  from  you. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


[June  24,  1862. — For  Secretary  of  State  to  Secretary  of  War,  ap- 
proving Butler’s  action  in  reference  to  Mexican  consulate,  see  Series 
III,  Yol.  II.] 


Department  of  State, 
Washington , June  24,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I notice  that  Major-General  Butler  is  represented  to  have  re- 
quired certain  oaths  frbm  foreigners  at  New  Orleans.  Though  his  gen- 
eral right,  pursuant  to  martial  law,  to  make  any  exactions  which  he 
may  deem  necessary  for  the  peace  and  safety  of  the  district  under  his 
command  cannot  be  questioned,  the  expediency  of  requiring  oaths  from 
those  who  do  not  owe  a permanent  allegiance  to  the  Government  is  so 
doubtful,  that  I am  directed  by  the  President  to  request  you  to  order 
him  to  discontinue  that  practice  for  the  future  and  to  cancel  any  such 
obligations  which  may  thus  have  been  compulsorily  contracted.  For- 
eigners owe  temporary  allegiance  to  the  authorities  wherever  they  may 
reside.  From  this  nothing  but  a treaty  stipulation  can  absolve  them. 
In  general,  however,  it  is  best  to  presume  that  they  will  observe  this 
allegiance.  If,  however,  they  disregard  it,  the  particular  acts  by  which 
this  disregard  may  be  shown  are  liable  to  punishment  by  the  civil  or, 
if  this  should  be  silent  or  inadequate,  by  martial  law.  It  is  preferable 
for  the  maintenance  of  harmonious  relations  with  foreign  powers  that 
misconduct  on  the  part  of  their  citizens  or  subjects  within  our  jurisdic- 
tion should  not  be  anticipated,  but  that  its  actual  development  should 
be  awaited.  When  it  shall  have  occurred,  is  notorious  in  particular 
instances,  or  shall  be  susceptible  of  due  proof,  their  governments  can- 
not reasonably  complain  if  the  guilty  parties  are  punished  in  propor- 
tion to  their  offense. 

This  Department  having  been  officially  apprised  by  the  British  lega- 
tion here  that  Mr.  Coppell  had  been  duly  appointed  acting  British  con- 
sul at  New  Orleans,  I will  again  thank  you  to  direct  General  Butler  to 
respect  his  official  acts  accordingly.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  gen- 

32  R r—vol  xv 


498 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 


era!  should  have  deemed  it  advisable  to  issue  a certain  order  in  con- 
sequence of  which  that  gentleman  deemed  it  necessary  formally  to 
relinquish  his  consular  functions.  He  has  been  requested  through  the 
British  legation  here  to  resume  them. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  H.  SEWARD. 


Steam-Ram  Monarch, 

Above  Vicksburg , June  25  (via  Cairo,  111.,  29),  1862. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War,  Washington,  I).  C.: 


I arrived  above  Vicksburg  yesterday  afternoon,  and  immediately  dis- 
patched a party  of  four  young  men,  who  volunteered  to  carry  a communi- 
cation to  Commodore  Farragut,  viz : Medical  Cadet  Charles  R.  Ellet, 
commanding  party;  Sergeant  E.  W.  Bartlett;  my  son,  Edward  C.  Ellet, 
and  W.  E.  Warren.  After  a most  arduous  and  dangerous  march  through 
swamps  and  sloughs,  in  some  cases  waist-deep,  and  passing  many  of  the 
enemy’s  pickets,  they  succeeded  in  reaching  the  fleet  and  delivering  my 
letter  to  Commodore  Farragut  in  person,  and  upon  their  return  brought 
me  the  following  reply: 


I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication  of  the  24th  instant,  by  the 
hands  of  your  Medical  Cadet  Ellet.  I am  highly  gratified  to  find  you  in  this  vicinity, 
as  you  may  render  most  efficient  service  by  looking  after  and  breaking  up  the  com- 
munication between  the  Yazoo  River  and  Vicksburg.  As  the  young  gentleman  in- 
forms me  that  your  vessels  are  not  well  calculated  for  attacking  the  forts,  they  can  be 
of  no  use  to  us  in  the  fight  about  to  take  place,  and  for  which  I think  we  are  abun- 
dantly strong.  If  Commodore  Davis’  iron-clad  gunboats  could  be  present  they  would 
add  greatly  to  the  chances  of  success  without  much  loss  of  life,  which  is  always  de- 
sirable in  some  cases.  If  you  can  communicate  to  him  that  the  affair  will  come  off  in 
a day  or  two  you  will  greatly  oblige  me.  Please  accept  my  thanks  for  your  kindness 
in  making  this  successful  effort  to  communicate  with  me,  and  my  high  appreciation 
of  the  young  gentleman’s  enterprising  and  daring  character  in  undertaking  the  serv- 
ice which  thus  far  he  has  perfected  so  well. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J 1 J D.  G.  FARRAGUT, 

Flag-Officer,  Commanding  South  Gulf  Squadron. 


I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  courage  and  good  judgment  dis- 
played by  the  four  young  men  who  volunteered  upon  this  dangerous  and 
most  laborious  service,  which,  through  all  the  many  difficulties  that  they 
encountered,  they  succeeded  in  carrying  through  successfully. 

I have  only  to  add  that  from  Memphis  to  this  point  I have  encoun- 
tered no  obstacle.  The  river  was  entirely  unobstructed.  I shall  for 
the  present  confine  my  attention  to  the  enemy’s  gunboats  and  rams  said 
to  be  up  the  Yazoo  River,  and  cut  off  their  communication  with  Vicks- 
burg. I have  apprehensions  that  I may  not  be  able  to  get  up  the  river 
to  where  they  are  said  to  be,  but  will  make  the  attempt  unless  the  water 
is  too  shallow.  In  conformity  with  Commodore  Farragut’s  express  de- 
sire I have  communicated  his  wish  to  Flag-Officer  Davis  in  a dispatch 
to-day  in  his  own  words.  I forwarded  the  dispatch  by  tender  Dick 

Fulton.  T 

ALFRED  W.  ELLET, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Ram  Fleet. 


Chap.  XXYII.  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


499 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , June  26,  1862. 

Hon.  Salmon  P.  Chase  : 

Dear  Sir  : I send  this  by  the  hand  of  David  Ritchie,  a young  Scotch- 
man, who,  being  a sailor  on  board  the  revenue-cutter  McClelland,  re- 
mained true  and  loyal. 

The  inclosed  copy  of  letter  to  General  Dix  and  the  affidavit  will  give 
the  fact. 

I have  sent  him  home  as  first  officer  on  board  the  prize  bng  Harriet 
Ralli,  seized  by  the  collector.  1 think  him  worthy  of  promotion.  Can 
you  not  give  him  some  place  on  board  a revenue  boat? 

I am,  most  truly,  yours, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 


STATEMENT  OF  DAVID  RITCHIE. 

Am  a native  of  Montrose,  in  the  north  of  Scotland ; have  lived  in  this 
country  seven  years;  have  followed  the  sea  as  a profession  since  I left 
school.  For  two  years  prior  to  August,  1859, 1 was  employed  by  Henry 
Mitchell,  esq.,  in*  the  U.  S.  Coast  Survey  Department.  From  this  I 
enlisted  on  board  the  revenue-cutter  Robert  McClelland  at  the  time  she 
was  put  in  commission  in  New  York.  Was  at  the  New  York  station 
about  a year,  and  then  left  for  New  Orleans,  where  the  McClelland  was 
to  relieve  the  revenue-cutter  Washington ; arrived  at  New  Orleans  late 
in  September. 

After  Mr.  Jones,  the  special  agent  from  Secretary  Dix,  arrived  I heard 
Captain  Hudgins,  of  the  McClelland,  say  that  Mr.  Jones  had  read  to 
them  the  famous  order  u Shoot  the  first  man  that  attempts  to  haul  down 
the  American  flag,”  in  the  cabin  of  the  McClelland,  and  had  placed  Cap- 
tain Breshwood  in  irons  for  disobedience  of  orders.  About  a week 
after  this  the  revenue  flag  was  taken  down  from  the  McClelland  and  put 
into  the  signal  house.  For  about  two  weeks  no  flag  was  raised,  then 
the  secession  flag  was  run  up  to  the  peak. 

On  the  night  of  the  24th  of  April  last  the  authorities  here,  learning 
that  the  Federal  fleet  had  passed  the  forts,  determined  to  burn  the  Mc- 
Clelland. She  lay  at  the  dock  in  Algiers,  and  as  they  were  removing  such 
articles  on  her  as  they  wished  to  save,  I remarked  to  a friend  that  I was 
bound  to  get  the  old  revenue  flag  and  the  secession  one  also.  About 
half  past  2 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  25th  April  the  McClelland 
dropped  off  and  her  anchors  let  go,  and  then  was  fired.  Just  before  she 
dropped  off  I jumped  aboard  and  went  to  the  signal-house,  where, 
among  various  signal  flags,  I found  the  revenue  and  secession  flags,  and 
wrapped  them  up  and  carried  them  off,  and  have  since  kept  them  in  my 
house  in  Algiers.  I am  perfectly  certain  and  satisfied  that  this  revenue 
flag  is  the  identical  one  which  elicited  the  noted  order  of  General  Dix, 
and  that  the  other  is  the  flag  which  has  been  flying  from  the  McClelland 
since  until  the  capture  of  the  forts. 

DAVID  RITCHIE. 

Subscribed  and  sworn  to  before  me. 

JAS.  M.  BELL, 

Provost  Judge. 


500 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  LChap.  xxvn. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , June  27,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : Inclosed  will  be  found  several  letters  addressed  to  General 
David  E.  Twiggs,  late  of  the  IT.  S.  Army,  by  his  son-in-law,  Colonel 
Myers,  late  of  the  Army,  and  now  Quartermaster-General,  I believe,  of 
the  Confederate  States  Government. 

The  letter  of  November  12,  1860,  which  incloses  the  order  for  General 
Twiggs  to  take  command  in  Texas,  shows  that  at  that  early  day  he  was 
contemplating  the  treason  he  has  since  acted,  and  that  he  sought  the 
very  place  so  as  to  be  in  position  to  do  the  utmost  mischief. 

The  others,  of  dates  May  16,  22,  and  26,*  disclose  the  reason  of  his 
appointment  as  provisional  general  by  the  rebel  government  and  his 
declination  of  the  position  of  major-general. 

All  these  were  found  in  his  house,  which  I have  taken  possession  of, 
and,  with  its  furniture,  have  had  put  in  order  for  quarters  for  myself 
and  a portion  of  my  staff. 

I have  caused  all  the  property  here  which  General  Twiggs  owned  or 
of  which  he  received  the  income  to  be  sequestered,  and  the  rents,  after 
paying  expenses,  to  be  held  to  await  the  action  of  the  Government  of 
the  United  States. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  E.  BUTLER, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.) 


New  Orleans,  November  13,  1860. 

General  Twiggs,  U.  S.  A. : 

General  : Here  is  your  order  to  command  in  Texas  : 

******* 
Secession  seems  to  progress.  Georgia  has  raised  the  colonial  flag 
(that  is,  Savannah).  We  must  have  troubled 


Yours,  truly, 


A.  C.  MYERS. 


Special  Orders, 
No.  133. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

New  YorJc,  November  7,  1860. 


******* 

I.  Having  reported  for  duty,  Bvt.  Maj.  Gen.  David  E.  Twiggs  will  pro- 
ceed without  delay  to  San  Antonio  and  resume  the  command  of  the 
Department  of  Texas. 

******* 

Bv  command  of  Lieutenant-General  Scott : 

L.  THOMAS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


That  of  26th  not  found. 


t Domestic  matters  omitted. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 


501 


Montgomery,  May  16,  1861. 

General  Twiggs,  East  Pascagoula : 

General:  Yours  of  the  12 tli  instant  is  just  received.  I am  happy 
to  bear  that  yon  are  all  well. 

The  reason  for  stationing  troops  back  from  the  coast  was  for  water, 
shade,  and  instruction.  A company  detached  from  the  camp  would 
guard  the  places  you  allude  to  and  in  the  same  manner  as  you  propose. 
However,  it  is  not  likely  that  anything  will  be  done.  Everything  is  as 
slow  and  difficult  to  adopt  as  if  we  were  in  profound  peace  and  not  the 
beginning  of  active  war. 

Arms  are  provided  to  volunteers  by  the  State.  I will  see  General 
McRae  and  ask  him  to  get  arms  for  the  Pascagoula  company. 

You  ask  me  why  the  staff  is  not  filled  up.  I can’t  say,  except  that 
Davis  don’t  want  me  as  Quartermaster- General.  Washington  is  assist- 
ant adjutant-general  with  rank  of  captain.  Withers  is  here  in  General 
Cooper’s  office. 

Harney  is  as  black  a creature  as  Lincoln.  He  is  a poor  fool,  who  has 
begun  to  write  for  effect  and  giving  advice  to  the  people  of  Missouri. 
He  is  a veritable  traitor,  and  has  joined  Lincoln  in  his  crusade  against 
the  South.  Maj.  Lloyd  Beall  says  Harney  told  him  the  most  barefaced- 
lies.  The  President  is  going  to  Richmond  in  about  a week.  We  will 
remain  here  for  the  present.  I mean  the  executive  departments. 

Gradually  the  North  is  getting  around  us  and  penetrating  by  degrees 
into  Virginia.  We  shall  have  some  bloody  battles  before  long.  J.  E. 
Johnston,  just  made  general,  started  last  night  for  Harper’s  Ferry. 
Every  man  now  is  anxious  to  turn  out  for  the  war.  I am  afraid  we 
are  draining  too  many  men  from  the  South  and  Southwest.  Mr.  Conrad 
is  insisting  on  your  being  assigned  to  duty.* 


Yours,  truly, 


A.  C.  MYERS. 


[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

Quartermaster-General’s  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Montgomery , May  22,  1861. 

General  David  E.  Twiggs,  &c.  : 

General  : Mr.  Davis  sent  for  me  yesterday  and  asked  me  where  you 
were.  I said  “At  Pascagoula.”  He  thought  you  were  at  New  Orleans, 
but  continued,  “Will  General  Twiggs  accept  the  command  of  the 
forces  at  New  Orleans  and  the  adjacent  country  ?”  I replied,  “ I think 
he  will,”  and  observed  that  you  had  telegraphed  me  to  that  effect.  I 
then  asked  what  would  be  tendered  you.  He  said,  as  he  supposed  you 
would  not  care  to  serve  longer  than  the  period  of  the  war,  you  would 
be  offered  the  appointment  of  i>ro visional  general,  and  as  you  had  de- 
clined the  appointment  of  general  in  the  regular  army  on  account  of' 
not  being  able  to  take  the  field  he  could  not  tender  you  the  same  ap- 
pointment again,  as  he  required  the  most  active  men,  but  did  not  wish 
you  to  misunderstand  his  offering  you  the  place  of  provisional  general. 
1 hope  you  will  accept,  for  you  will  have  the  same  command  as  if  you 
were  lieutenant-general.  It  cannot  be  higher.  I told  Mr.  Davis  you 
ought  to  have  a staff  officer,  and  suggested  your  getting  Captain  Wash- 


Some  domestic  matters  omitted. 


502 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


ington.  I distinctly  understood  that  you  would  be  appointed.  Mr. 
Davis  said  so  to  me  positively.  I now  trust  that  your  health  will  allow 
of  your  attending  to  the  important  duties  of  the  defense  of  New  Or-  j 
leans,  the  lake  shore,  and  the  islands  on  the  coast  between  Mobile  and 
New  Orleans. 

Henry  May  is  out  for  Congress  to  run  against  Winter  Davis.  I hope 
Davis  will  beat  him.  He  is,  I think,  a degraded  man.  Like  the  rest  of 
the  North,  he  thinks  the  strength  is  there,  and  coward-like  they  hope 
to  subjugate  the  South  and  make  a name  for  courage.  I never  knew  a 
Northern  man  of  gallantry.  They  pretend  to  be  gallant  to  women  to  | 
cover  their  low  designs  at  producing  infamy  and  ruin.  I will  qualify 
my  remark  about  Northern  men  to  except  McClellan.  He  is  a brave, 
noble  soldier,  and  will  be  our  most  formidable  enemy  in  battle.  He 
commands  in  Ohio,  and  will  make  the  attack  on  Western  Virginia  if  it 


is  meant  to  be  real. 

I hope  this  letter  will  reach  you  in  New  Orleans  and  find  you  all  well. 
Yours,  truly, 

A.  C.  MYERS. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , June  28  [and  July  3],  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

/Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I am  on  my  return  from  Baton  Rouge,  where  I have  been  for 
the  purpose  of  inspecting  the  garrison  there  and  ascertaining,  if  possi- 
ble, what  is  the  sentiment  of  the  people  toward  the  Government.  ! 

The  garrison,  consisting  of  two  regiments,  Twenty-first  Indiana  and 
Sixth  Michigan  Volunteers,  with  a section  of  Everett’s  battery,  Sixth 
Massachusetts,  are  in  fine  condition  and  health,  and  I believe  strong 
enough  to  resist  a threatened  attack  by  General  Van  Dorn,  who  has 
been  put  in  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Mississippi  in  place  of 
General  Lovell,  removed. 

I have  been  agreeably  disappointed  in  the  feeling  at  Baton  Rouge. 

There  is  a tiredness  of  the  war  and  a longing  for  the  restoration  of 
the  old  state  of  things  under  the  Union  which  is  gratifying.  I had  a 
visit  from  a dozen  or  more  gentlemen  of  Baton  Rouge  and  vicinity, 
representing  some  $5,000,000  or  $6,000,000  of  property,  and  had  conver- 
sations with  them  upon  the  new  system  of  Partisan  Rangers  just  now 
inaugurated,  i.  e .,  guerrilla  warfare.  They  deprecate  it;  will  do  every- 
thing possible  to  discountenance  it.  They  offered  to  take  the  oath  ot 
allegiance  if  I required,  but  assured  me  they  thought  they  could  do  more 
good  by  abstaining  from  the  oath  at  the  present,  because  it  would  be 
impossible  for  them  to  have  communication  with  these  partisans  if  they 
took  the  oath  and  it  should  be  publicly  known. 

Governor  Moore  has  issued  an  address  more  remarkable  than  any 
document  of  the  kind  ever  before  perused.  I inclose  a copy. 

At  the  same  time  General  Van  Dorn  has  issued  his  General  Orders, 
No.  1,  which  recommends  that  all  inhabitants  remove  8 miles  from  the 
river.  I brought  before  me  some  of  the  most  violent  of  the  rebels,  and 
after  calling  their  attention  to  the  present  state  of  things  I proposed  to 
them  the  oath  of  allegiance,  and  after  consideration  overnight  two  ot 
them,  Mr.  Benjamin,  brother  of  the  rebel  Secretary  of  War,  aud  Bryan, 
the  mayor  of  the  city,  took  the  oath. 


Chap.  XXYII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION. 


503 


I brought  away  with  me,  and  now  have  under  arrest,  five  of  those 
who  had  used  threats  toward  the  men  who  had  shown  themselves  favor- 
able to  the  Union. 

Upon  full  reflection  and  observation  I find  the  condition  of  public 
sentiment  to  be  this  : The  planters  and  men  of  property  are  now  tired 
of  the  war,  well-disposed  toward  the  Union,  only  fearing  lest  their 
negroes  shall  not  be  let  alone ; would  be  quite  happy  to  have  the  Union 
restored  in  all  things. 

The  operative  classes  of  white  men  of  all  trades  are  as  a rule  in  favor 
of  the  Union.  In  fact  this  rebellion  was  at  first  inaugurated  for  the 
purpose  of  establishing  a landed  aristocracy  as  against  the  poor  and 
middling  whites,  who  had  shown  some  disposition  to  assert  their  equal- 
ity with  the  planters,  and  had  begun  to  express  themselves  through 
organizations,  on  the  basis  of  the  Masonic  order,  into  societies  of  which 
the  South  is  full,  of  which  that  ritual  is  the  pattern.  This  disinclination 
of  the  people  to  the  war  has  required  the  conscription  acts,  so  that  we 
now  have  the  before- unheard-of  fact  of  a people  professedly  fighting  for 
their  liberties  against  oppression,  and  yet  obliged  to  do  so  by  their  lead- 
ers in  a most  rigid  conscription  act.  “ Free  conscripts  ” are  certainly 
evidence  of  progress  in  terms. 

I have  ordered  all  the  funds  in  the  several  banks  belonging  to  the 
State  of  Louisiana  to  be  sequestered  and  held  for  the  disposition  of  the 
Government.  They  are  all  collected  in  Confederate  Treasury  notes, 
and  so  may  not  be  very  valuable. 

By  some  unfortunate  oversight  the  paymaster  came  down  here  with 
$285,000,  too  little  money  to  pay  the  troops  up  to  last  May.  Some  of 
them  have  not  been  paid  for  six  months  and  some  not  since  they  have 
been  in  the  service — nine  months ; men  were  disheartened.  The  mails 
brought  intelligence  of  the  destitution  of  families.  Two  months’  more 
pay  came  due  July  1.  In  this  emergency  specie  seized,  and  which,  by 
the  decision  of  a commission,  was  to  be  sent  to  Washington,  in  amount 
$50,000,  was  taken  and  is  being  paid  out  to  the  troops. 

I have  borrowed  by  pledge  of  personal  credit  and  the  faith  of  the 
Government  $100,000  more,  which  will  be  paid  out  to  the  suffering 
soldiers.  Major  [Erie]  Locke,  one  of  the  paymasters,  has  also  been 
ordered  to  report  to  Washington  to  get  funds  to  pay  the  allotment  and 
for  the  July  payment,  which  ought  to  be  made  at  once.  May  I ask  that 
his  mission  may  be  speeded  at  once.  Details  are  given  in  a note  to  the 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  a duplicate  of  which  is  inclosed. 

The  question  of  how  to  feed  the  people  of  this  city  and  the  surrounding 
country  becomes  of  the  utmost  magnitude,  and  to  it  I have  giveu  the 
best  exertions.  Owing  to  the  impression  at  the  North  that  the  river 
was  opened  no  flour  has  been  shipped  from  Northern  ports.  It  is 
now  at  a fabulous  price.  Moore’s  proclamation  has  frightened  all  the 
people  from  the  Red  River  country  from  sending  the  flour  here,  and  we 
are  in  danger  of  starving.  Upon  consultation  with  Colonel  Turner, 
chief  commissary  of  subsistence,  it  has  been  thought  best  to  distribute 
gratuitously  all  the  flour  and  beef  we  can  spare,  say  2,000  barrels  of 
each. 

The  leading  secessionists  will  be  taxed  to  pay  the  expense,  which  I 
set  down  at  about  $75,000.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  a fast-sail- 
ifig  steamer,  capable  of  containing,  say,  4,000  barrels  of  flour  and  beef 
and  pork,  be  at  once  forwarded  for  the  use  of  the  city.  Colonel  Turner 
lias  made  the  necessary  requisition  for  the  flour — 4,000  barrels. 

The  trustees  of  the  Charity  Hospital  have  resigned,  but  have  been 
continued  in  office,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  inclosed  correspondence. 


504 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII.  i 

July  3. 

A boat  from  Vicksburg  tbis  morning  brings  news  (but  no  official  dis 
patches)  that  there  has  been  an  attack  upon  the  place ; that  a portion  of 
the  fleet  have  got  by  the  batteries  and  joined  the  fleet  of  Commodore  > 
Davis  above  5 that  General  Williams  has  made  a lodgment  on  the  op- 
posite bank  of  the  river,  erected  a battery  there,  and  with  his  rifle  12-  j 
pounders  is  throwing  shells  into  the  town  and  enemy’s  camp.  This  is 
the  rebels’  last  defense  on  the  river  and  must  yield.  We  are  threatened 
then  with  a guerrilla  war,  which  is  claimed  wall  be  interminable. 

I take  leave  to  suggest  that  it  can  be  terminated  in  a few  days.  A 
reward  offered  of  $1,000  for  each  guerrilla’s  head  and  freedom  to  the 
negro  who  should  bring  it  in  would  bring  that  uncivilized  system  of  war-  | 
fare  to  a sudden  termination  by  an  equally  uncivilized  remedy — “ fire  set 
to  fight  fire.” 

I am  sorry  to  say  that  some  of  the  stories  about  the  inhuman  acts  of 
our  enemies  are  true. 

Insults  to  the  dead  are  too  shocking  to  be  tolerated.  I hope  all  those 
who  have  whined  over  order  No.  28  will  read  the  orders  which  I have  j 
felt  it  my  duty  to  enforce  in  the  cases  of  Mrs.  Philips,  [Fidel]  Keller, 
and  [John  W.]  Andrews,  copies  of  which  I inclose. 

I beg  leave  to  call  attention  to  my  call  for  more  troops.  I have 
enough  to  hold  all  I have  occupied,  but  if  the  ulterior  movements  in 
Texas  and  upon  Mobile  are  to  be  carried  out  more  will  be  required. 

Colonel  Deming  again  returns  home  for  reasons  which  he  prays  leave 
to  explain  to  the  Department,  and  is  charged  with  some  personal  com- 
munication to  which  I pray  attention. 

I am  deeply  gratified,  as  indeed  are  all  the  loyal  citizens  of  New  Or- 
leans, to  learn  that  Acting  Brigadier-General  Shepley  has  been  made  | 
military  governor  of  Louisiana.  His  successful  administration  of  the  | 
city  affairs  has  rendered  him  very  acceptable. 

It  will  be  necessary  to  give  him  a commission  as  brigadier-general,  i 
so  that  he  may  be  able  to  command  the  troops  detailed  to  him  to  guard 
the  State. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEB, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.]  • 

ADDRESS. 


To  the  People  of  Louisiana : 

The  occupation  by  the  enemy  of  a portion  of  the  territory  of  our  State 
imposes  upon  us  new  and  unaccustomed  responsibilities.  It  creates  an 
anomalous  condition  of  affairs,  and  establishes  between  the  citizens  of 
New  Orleans  and  all  other  of  our  towns  in  the  actual  occupation  of  the 
enemy  and  those  of  the  country  parishes  relations  very  different  from 
those  which  regulate  their  ordinary  intercourse.  It  is  not  surprising 
that  a people  who  are  now  experiencing  the  first  invasion  of  their  State 
should  not  at  the  outset  have  appreciated  the  duties  and  necessities  of 
the  new  position  in  which  they  suddenly  find  themselves  placed. 

New  Orleans  is  the  commercial  depot  of  the  State.  To  it  the  whole 
agricultural  products  of  our  soil  are  conveyed,  and  from  it  are  brought 
in  return  a large  measure  of  the  supplies  for  our  plantations  and  the 
merchandise  which  forms  the  object  of  every  species  of  traffic.  The 


Chap.  XXTO.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


505 


channels  of  trade  constantly  flow  between  it  and  the  country,  freighted 
with  the  every-day  transactions  of  all  classes  of  our  citizens,  thus  bind- 
ing our  urban  and  rural  populations  together  by  the  strong  bands  of 
mutual  dependence  and  reciprocal  benefit. 

TRADE  WITH  THE  ENEMY  FORBIDDEN. 

A state  of  public  war,  resulting  in  the  armed  occupancy  of  New 
Orleans  by  the  enemy,  changes  these  relations.  There  cannot  be  a 
war  for  arms  and  a peace  for  trade  between  two  people  at  the  same 
time.  The  armed  occupants  of  that  city  are  our  enemies.  To  each 
loyal  citizen  of  Louisiana  and  of  the  Confederacy  every  citizen  of  the 
country  hostile  to  us  is  an  enemy.  We  cannot  barter  our  produce  for 
theirs.  We  cannot  exchange  our  corn,  cattle,  sugar,  or  cotton  for  their 
gold.  We  have  no  right  even  to  pay  money  that  was  owing  to  the 
citizens  of  the  now-hostile  States  before  the  war.  Absolute  non-inter- 
course— the  entire  suspension  of  communication  by  visit  or  trade— is 
the  only  safe  rule  for  our  guidance.  It  is  a rule  recognized  as  impera- 
tive by  all  writers  on  public  law  and  universally  administered  by  the 
authorities  of  nations  at  war. 

COMMUNICATION  WITH  CITIZENS  OF  OCCUPIED  PLACES  MUST  CEASE. 

Nor  is  it  prudent  to  hold  communication  with  citizens  of  any  portion 
of  our  territory  temporarily  occupied  by  the  enemy. 

However  much  we  may  deplore  their  misfortunes,  we  must  not  per- 
mit these  to  be  made  the  instruments  for  our  further  damage.  The 
only  proper  and  permissible  manner  in  which  we  can  communicate  with 
the  enemy  or  those  under  his  control  who  are  within  his  lines  is  under 
a flag  of  truce. 

Communication  with  New  Orleans  since  its  armed  occupation  has 
been  almost  unrestrained,  save  by  the  fears  of  those  who  desired,  from 
motives  either  of  gain  or  curiosity,  to  enter  the  lines  of  the  enemy. 

This  communication  must  cease  and  at  once.  It  is  well  known  that 
the  general  commanding  the  invading  army  opposes  no  obstacle  to  the 
ingress  of  any  of  our  citizens  into  New  Orleans,  but  invariably  attaches 
to  the  passport  for  egress  the  statement  u This  pass  is  given  upon  the 
parole  of  honor  of  the  holder  that  he  will  in  no  way  give  information, 
countenance,  aid,  or  support  to  the  so-called  Confederate  Government 
or  States.”  This  cunningly  devised  trap  to  catch  the  unsuspicious  visi- 
tor was  expected  to  trammel  him  in  the  rendition  of  those  services 
which  his  country  demands.  No  parole  is  ever  taken  when  these  pass- 
ports are  delivered — none  ever  required.  This  condition  is  inserted  in 
the  passport  without  notification  to  the  applicant  that  it  is  to  be  required, 
in  the  belief  that  the  apparent  tacit  consent  of  the  receiver  to  a condi- 
tion thussneakingly  sought  to  be  foisted  upon  him  would  be  held  bind- 
ing in  morals  and  in  conscience.  At  first  the  passports  were  received 
unsuspectingly  and  without  knowledge  of  the  characteristic  trickery 
contained  in  this  clause,  but  it  is  now  well  known  that  none  are  given 
without  it. 


USING  THE  ENEMY’S  PASSPORT. 

Whoever,  therefore,  now  voluntarily  places  himself  in  the  power  of 
the  enemy  by  entering  their  lines  throws  a shade  upon  his  loyalty 
to  his  Government.  The  possession  of  a passport  containing  the  clause 


506 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVI L 

above  quoted  subjects  the  holder  to  grave  suspicion.  Its  receipt  is 
incipient  neutrality.  The  desire  to  fulfill  the  condition  assumed  to  be 
imposed  is  only  disguised  indifference  to  our  success.  The  attempt  to 
fulfill  it  is  treachery  to  our  cause.  No  man  can  pretend  to  assimilate 
this  ex-parte  declaration  of  a Federal  provost-in arshal,  to  which  no  as- 
sent is  made  by  parade  or  act,  to  the  parole  of  honor  well  recognized 
in  military  usage,  the  observance  of  which  must  ever  be  regarded  as  a 
primary  duty.  Such  paroles  are  given  to  and  received  by  prisoners  on 
either  side  that  they  will  not  renew  their  participation  in  hostilities 
until  exchanged,  and  by  persons  sent  from  without  the  lines  that  they 
will  not  reveal  what  their  presence  has  enabled  them  to  see  or  hear. 

Neither  the  citizens  of  New  Orleans  nor  those  visitors  who  have  gone 
there  since  its  occupation  by  the  enemy  are  regarded  by  him  as  pris- 
oners of  war.  If  prisoners,  it  is  a manifest  duty  to  feed  them,  and  when 
permitted  to  depart  from  his  lines  he  would  require  of  them  a parole  to 
cease  hostilities  until  exchanged. 

THE  PASSPORTS  SHALL  NOT  BE  A SHELTER  FROM  DUTY. 

It  has  come  to  my  knowledge  that  some  persons  have  gone  to  New 
Orleans  voluntarily,  and  without  any  apparent  or  avowed  purpose  to 
accomplish  save  the  gratification  of  an  idle  curiosity,  and  have  since 
returned  with  some  of  these  passports.  When  required  to  perform 
militia  duty  afterward,  or  accosted  by  the  enrolling  officer  of  con- 
scripts, they  present  the  passport  in  which  a Federal  officer  has  as- 
sumed a promise  that  the  holder  will  not  countenance  or  aid  his  Govern- 
ment. If  any  citizen  of  this  State  confesses  to  such  a promise  he  is 
self-convicted  of  treason.  If  such  citizen  holds  himself  bound  not  to 
countenance  his  own  Government,  he  must  be  a traitor  to  it.  He  cannot 
ignore  his  own  Government.  If  lie  does  not  countenance  that,  he  must 
necessarily  recognize  the  pretensions  of  those  who  seek  to  crush  it;  nor 
can  he  separate  one  part  of  the  pretended  parole  from  another.  He 
cannot  claim  that  he  holds  himself  bound  by  the  stipulation  not  to  give 
aid  of  support  to  his  Government,  and  thus  avoid  military  duty,  with- 
out also  confessing  to  an  obligation  not  to  countenance  it,  which  is 
treason  unmasked. 

The  military  officers  will  be  charged  with  orders  on  this  subject,  tlie 
rigorous  execution  of  which  will  be  required.  The  Confederacy  and 
the  State  recognizes  but  two  classes— its  friends  and  its  foes. 

In  this  mighty  and  awful  struggle  for  our  sacred  rights,  for  the 
sanctity  of  our  homes,  for  the  enjoyment  of  liberty,  for  the  salvation  of 
our  country,  all  considerations  of  blood  or  friendship  must  give  way,  all 
apprehensions  for  the  safety  of  property  must  be  disregarded.  Obe- 
dience to  the  laws  and  acquiescence  in  the  policy  of  the  Government  will 
be  the  cheerful  homage  that  every  true  man  will  make.  Those  who  are 
not  true  must  be  deprived  of  the  power  to  do  harm. 

SPIES,  SALARIED  INFORMERS,  AND  TORIES. 

Not  the  least  evil  of  the  consequences  flowing  from  communication  by 
our  citizens  with  the  places  occupied  by  the  enemy  is  the  facility  it 
affords  to  spies,  who  traverse  the  country  through  the  negligence  ot 
officers  or  the  unsuspicious  security  of  the  people.  These  spies  com- 
municate with  salaried  informers,  who  are  to  be  found  in  some  locali- 
ties ready  to  serve  any  master  for  gold.  . 

The  world  has  never  furnished  an  instance  of  a people  renouncing 


Chap.  XXY1I.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  507 

their  government  and  establishing  a new  one  with  the  unanimity  which 
has  characterized  the  people  of  the  Confederate  States.  Not  even  the 
men  of ’76,  those  forefathers  whom  we  are  accustomed  to  think  of  as 
battling  with  undivided  hearts  for  a severance  from  the  Crown  and  the 
independence  of  their  nation,  approached  so  near  to  perfect  unity  as 
ourselves,  in  this  struggle  against  a foe  more  malignant  and  vindictive 
than  the  one  confronted  by  them.  In  the  revolt  of  the  Colonies  whole 
districts  were  inhabited  by  tories,  who  strove  to  throttle  the  infant  lib- 
erties of  their  countries  and  bind  her  by  fetters  to  the  throne.  In  our 
struggle  they  are  rarely  to  be  met,  but  though  very  few  in  number 
they  exist,  and  with  a hate  of  our  Government  not  exceeded  by  the 
hate  of  their  predecessors  to  the  Government  of  George  Washington. 
They  cau  be  tolerated  no  longer.  If  they  did  not  wish  to  live  under 
the  Confederate  Government  they  were  warned  by  its  President  a year 
ago  that  they  were  at  liberty  to  depart.  They  have  made  their  option. 
They  cannot  live  here  and  disregard  our  laws.  They  can  neither  hold 
property  nor  enjoy  liberty  if  they  disown  the  Government  which  pro- 
tects the  one  and  insures  the  other.  This  would  be  true  even  in  ordi- 
nary circumstances,  but  when  the  foe  who  aims  at  our  subjugation  is 
pressing  our  soil  short  must  be  the  shrift  of  those  who  stand  ready  to 
welcome  him. 

All  possible  vigilance  must  therefore  be  exercised  for  the  detection 
of  these  spies  and  salaried  informers  and  for  their  apprehension.  All 
citizens  should  report  to  the  nearest  authorities  the  names  and  the 
proof  or  the  grounds  of  suspicion.  Nor  must  less  rigor  be  enforced  in 
the  cases  of  those  persons  who  have  not  obeyed  the  President’s  warning. 
Strangers  must  give  a satisfactory  account  of  themselves ; the  doubtful 
must  be  closely  watched ; the  disloyal  must  be  imprisoned,  and  when 
found  guilty  of  treason  must  be  held  liable  to  the  penalty  due  to  that 
capital  crime. 

CONFEDERATE  NOTES  THE  CURRENCY  OF  OUR  COUNTRY. 

Manifold  are  the  inducements  presented  by  the  enemy  to  begin  trading 
with  him.  As  temptations  to  you  to  thus  violate  your  sacred  duty  as 
citizens  of  the  Confederate  States  he  offers  high  prices  for  your  products, 
which  he  promises  to  pay  in  gold  and  silver.  With  equal  assiduity  he 
is  engaged  in  efforts  to  depreciate  the  currency  of  your  country.  He 
forgets 'that  every  Confederate  bond  is  a record  and  a certificate  of  a 
sum  that  has  been  contributed  by  generous  and  confiding  citizens  to 
secure  the  independence  of  their  country  5 that  every  Confederate  note 
is  the  evidence  that  thus  much  of  the  wealth  of  the  people  has  been 
loaned  to  the  Government  to  help  it  in  its  struggle;  that  all  the  re- 
sources of  a republic  of  ten  millions  of  people,  occupying  a vast  terri- 
tory of  unsurpassed  productiveness,  are  pledged  for  their  redemption; 
that  they  constitute  a currency  that  measures  the  value  of  all  your 
property,  and  that  custom  and  loyalty  recognize  them  as  a legal  tender. 
They  are  received  and  paid  as  such  by  all  patriots.  He  wbo  refuses  to 
receive  them  in  the  payment  of  a debt  or  in  exchange  for  what  he  offers 
for  sale  does  a direct  injury  to  our  sacred  cause,  fans  the  latent  sparks 
of  treason,  and  gives  indirect  aid  and  comfort  to  the  ruthless  enemy 
who  invades  our  soil,  ravages  our  coasts,  insults  our  mothers,  wives,  and 
daughters,  and  tyrannizes  over  our  conquered  cities.  The  refusal  to 
take  Confederate  money,  if  general,  would  at  once  paralyze  our  Govern- 
ment and  put  the  Confederacy  in  imminent  peril.  Such  refusal  affords 
a presumption  of  disloyalty,  and  the  plea  of  ignorance  is  but  a slight 
palliation  of  the  grave  offense. 


508 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


RIVER  STEAMBOATS  AND  TRANSPORTS. 

The  enemy  needs  river  steamboats  to  transport  his  troops  on  their 
plundering  expeditions  along  the  Mississippi,  and  he  seizes  all  that  lie 
within  his  reach.  He  searches  for  them  in  bayous  seldom  navigated, 
and  by  the  aid  of  traitorous 'in formers  he  has  succeeded  in  capturing 
those  that  were  thought  to  be  effectually  hidden.  This  must  be  pre- 
vented at  any  cost.  As  no  concealment  can  be  depended  on,  the  boats  i 
must  be  destroyed  whenever  the  near  approach  of  the  enemy  shall  leave 
no  other  means  of  preventing  their  capture. 

SUPPLIES  OF  PROVISIONS  FOR  NEW  ORLEANS. 

The  delicate  question  of  permitting  New  Orleans  to  be  supplied  with 
provisions  while  in  the  occupation  of  the  enemy  was  presented  to  me 
for  decision  soon  after  my  return  from  Camp  Moore,  whither  I had  gone 
for  the  purpose  of  concerting  with  the  authorities  at  Richmond  plans 
for  the  future,  which  will  soon  be  made  manifest.  Much  was  and  is  to 
be  said  for  and  against  the  policy.  It  is  sufficient  for  my  present  pur- 
pose to  say  that  1 gave  permits  to  two  agents  of  the  committee  from 
the  city  to  carry  provisions  to  our  citizens  so  long  as  the  Federal 
general*  should  faithfully  observe  his  pledge  not  to  appropriate  any 
portion  of  the  provisions  to  other  uses  than  supplying  the  wants  of  our 
own  people.  I was  not  aware  of  the  danger  that  attended  such  a policy 
in  affording  advantages  for  the  establishment  of  an  intercourse  which 
the  previous  part  of  this  address  will  show  I could  not  approve.  Rut 
I did  not  expect  that  such  a concession,  made  in  tender  consideration 
of  the  pressing  wants  of  that  city,  would  be  abused  by  any  of  its  own 
citizens  to  the  extent  of  committing  an  act  little  short  of  affording  di- 
rect aid  to  the  enemy.  The  recent  act  of  the  cashier  of  the  Bank  of 
America  and  his  accomplices  has  convinced  me  that  any  departure 
from  the  rule  that  the  necessities  of  the  population  of  any  locality  must 
be  held  subservient  to  the  paramount  consideration  of  the  public  safety 
is  attended  with  peril,  and  that  in  my  desire  to  relieve  the  people  of 
New  Orleans  I was  subjecting  the  public  interests  to  danger  of  injury. 
No  boats  will  hereafter  be  permitted  to  go  to  New  Orleans  or  Baton 
Rouge  while  those  places  are  occupied  by  the  enemy,  unless,  after  the 
arrival  of  the  commanding  general,  Confederate  officers  should  be  de- 
tailed for  the  purpose  of  going  in  charge  of  them  in  the  manner  usually 
practiced  by  belligerents. 

CONTINUED  RESISTANCE  OUR  PARAMOUNT  DUTY. 

It  is  not  proper  for  obvious  reasons  to  state  here  in  detail  the  meas- 
ures I have  taken  and  the  plans  devised  for  the  defense  of  our  homes. 
The  loss  of  New  Orleans  and  the  opening  of  the  Mississippi,  which  will 
soon  follow,  has  greatly  increased  our  danger  and  deprived  us  of  many 
resources  for  defense.  With  less  means  we  have  more  to  do  than  before. 
Every  weapon  we  have  and  all  that  our  skillful  mechanics  can  make 
will  be  needed.  Every  able-bodied  citizen  must  hold  himself  in  readi- 
ness for  immediate  active  service.  Brave,  vigilant,  energetic  officers 
are  authorized*to  raise  bands  of  Partisan  Rangers.  Let  every  possible 
assistance  be  rendered  them  informing,  arming, equipping,  and  mount- 
ing their  companies  and  in  giving  them  support  and  information  when 
in  service.  Let  every  citizen  be  an  armed  sentinel  to  give  warning  ot 
any  approach  of  the  insolent  foe.  Let  all  our  river-banks  swarm  with 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


509 


armed  patriots  to  teach  the  hated  invader  that  the  rifle  will  be  his  only 
welcome  on  his  errands  of  plunder  and  destruction.  Wherever  he 
dares  to  raise  the  nated  emblem  of  tyranny  tear  it  down  and  rend  it 
in  tatters. 


MUMFORD  THE  MARTYR. 

The  noble  heroism  of  the  patriot  Mumford  has  placed  his  name  high 
on  the  list  of  our  martyred  sons.  When  the  Federal  Navy  reached 
New  Orleans  a squad  of  marines  were  sent  on  shore,  who  hoisted  their 
flag  on  the  Mint.  The  city  was  not  occupied  by  the  United  States 
troops  nor  had  they  reached  there.  The  place  was  not  in  their  posses- 
sion. William  B.  Mumford  pulled  down  the  detested  symbol  with  his 
own  hands,  and  for  that  was  condemned  to  be  hung  by  General  Butler 
after  his  arrival.  Brought  in  full  view  of  the  scaffold,  his  murderers 
hoped  to  appall  his  heroic  soul  by  the  exhibition  of  the  implements  of 
ignominious  death.  With  the  evidence  of  their  determination  to  con- 
summate this  brutal  purpose  before  his  eyes  they  offered  him  life  on  the 
condition  that  he  would  abjure  his  country  and  swear  allegiance  to  her 
foe.  He  spurned  the  offer.  Scorning  to  stain  his  soul  with  such  foul 
dishonor,  he  met  his  fate  courageously  and  transmitted  to  his  country- 
men afresh  example  of  what  men  will  do  and  dare  when  under  the  in- 
spiration of  fervid  patriotism.  I shall  not  forget  the  outrage  of  his 
murder  nor  shall  it  pass  unatoned. 

RULES  THAT  WILL  NOT  BE  RELAXED. 

I am  not  introducing  any  new  regulations  for  the  conduct  of  our  citi- 
zens, but  am  only  placing  before  them  those  that  every  nation  at  war 
recognizes  as  necessary  and  proper  to  be  enforced.  It  is  needless  there- 
fore to  say  that  they  will  not  be  relaxed.  On  the  contrary,  I am  but 
awaiting  the  assistance  and  presence  of  the  general  appointed  to  the 
department  to  inaugurate  the  most  effectual  method  for  their  enforce- 
ment. It  is  well  to  repeat  them. 

Trading  with  the  enemy  is  prohibited  under  all  circumstances. 

Traveling  to  and  from  New  Orleans  and  other  places  occupied  by 
the  enemy  is  forbidden.  All  passengers  will  be  arrested. 

Citizens  going  to  those  places  and  returning  with  the  enemy’s  usual 
passport  will  be  arrested. 

Conscripts  or  militia-men  having  in  possession  such  passports  and 
seeking  to  shun  duty  under  the  pretext  of  a parole  shall  b6  treated  as 
public  enemies.  No  such  papers  will  be  held  sufficient  excuse  for  inac- 
tion by  any  citizen. 

The  utmost  vigilance  must  be  used  by  officers  and  citizens  in  the  de- 
tection of  spies  and  salaried  informers  and  their  apprehension  promptly 
effected. 

Tories  must  suffer  the  fate  that  every  betrayer  of  his  country  de- 
serves. 

Confederate  notes  shall  be  received  and  used  as  the  currency  of  the 
country. 

River  steamboats  must  in  no  case  be  permitted  to  be  captured.  Burn 
them  when  they  cannot  be  saved. 

Provisions  may  be  conveyed  to  New  Orleans  only  in  charge  of  offi- 
cers and  under  the  precautionary  regulations  governing  communica- 
tion between  belligerents. 


510 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 
OUR  STRUGGLE  AND  ITS  SURE  RESULT. 

The  loss  of  New  Orleans,  bitter  humiliation  as  it  was  to  Louisian- 
ians, has  not  created  despondency  nor  shaken  our  abiding  faith  in  our 
success.  Not  to  the  eye  of  the  enthusiastic  patriot  alone,  who  might  i 
be  expected  to  color  events  with  his  hopes,  but  to  the  more  impassioned  | 
gaze  of  the  statesman  that  success  was  certain  from  the  beginning. 

It  is  only  the  timid,  the  unreflecting,  and  the  property-owner  who 
thinks  more  of  his  possessions  than  his  country  that  will  succumb  to 
the  depressing  influences  of  disaster.  The  great  heart  of  the  people  has 
swelled  with  more  intense  aspirations  for  the  cause  the  more  it  seemed 
to  totter.  Their  confidence  is  well  founded.  The  possession  by  the 
enemy  of  our  seaboard  and  main  water-courses  ought  to  have  been 
foreseen  by  us.  His  overwhelming  naval  force  necessarily  accom- 
plished the  same  results  attained  by  the  British  with  the  same  force  in 
their  war  of  subjugation.  The  final  result  will  be  the  same.  Let  us 
turn  unheeding  ears  to  the  rumors  of  foreign  intervention.  To  believe 
is  to  rely  on  them.  We  must  rely  only  on  ourselves.  Our  recognition 
as  a nation  is  one  of  those  certainties  of  the  future  which  nothing  but 
our  own  unfaithfulness  can  prevent.  We  must  not  look  around  for 
help  when  the  enemy  is  straight  before  us.  Help  yourselves.  It  is 
the  great  instrument  of  national  as  of  individual  success. 

s THO.  O.  MOORE, 

Governor  of  Louisiana. 

Opelousas,  June  18,  1862. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

AN  IMPORTANT  ORDER. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  La.,  Miss.,  and  E.  La., 

I.  | Jackson,  Miss.,  June  24, 1862. 

By  order  of  the  President  the  undersigned  assumes  command  of 
this  department.  It  is  recommended  to  all  persons  living  within  8 
miles  of  the  Mississippi  River  to  remove  their  families  and  servants  to 
the  interior,  as  it  is  the  intention  to  defend  the  department  to  the  last 

extremity.  EARL  VAN  DORK, 

Major-General. 


[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Special  Orders,  V Hdqrs.  Department  op  the  Gulp, 

No.  150.  ] New  Orleans,  June  30,  1802. 

Mrs.  Philips,  wife  of  Philip  Philips,  having  been  once  imprisoned  for 
her  traitorous  proclivities  and  acts  at  Washington  and  released  by  the 
clemency  of  the  Government,  and  having  been  found  training  her  chil- 
dren to  spit  upon  officers  of  the  United  States,  for  which  act  of  one  of 
those  children  both  her  husband  and  herself  apologized  and  were  again 
forgiven,  is  now  found  on  the  balcony  of  her  house  during  the  passage 
of  the  funeral  procession  of  Lieutenant  De  Kay  laughing  and  mocking 
at  his  remains,  and  upon  being  inquired  of  by  the  commanding  general 
if  this  fact  were  so  contemptuously  replied,  “I  was  in  good  spirits  that 
day 

It  is  therefore  ordered  that  she  be  not  “regarded  and  treated  as  a 
common  woman,”  of  whom  no  officer  or  soldier  is  bound  to  take  notice, 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


511 


but  as  an  uncommon,  bad,  and  dangerous  woman,  stirring  up  strife  and 
inciting  to  riot;  and  that  therefore  she  be  confined  at  Ship  Island,  in 
the  State  of  Mississippi,  within  proper  limits  there  until  further  orders, 
and  that  she  be  allowed  one  female  servant,  and  no  more,  if  she  so  choose ; 
that  one  of  the  houses  for  hospital  purposes  be  assigned  her  as  quar- 
ters and  a soldier’s  ration  each  day  served  out  to  her,  with  the  means  of 
cooking  the  same,  and  that  tio  verbal  or  written  communication  be  al- 
lowed with  her  except  through  this  office,  and  that  she  be  kept  in  close 
confinement  until  removed  to  Ship  Island. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler : 

R.  S.  DAYIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  151.  ' J June  30,  1862. 

Fidel  Keller  has  been  found  exhibiting  a human  skeleton  in  his  book- 
store window  in  a public  place  in  this  city,  labeled  “Chickahominy  ” in 
large  letters,  meaning  and  intending  that  the  bones  should  be  taken  by 
the  populace  to  be  the  bones  of  a Union  soldier  slain  in  that  battle,  in 
order  to  bring  the  authority  of  the  United  States  and  our  armies  into 
contempt,  and  for  that  purpose  had  stated  to  the  passers-by  that  the 
bones  were  those  of  a u Yankee  soldier;”  whereas,  in  truth  and  fact, 
they  were  the  bones  purchased  some  weeks  before  of  a Mexican  consul, 
to  whom  they  were  pledged  by  a medical  student : 

It  is  therefore  ordered  that  for  this  desecration  of  the  dead  he  be  con- 
fined at  Ship  Island  for  two  years  at  hard  labor,  and  that  he  be  allowed 
to  communicate  with  no  other  person  on  the  island  except  Mrs.  Philips, 
who  has  been  sent  there  for  a like  offense.  Any  written  messages  may 
be  sent  to  him  through  these  headquarters. 

Upon  the  order  being  read  to  him  the  said  Keller  requested  that  so 
much  of  it  as  associated  him  with  “that  woman”  might  be  recalled, 
which  request  was  therefore  reduced  to  writing  by  him  as  follows: 

New  Orleans,  June  30, 1862. 

Mr.  Keller  desires  that  that  part  of  the  sentence  which  refers  to  the  communication 
with  Mrs.  Philips  be  stricken  out,  as  he  does  not  wish  to  have  communication  with 
the  said  Mrs.  Philips. 

F.  KELLER. 

Witness : 

D.  Waters. 

Said  request  seeming  to  the  commanding  general  to  be  reasonable,  so 
much  of  said  order  is  revoked,  and  the  remainder  will  be  executed. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler: 

R.  S.  DAYIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure  No.  5.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  152.  j New  Orleans , June  30,  1862. 

John  W.  Andrews  exhibited  a cross,  the  emblem  of  the  suffering  of 
our  blessed  Saviour,  fashioned  for  a personal  ornament,  which  he  said  was 
made  from  the  bones  of  a u Yankee  soldier,”  and  having  shown  this  too 
without  rebuke  in  the  Louisiana  01ub?  which  claims  to  be  composed  of 
chivalric  gentlemen: 


512 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA., 


S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chap.  XXVII. 


It  is  therefore  ordered  that  for  this  desecration  of  the  dead  lie  he 
confined  at  hard  labor  for  two  years  on  the  fortifications  at  Ship  Island, 
and  that  he  be  allowed  no  verbal  or  written  communication  to  or  with 
any  one  except  through  these  headquarters. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler : 

It.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  arid  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure  No.  6.] 

New  Orleans,  June  23,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler: 

Sir:  The  undersigned  desire  to  resign  their  position  as  administrators 
of  the  Charity  Hospital  of  New  Orleans,  and  as  you  are  the  only  repre- 
sentative of  executive  authority  in  this  part  of  the  State  of  Louisiana  to 
whom  we  can  have  access  for  that  purpose  we  hereby  resign  the  trust 
above  referred  to,  and  request  that  our  resignation  may  be  considered 
as  taking  effect  immediately. 

Any  assistance  which  we  may  be  able  to  render  to  those  whom  you 
may  select  as  our  successors  will  be  cheerfully  afforded. 

Very  respectfully,  yours. 

»).  JN . LLA. 

OH.  JUMONVILLE. 

JNO.  C.  KICKS. 

W.  C.  BIBB. 


[Inclosure  No.  7.1 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  June  25,  1862. 

Messieurs:  Your  resignation  of  the  trust  of  administration  of  the 


1 oi  urn 

Charity  Hospital  cannot  be  accepted.  Youwil^continue  to  .exercise  j 


U n ant v uospitai  tauuui  uo  ^ 

your  functions  under  the  authority  of  the  United  States  until  farther 
orders  It  may  be  well  that  you  should  show  your  readiness  to  renounce 
official  relations  under  the  State  authority,  as  its  civil  affairs  are  at  pres- 
ent constituted;  but  yours  is  a charity  belonging  to  all  the  world  , a 
refuge  for  the  sick  of  all  nations.  Upon  such  institutions  the  United 
States  have  not  come  to  make  war,  but  rather  to  avert,  so  far  as  pos- 
sible the  consequences  of  war.  I can  therefore  assure  the  aid  and  pro- 
tection of  the  military  department  of  the  Government  in  every  possible 


wav  to  your  institution.  And  on  your  part,  gentlemen,  have  you  not 


wav  to  youi  lusutuuuu.  i \ ? «■ 

duties  to  do  to  your  fellow-citizens,  to  your  city,  to  your  State,  to  your 
country,  to  yourselves,  and  your  God  * Can  you,  as  Christian  men, 
lightly  lay  down  those  duties  and  turn  over  the  administration  of  this 
institution  to  untried  and  strange  hands,  by  whom  it  may  not  be  carried 
on  without  derangement,  contusion,  and  loss?  If  in  this  day  °f  t^- 
tress  of  the  city,  and  therefore  of  the  highest  usefulness  of  your  insti- 
tution, vou  desert  your  post  and  add  one  pang  to  the  sick  pillow  o 
suffering  invalid,  otherwise  to  be  avoided,  how  can  you  reconcile  it,  to 
your  consciences  ? Indeed,  from  the  tone  of  your  letter  in  offering  as- 
sistance to  those  who  should  take  your  places,  I do  not  understand  you 
as  desiring  to  lay  down  vour  trust,  but  rather  as  acting  m the  belief  that 
holding  it  may  render  you  in  some  way  obnoxious  to  military  orders . or 
to  the  acts  of  Congress  operating  upon  those  who  hold  8ta  e offices. 
Be  assured  that  in  this  you  are  mistaken  Administer  your  institution 
in  the  spirit  of  that  “Charity  which  suffereth  long  and  is  kind,  which 


Chap.  XXYn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  513 

seeketh  not  her  own,  is  not  easily  provoked,  thinketk  no  evil,  beareth 
all  things,  endureth  all  things,  and  never  faileth.” 

No  one  can  impute  such  action  to  you  as  evil.  I will  fill  the  vacancies 
in  your  board,  because  of  the  absence  and  death  of  some  of  its  mem- 
bers, with  such  capable  persons  as  may  be  qualified  to  aid  you,  and  if 
you  will  call  upon  the  medical  director,  Dr.  Bache,  he  will  consult  with 
you  as  to  the  best  means  of  carrying  on  your  work. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 

‘ Messieurs  J.  N.  Lea, 

Charles  Jumonville, 

John  C.  Ricks, 

William  O.  Bibb, 

Administrators  of  the  Charity  Hospital , Hew  Orleans , La. 


[Inclosure  No.  8.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  July  2,  1862. 

Hon.  Salmon  P.  Chase,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury: 

•Sir  : Will  be  found  inclosed  herewith  minutes  of  the  doings  of  a com- 
mission to  inquire  into  the  seizure  of  the  specie  of  Samuel  Smith  & Co. 
The  finding  is  that  the  case  should  be  sent  to  the  Department  for  in- 
vestigation. I should  have  sent  the  specie  ($50,000)  to  you,  but  this  re- 
markable state  of  things  exists : 

Two  paymasters  came  down  here  with  $285,000,  too  little  money  to 
pay  the  troops  of  this  department,  some  of  whom  have  not  been  paid 
for  six  months,  and  they  and  their  families  are  suffering  for  their  just 
dues,  which,  for  the  inefficiency  of  the  Pay  Department  in  not  making 
proper  requisitions,  has  not  been  furnished  them.  I shall  therefore 
appropriate  this  $50,000  toward  the  payment  of  the  troops  left  unpaid, 
one  of  which  is  a Western  regiment  not  paid  since  December,  and  one 
a Maine  one  not  paid  since  October. 

I shall  borrow  of  one  of  the  banks  here  $50,000  more  in  gold  (I  can- 
not get  Treasury  notes)  upon  my  own  credit  and  pledging  the  faith  of 
the  Government.  This  I have  promised  shall  be  returned  in  gold  in 
sixty  days,  with  interest  at  the  rate  of  6 per  cent,  per  annum,  and  trust 
that  pledge  will  be  made  good,  as  I shall  have  to  suffer  the  loss. 

I shall  also  obtain  from  Adams  & Co.  here  $50,000  in  Treasury  notes, 
or  thereabout,  and  by  leaving  the  allotments  unpaid  here,  but  to  be  paid 
in  New  Yoj?k,  I shall  be  able  to  have  the  payment  completed  ; but  this 
only  pays  the  March  and  April  payment,  leaving  two  months  still  due. 
May  I ask  therefore  that  my  draft  of  $25,000  in  favor  of  Adams  & 
Co.  be  honored,  and  a future  draft,  not  exceeding  in  all  $50,000,  be 
honored  at  sight?  so  that  Adams  & Co.  can  send  forward  remittances 
to  the  soldiers’  wives,  which  have  been  used  here  to  pay  others,  and  that 
$50,000  in  gold  be  sent  me  to  repay  that  which  I have  borrowed. 

I would  not  let  my  soldiers  go  longer  unpaid.  It  was  injuring  the 
credit  of  the  Government  with  our  foes  and  breeding  sickness  and  dis- 
content among  my  men. 

Trusting  that  this  action  will  meet  approval  in  the  emergency,  I am, 
most  truly,  yours, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major- General , Commanding. 


33  R R — VOL  XV 


514 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


[Inclosure  No.  9.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , July  2,- 1862. 

Mr.  Asa  S.  Blake, 

. Agent  Adams  Express  Company : 

Sir  : I hereby  order  yon  to  furnish  me  with  the  sum  of  $25,000  at  the 
earliest  possible  moment,  for  which  amount  I propose  to  give  you  a 
check  on  the  Assistant  Treasurer  of  the  United  States  at  Sew  York; 
this  in  accordance  with  the  terms  proposed  to  you  at  our  last  interview, 
and  I shall  hold  you  for  the  above  amount,  as  heretofore  stated. 
Bespectfully,  yours, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEB, 

Major-  General , Commanding, 

[Inclosur©  No.  10.] 


. • 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , July  3,  1862. 

W.  B.  Dinsmore,  Esq., 

President  Adams  Express  Company : 

Dear  Sir  : I have  this  day  compelled  Mr.  A.  S.  Blake,  your  ageflt, 
of  this  city,  to  furnish  me  with  the  sum  of  $25,000,  for  which  amount  I 
have  handed  him  a check  drawn  upon  the  Assistant  Treasurer  of  the 
United  States  at  New  York.  He  has  strongly  resisted  me  in  the  mat- 
ter, not  wishing  to  deviate  from  his  instructions  and  the  rules  of  yourjj 
company.  1 

Knowing,  however,  that  the  matter  as  proposed  and  insisted  upon  by: 
me  will  not  conflict  in  any  way  with  your  interest,  and  as  “necessity! 
knows  no  law”  I have  taken  such  steps  in  this  affair  as  the  occasion 
and  the  wants  of  my  troops  demand. 

Bespectfully, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEB, 
Major-  General , Commanding.  | 


Aboard  Flag-Boat, 

Above  Vicksburg , June  28,  1862.  | 

Major-General  Halleck: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  I have  passed  the  batteries ; 
and  am  now  above  Vicksburg  with  the  greatest  part  of  my  fleet.  1 
drove  the  men  from  the  batteries,  but  they  remained  quiet  till  we 
passed,  and  then  they  up  again  and  raked  us.  They  have  some  eight  i 
regiments,  or  10,000  troops,  to  replenish  the  batteries  and  prevent  us 
from  landing.  Brigadier-General  Williams  is  acting  in  concert  with 
me,  but  his  force  is  too  small  to  attempt  to  land  on  the  Vicksburg  side.  - 
but  he  is  cutting  a ditch  across  the  peninsula  to  change  the  course  oJ 
the  river.  My  orders,  general,  are  to  clear  the  river.  This  I find  im 
possible  without  your  assistance.  Can  you  aid  me  in  this  matter  tc( 
carry  out  the  peremptory  order  of  the  President  I * I am  satisfied  thal 
you  "will  act  for  the  best  advantage  of  the  Government  in  this  matter,  i 
and  shall  therefore  wait  with  great  anxiety  your  reply.  Lieutenant:  ] 

— — “?J 

* See  Halleck  to  Farragut,  July  3,  p.  517. 

-H 


OmAi.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  515 

Colonel  Ellet,  who  has  kindly  offered  to  co-operate  with  me  in  any  way 
in  his  power,  has  also  offered  to  send  this  dispatch  to  you. 

I remain,  with  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  G.  FARRAGUT, 

Flag-Officer , Commanding . 


Corinth,  Miss.,  June  28,  1862. 

(Received  July  1,  8.45  p.  m.) 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Your  telegram  of  23d  is  received.  Five  days  en  route . It  is  impos- 
sible  to  semi  to  Vicksburg  at  present,  but  I will  give  the  matter  my  full 
attention  as  soon  as  circumstances  will  permit. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General,. 


Steam-Ram  Switzerland, 

Above  Vicksburg , June  28  (via  Memphis , July  2),  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Since  my  dispatch  informing  you  that  I had  communicated  with  Flag- 
Officer  Farragut  I have  been  able  to  maintain  constant  intercourse 
with  his  fleet  through  the  active  energy  of  General  Williams,  who 
holds  possession  of  the  neck  of  land  between  the  two  fleets.  On  the 
26th  instant  I went  up  the  Yazoo  River  with  two  rams,  the  Monarch 
and  Lancaster,  the  latter  under  command  of  Medical  Cadet  Charles  R. 
Ellet.  I proceeded  about  65  miles  to  a point  where  the  river  is  ob- 
structed by  a raft  built  by  the  enemy  and  protected  by  four  guns  in 
battery.  My  object  was  to  capture  or  destroy  three  of  the  enemy’s  gun- 
boats that  I was  informed  were  lying  below  the  raft — the  Van  Dorn, 
Polk,  and  Livingston.  I ran  up  close  under  the  battery,  and  was  morti- 
fied to  see  the  enemy  set  fire  to  the  boats  and  start  them  adrift  down 
upon  us.  I was  obliged  to  leave  the  river  to  escape  the  conflagration. 
The  three  boat's  were  totally  destroyed.  The  enemy  did  not  fire  upon 
us.  It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I announce  the  arrival  of  Flag-Officer 
Farragut,  with  nine  vessels  of  his  fleet,  above  Vicksburg.  They  passed 
up  this  morning  about  5 o’clock  through  a severe  fire  from  some  30  or  40 
of  the  enemy’s  guns.  Their  loss  was,  as  far  as  reported,  4 men  killed 
and  13  wounded. 

Respectfully, 

ALFRED  W.  ELLET, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel, 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , J).  0.,  June  29,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding , &c .,  New  Orleans , La. : 

Sir:  My  last  communication  to  you,  intrusted  for  delivery  to  Cuth- 
bert  Bullitt,  esq.,  then  on  the  point  of  departing  for  Hew  Orleans,  bore 
date  on  the  23d  instant,  and  since  that  time  I have  received  your  .dis- 


516  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS. 


patches  of  the  17th,  18th,  and  19th  instant,  with  their  various  inclos- 
ur6S» 

The  suggestions  made  in  your  dispatch  of  the  10th  instant  as  to  a 
« qualified  amnesty  ” have  been  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  President, 
and  his  determination  shall  be  announced  to  you  with  the  least  possible 

delay.  , • _ . 

The  attention  of  the  President  has  also  been  drawn  to  your  Generali 
Orders,  No.  41,  requiring  certain  oaths  from  foreigners  resident  at  New  i 
Orleans,  as  well  as  to  your  correspondence  on  that  subject  with  the 
acting  British  consul,  and  two  communications  relative  thereto  have: 
been  received  from  the  State  Department,  of  which  copies  are  herewith 
transmitted  to  you  by  direction  of  the  President  for  your  information 

and  guidance.  „ „ , „ a. 

The  Department  has  likewise  received  from  the  Secretary  ot  State: 
the  inclosed  copy  of  certain  instructions  issued  by  him  to  the  Hon.; 
lieverdy  Johnson  to  examine  and  report  as  to  the  facts  touching  the 
sugars  claimed  by  certain  British,  Prench,  and  Grecian  merchants,  of 
which  mention  was  made  in  your  dispatch  of  the  17th  instant,  and  also 
a letter,  of  which  a copy  is  inclosed,  approving  your  course  with  reference] 
to  the  Mexican  consulate,  which  it  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  transmit 

The  views  expressed  in  your  dispatch  of  the  25th  May,  to  which  you  I 
again  refer  in  that  of  the  18th  instant,  as  to  the  policy  to  be  pursued  in 
regard  to  persons  held  under  the  laws  of  Louisiana  to  labor  or  service, 
but  whom  the  fortunes  of  war  have  placed  within  your  command,  have 
strongly  impressed  me.  It  has  not  yet,  however,  been  deemed  necessary  ^ 
or  wise  to  fetter  your  judgment  by  any  specific  instructions  in  this  t 

regard.  , , . . j 

Your  last  dispatch  upon  this  subject  and  the  accompanying  report  ot 
General  Phelps,  which  were  not  received  until  the  28th  instant,  shall  be 
laid  before  the  President.  Pending  his  consideration,  and  any  action- 
which  he  may  see  fit  to  take  thereon,  it  is  confidently  hoped  that,  exer 
cising  your  accustomed  skill  and  discretion,  you  will  so  deal  with  this! 
question  as  to  avoid  any  serious  embarrassment  to  the  Government  oi  l 
any  difficulty  with  General  Phelps. 

Your  cordial  commendation  of  his  skill,  experience,  and  courage 
renders  the  Department  very  unwilling  to  forego  the  aid- of  his  services! 

The  news  of  the  brilliant  achievement  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Kimball  \ 
of  the  Twelfth  Maine  Volunteers,  and  the  brave  men  under  his  coin  ) 
mand,  at  Manchac  Pass  was  very  gratifying  to  the  Department,  and  i 
entirely  approves  your  action  in  allowing  the  regiment  to  retain  th< 
colors  which  they  had  so  gallantly  taken  Irom  the  enemy. 

Information  has  reached  the  Department  that  General  McClellan  ha 
met  with  a serious  reverse  in  front  of  Richmond.  Though  the  detail 
have  not  transpired,  it  is  quite  certain  that  the  published  accounts  ar 
very  much  exaggerated.  The  army  has  changed  its  base,  with  com 
paratively  little  loss,  to  a much  stronger  position  (Turkey  Point)  on  th 
James  River,  and  will,  it  is  confidently  expected,  very  soon  march  oi 
and  into  Richmond.  ...  . . 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

Secretary  of  War. 


TTune  30, 1862.— For  Butler  to  the  French  consul,  see  Series  IE 
Vol.  II.] 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


517 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  July  2, 1S62. 
Hon.  Gideon  Welles,  * 

Secretary  of  Navy : 

I have  arrived  at  Island  No.  76  and  am  in  communication  with  Flag- 
Officer  Farragut. 

C.  H.  DAYIS, 

Flag-Officer . 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  47.  ( New  Orleans , July  2,  1862. 

Commanding  officers  of  posts  within  this  department  will  only  order 
the  sales  or  free  distribution  of  army  provisions  in  extreme  cases  of 
destitution  to  prevent  starvation,  and  then  only  in  small  quantities,  the 
order  stating  the  amount  ordered  to  be  sold  or  distributed.  He  will 
immediately  report  the  order,  by  copy,  to  the  headquarters  of  the  de- 
partment, and  all  distributions  now  being  made  will  on  the  receipt  of 
this  order  be  so  reported. 

The  commissaries  making  these  distributions  will  report  weekly  to 
their  commanding  officers  the  amount  of  stores  issued  and  the  number 
of  persons  issued  to,  with  an  account  of  sales,  a duplicate  of  which  will 
be  sent  to  the  chief  commissary  of  the  department. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

B.  S.  DAYIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Corinth,  July  3, 1862. 


Flag-Officer  Farragut,  . ‘ 

Commanding  U.  S.  Flotilla  in  the  Mississippi  : 

The  scattered  and  weakened  condition  of  my  forces  renders  it  impos- 
sible for  me,  at  the  present  moment  to  detach  any  to  co-operate  with 
you  on  Yicksburg.*  Probably  I shall  be  able  to  do  so  as  soon  as  I can 
get  my  troops  more  concentrated.  This  may  delay  the  clearing  of  the 
river,  but  its  accomplishment  will  be  certain  in  a few  weeks.  Allow 
me  to  congratulate  you  on  your  great  successes. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Navy  Department,  July  5, 1862. 

Senior  Naval  Officer,  Cairo , III. : « 

• Please  forward  the  following  by  special  boat : 

Flag-Officer  D.  G.  Farragut,  off  Vickslwg : 

As  soon  as  you  can  spare  them  from  your  operations  at  Vicksburg  send  twelve 
mortar-boats  and  the  Octorara,  with  Commander  Porter,  to  Hampton  Roads.  Retain 
the  others  under  Commander  Renshaw.  Let  there  he  no  delay.  Answer  by  tele- 
graph. 

GIDEON  WELLES. 


[July  7,  1862. — For  Butler  to  Coppell,  acting  British  consul  see 
Series  III,  Vol.  II.] 


* See  Farragut  to  Halleck,  June  28,  p.  514. 


518 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS., 


General  Orders,  ) 
Ro.  48.  f 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , July  9,  1862. 

All  dividends,  interest,  coupons,  stock  certificates,  and  accrued  in- 
terest due  any  or  payable  by  any  incorporated  or  joint-stock  company  j 
to  any  citizen  of  the  United  States  £ and  any  notes,  dues,  claims,  and  , 
accounts  of  any  such  citizen  due  from  any  such  company  or  any  pri- 
vate person  or  company  within  this  department,  which  have  heretofore  j 
been  retained  under  any  supposed  order,  authority,  act  of  sequestration, 
garnishee  process,  or  in  any  way  emanating  under  the  supposed  Confed- 
erate  States  or  the  State  of  Louisiana  since  the  fraudulent  Qrdinance  of 
secession,  are  hereby  ordered  to  be  paid  and  delivered  respectively  to 
the  lawful  owners  thereof  or  their  duly  authorized  agents. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler  : 

R.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

, New  Orleans , July  10,  1862. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  dispatches  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  June  10  and  23,  received  on  the  7th  of  July.  Being  the  first 
that  came  they  were  very  grateful,  and  the  approval  of  the  Department 
of  my  acts  was  most  sustaining.  I have  forwarded  the  commission  and 
accompanying  papers  to  Colonel  Shepley . Inclosed  please  find  report 
of  General  Williams  of  his  operations  in  conjunction  with  the  fleet  up 
the  river,  with  the  sketches,  which  show  what  has  been  done.*  Every- 
thing is  quiet  here.  . , ^ ^ i 

We  have  rumors  of  attempts  to  be  made  upon  Baton  Rouge,  and 
I have  strengthened  the  force  there  by  the  addition  of  a regiment  and 
battery,  so  that  they  have  now  there  three  regiments,  twelve  pieces  ot 
artillery,  and  a company  of  cavalry.  This  large  force  is  sent  there 
rather  to  relieve  the  anxieties  of  the  inhabitants  than  in  any  belie! 
that  it  is  necessary  5 besides,  it  will  be  a good  point  to  move  from,  when 
necessary,  toward  the  interidr.  _ • . , 

One  Castle,  a planter,  whose  property  we  destroyed  and  whose  hab- 
itation we  rooted  out  because  he  was  the  leader  of  a band  of  guerrillas, 
and  which  by  his  order  fired  into  an  unarmed  boat  of  Flag-Officer  Far- 
ragut,  has  come  in  and  voluntarily  given  himself  up  and  asked  only 
amnesty  for  his  life.  He  is  in  confinement.  . 

I desire  to  renew  my  request  for  an  experienced  brigadier-general, 
such  as  Lieutenant  Weitzel  would  be  if  he  held  that  commission. 

I am,  most  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ t BERJ.  F.  BUTLER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


[July  11,  1862.— For  Butler  to  Secretary  of  State,  see  Series  III, 
Vol.  II.] 


Major-General  Halleck  : 

The  Secretary  of  the  Ravy  desires  to 


War  Department, 

July  14,  1862. 

know  whether  you  have  or 


See  p.  26. 


chap,  xxvn.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


519 


intend  to  have  any  land  force  to  co-operate  in  the  operations  at  Yicks- 
burg.  Please  inform  me  immediately,  inasmuch  as  orders  he  intends  to 

give  will  depend  on  your  answer.  EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War . 


Corinth,  Miss.,  July  15, 1862 — 10.40  a.  m. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

I cannot  at  present  give  Commodore 
burg.  I am  sending  re-enforcements 
and  to  General  Buell  in  Tennessee  and  KenWcty.  HALLE0K) 

Major-General . 


Farragut  any  aid  against  Yicks- 
to  General  Curtis  in  Arkansas 


Hdqrs.  First  Dist.,  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  East  La., 

Tangipahoa,  La.,  July  15, 18o2. 


Major-General  Butler,  t 

■ Commanding  United  States  Forces,  New  Orleans,  La. : 


General:  I have  received  petitions  from  officers  of  the  First  Regi- 
ment Louisiana  Partisan  Rangers  touching  the  case  of  Henry  Castle, 
jr,  a private  of  Company  H,  of  that  regiment  and  also  an  application 


respecting  Thomas  G Pennington,  a private  of  Capt,  Wilson  Tate’s 
® „ ,,  • 4-  AvnprliAnt,  to  rp.miest 


company,  of  the  sanm  regiment,  and  T deem  it  expedient  to  request 
vour  early  consideration  of  the  subject.  , , 

It  appears  that  Private  Castle  was  captured  by  a detachment  of  Fed. 

eral  troops  in  the  vicinity  of  Baton  Rouge  on  or  ^ivof 

present  month  and  Private  Pennington  on  or  about  the  28th  day  ot 
June:  that  they  were  taken  to  New  Orleans,  and  are  held  either  there 
or  at  one  of  the  forts  in  the  vicinity  in  close  confinement,  with  the 
threat  that  they  are  to  be  tried  and  executed  as  members  of  a military 
organization  not  sanctioned  by  the  laws  of  civilized  warfare.  It  is  to 
be  observed  that  the  first  great  law  of  nature,  the  right  of  self-defense, 
*is  inherent  in  communities  as  well  as  individuals.  No  law  condemns  the 
individual  who  slays  the  robber  or  the  assassin,  and  no  just  law  can  con- 
demn a community  for  using  all  its  power  to  resist  the  invader  and 
drive  him  from  their  soil.  The  exercise  of  this  right,  so  universally 
recognized,  becomes  an  imperative  duty  when  the  mvadnr,  as  has  been 
the  case  with  the  Federal  troops  in  this  district,  disregards  those  rules 
of  warfare  recognized  and  respected  by  all  civilized  nations  and  adopts 
that  code  which  has  heretofore  been  confined  to  the  rudest  savages. 

The  proof  of  this  is  unfortunately  too  abundant  in  the  vicinity  of 
Baton  Bouge.  It  is  attested  by  helpless  women  and  children  flying 
from  their  burning  homes  ^ by  the  desolation  ot  plantations  5 by  the 
plunder  of  private  property,  and  the  wanton  destruction  of  growing 
crops.  Such  acts  are  crimes  against  humanity,  and  justify  all  men  in 
taking  up  arms  against  their  perpetrators. 

The  independence  of  nations  has  rarely  been  achieved  by  regular 
armies.  Our  own  Revolution— that  Revolution  which  successfully  es- 
tablished the  great  principle  for  which  the  Confederate  States  are  now 
contending,  that  “all  governments  derive  their  just  powers  from  the 
consent  of  the  governed”— was  mainly  fought  out  by  men  who  left  the 


520 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYTL 

plow  at  the  news  of  the  enemy’s  approach  and  returned  to  it  when  he 
had  been  driven  back.  It  may  be  conceded  that  in  Europe,  where  the 
governments  mainly  rely  upon  large  standing  armies,  which  are  as 
much  as  possible  disconnected  with  the  people,  and  where  the  policy 
is  to  prevent  the  people  from  bearing  arms  under  almost  any  circum- 
stances, some  very  absurd  refinements  on  this  subject  have  been  as- 
serted and  to  some  extent  tolerated.  But  such  doctrines  have  never 
been  recognized  on  this  continent.  The  United  States  especially  has 
always  repudiated  them. 

The  various  revolutions  which  have  agitated  the  Central  and  South 
American  States  have  been  conducted  by  the  people,  frequently  with- 
out leaders  other  than  those  chosen  upon  the  spur  of  the  occasion  to 
direct  a single  enterprise.  And,  to  recur  to  the  Revolution  of  our  fore- 
fathers, the  history  of  that  immortal  struggle  abounds  with  instances 
where  the  hardv  yeomen,  as  at  Lexington  and  Bunker  Hill,  were,  like 
the  clansmen  of  Roderick  Dhu,  called  by  a concerted  signal  to  some 
“Lanrick  Mead,”  and  there  selected  their  officers  upon  the  very  field  of 

battle.  . l 

But  whatever  difference  of  opinion  may  exist  on  this  point,  it  has 
never  been  claimed,  even  by  the  most  stringent  advocates  of  legitimacy, 
that  one  belligerent  has  any  right  to  complain  of  the  name  or  form  which 
the  other  may  choose  to  give  to  its  military  organizations.  The  right 
to  adapt  these  to  the  peculiar  service  required  has  been  universally 
conceded.  So  far  indeed  has  this  practice  been  carried  in  naval  war- 
fare that  privateersmen,  “the  militia  of  the  seas,”  with  charters  as 
broad  as  the  ocean’s  bounds,  are  recognized  as  legitimate  among  bel- 
ligerents. And  now  indeed  the  extraordinary  spectacle  is  presented 
to  the  contemplation  of  civilized  man,  in  this  boasted  nineteenth  cen- 
tury of  the  Christian  world,  of  a nation  claiming  to  be  civilized,  in 
violation  of  its  constitutional  obligations,  inaugurating  deliberately 
servile  war,  by  stimulating  the  half- civilized  African  to  raise  his  hand 
against  his  master  and  benefactor,  and  thus  make  war  upon  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  race — war  on  human  nature. 

This  with  the  Federal  Government  is  legitimate  warfare;  but  the 
defense  of  their  firesides  by  Southern  citizens  is  treason  and  murder.  In 
military  organizations  the  Polish  Lancers,  French  Zouaves,  and  British 
Corps  of  Scouts  and  Guides  in  the  late  East  Indian  war  are  cases  in 
point.  The  Confederate  States  claim  and  have  exercised  this  undoubted 
right.  The  formation  of  companies,  battalions,  and  regiments  of  Parti- 
san Rangers  has  been  specially  authorized  by  an  act  of  Congress.  The 
officers  of  this  corps  are  commissioned;  the  men  are  regularly  mustered 
into  service,  receive  pay,  rations,  and  equipment  from  the  Government, 
and  are  entitled  to  the  same  privileges  and  governed  by  the  same  reg- 
ulations as  all  other  troops  in  the  Confederate  service.  It  is  not  per- 
ceived therefore  what  pretext  can  be  offered  by  the  enemy  for  subject- 
ing the  members  of  this  corps  to  a different  treatment  from  that  ex- 
tended to  other  prisoners  of  war.  Certainly  no  such  distinction  can  be 
recognized  or  tolerated  by  us.  The  Government,  having  called  these 
• men  into  service,  is  bound  by  every  obligation  of  good  faith  to  protect 
them  to  the  extent  of  its  power,  and  if  found  necessary  for  their  pro- 
tection, as  well  as  for  that  of  numerous  unarmed  citizens  who  have  been 
subjected  to  outrages  unparalleled  in  civilized  warfare,  will  not  hesi- 
tate, I feel  constrained  to  declare,  to  resort  to  retaliation,  even  to  the 
extent  sanctioned  by  the  Jewish  law,  “an  eye  for  an  eye,  a tooth  for  a 
tooth,  and  life  for  life.” 


OHAP.XXYn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  521 

I await  an  answer,  containing  an  explicit  declaration  of  the  inten- 
tions of  the  United  States  Government  respecting  these  prisoners. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding  District, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  July  16,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : After  consultation  with  Mr.  Johnson,  whose  official  position  and 
past  services  to  the  country  I thought  I had  a right  to  call  for  advices 
and  with  the  wish  of  Governor  Shepley,  I have  thought  it  best  that 
he  should  go  to  Washington  to  represent  the  needs  of  this  State  gov- 
ernment, as  well  as  the  conditions  of  affairs  in  this  department. 

I look  upon  the  questions  to  be  presented  by  Governor  Shepley,  upon 
which  he  is  fully  advised  of  my  opinions,  to  be  the  turning  points  of  the 
war  in  the  Southwest.  Certain  it  is  that  some  determination  of  these 
questions  must  be  reached  or  they  will  determine  themselves  in  disas- 
ter and  ruin  to  the  State  of  Louisiana. 

In  the  recruiting  I am  succeeding  very  well  indeed ; and  while  these 
troops  would  be  proper  to  lead  elsewhere  upon  the  Southern  coast,  it 
would  be  a doubtful  experiment  to  rely  upon  them  solely  here. 

I think  the  needs  of  the  service  are  such  that  I have  sent  an,  order  to 
recall  General  Williams  from  Vicksburg  in  expectation  of  the  imme- 
diate advance  upon  that  place  by  General  Grant. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER. 


[July  16-29,  1862. — For  correspondence  between  General  Butler  and 
Hon.  Reverdy  Johnson,  special  commissioner  from  the  Department  of 
State,  see  Series  III,  Vol.  II.] 


United  States  Steam-Ram  Switzerland, 
Above  Vicksburg,  July  13  (via  Memphis,  July  16),  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  received  from  Quartermaster  Brooks  ten  brass  field  pieces 
to  add  to  the  security  of  my  boat  from  the  attacks  of  the  guerrilla  bands 
that  are  now  infesting  the  banks  of  the  river  and  to  enable  us  to  in- 
flict punishment  on  such  bands  when  they  do  attack  us.  I find  it  nec- 
essary to  enable,  me  to  man  these  guns  to  ask  for  authority  to  increase 
my  military  force  75  men,  and,  if  consistent  with  the  service,  would  wish 
to  obtain  these  men  from  the  Seventh  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteer  In- 
fantry. At  present  I am  keeping  my  force  occupied  by  occasionally 
sending  a boat  to  Memphis  at  the  request  of  Flag-Officers  Farragut 
and  Davis,  and  by  reconnaissances  up  the  Yazoo  River.  Yesterday  I 
found  our  guns  of  great  service  upon  one  of  these  trips.  I was  attacked 
and  fired  into  by  various  bands,  who  scattered  and  fled  before  each 


522  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 

well-directed  discharge  of  grape.  The  Yazoo  River  is  lined  with  these 
ruffian  bands  and  filled  with  valuable  steamers  owned  by  the  Southern 
Confederacy.  I have  but  just  recovered  from  a severe  spell  of  illness 
that  has  confined  me  to  my  bed  for  six  days.  I have  offered  myself  and 
all  my  force  both  to  Flag-Officers  Farragut  and  Davis,  to  assist  m any 
enterprise  they  may  wish  to  attempt.  I shall  of  course  promptly  re- 
spoud  to  any  call  from  either  of  them.  alfred  w ellet> 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Fleet. 


Department  of  State, 

Washington,  July  18,  J.862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  * With  reference  to  the  communications  which  have  from  time  to 
time  been  addressed  to  you  by  this  Department,  suggesting  a military 
occupation  of  Texas  in  the  neighborhood  of  Brownsville,  I have  the 
honor  to  inclose  extracts  from  a private  letter  of  Charles  Hunter,  com- 
manding the  United  States  steamer  Montgomery,  blockading  the  mouth 
of  the  Rio  Grande,  to  the  chief  clerk  of  the  Department  of  State. 

1 have  the  houor  to  be,  your  obedieut^ervaut,  ^ gE-wARD. 


[In  closure.] 

United  States  Steamer  Montgomery, 

Off  the  Bio  Grande , June  16,  1862. 

The  poor  refugees  still  come  to  us,  one,  two,  or  three  each  day.  They 
flee  for  their  lives,  leaving  everything.  One  man  came  on  board  yes- 
terday who  was  pursued.  He  plunged  in  and  swain  across  the  Rio 
Grande,  but  was  shot  at  several  times.  Another  belonging  to  the 
Texan  army  got  leave  for  six  days  to  go  into  Mexico  to  collect  a 
debt  He  showed  me  his  pass.  I said  to  him,  “Well,  your  time  is  up 
in  two  days  and  I suppose  that  you  will  wish  to  go  back,  as  you  must 
have  come  merely  to  pay  us  a visit.”  He  looked  up  at  our  flag  and 
with  teTs  in  his  eyei  said,  “Oh!  no,  sir ; thank  God,  I am  under  the 
dear  old  flag  again.”  We  have  about  40  on  board  now,  and  they  are  as 
happy  as  they  can  be.  Between  70  and  80  others  left  in  the  Kensmg- 
ton.  * * * We  have  on  board  three  Union  gentlemen  from  Texas, 

men  of  influence;  one  is  a judge,  another  a celebrated  lawyer,  and  the 
other  an  influential  politician.  They  are  going  to  Washington  to  see 
the  President  and  suggest  the  immediate  occupation  ot  iexas. 

There  is  a large  number  of  Union  men  in  the  State  who  only  want  arms 
and  protection  to  organize  themselves  and  drive  the  secessionists  out. 


Headquabtebs  Fokt  Saint  Philip, 

July  18,  1862. 

Capt.  B.  S.  Davis, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Captain:  In  obedience  to  an  order  of  General  Butler  I have  the 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


523 


honor  to  forward  a report  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hesseltine  upon  the 
present  condition  of  Fort  Jackson,  that  officer  being  now  in  command 
there,  Major  Grover  being  in  command  of  this  post  at  present. 

The  burning  of  the  citadel  and  the  demolition  of  its  walls,  which  are 
at  present  in  progress,  give  the  fort  an  appearance  of  confusion  and 
ruin  that  does  not  really  exist.  I am  surprised  to  notice  the  small  amount 
of  actual  damage  that  the  works  have  sustained  by  the  severe  bom- 
bardment to  which  it  has  been  exposed. 

The  ramparts  are  encumbered  in  many  places  with  rubbish  which 
may  easily  be  cleared  away,  and  the  parapets  are  sotnewhat  injured 
by  neglect  and  abrasion  in  several  places.  The  scarp-walls  have  been 
slightly  injured  in  a few  places  by  shot  and  shell,  but  no  material 
damage  has  been  sustained  by  them.  The  revetment  of  the  parapets 
is  of  brick  masonry  and  requires  some  repairs,  as  it  has  been  neglected 
for  a long  time  and  was  not  originally  protected  at  top  from  the  weather 
by  a water-proof.  Five  guns  only  were  dismounted  during  the  bombard- 
ment, and  these  may  easily  be  put  in  position,  as  the  injury  is  to  the 
carriages  only,  and  that  only  trifling  in  amount.  In  a word,  the  prin- 
cipal difficulty  with  the  fort  is  slovenliness,  as  with  Fort  Saint  Philip, 
apparently  of  long  standing,  and  this  I am  endeavoring  to  correct  as 
speedily  as  possible. 

I have  not  yet  been  able  to  instruct % the  men  in  the  manual  of  the 
guns,  as  all  our  force  is  required  for  guard  duty. 

If  any  exigency  should  arise  to  require  it  the  entire  armament  of, 
the  fort  might  be  put  into  serviceable  condition  in  two  or  three  weeks. 
The  casemate  guns  are  all  in  good  condition,  and  may  be  made  ready 
for  use  in  a few. hours.  -Indeed  a full  garrison  of  instructed  artillerists 
could  make  a very  good  fight  in  the  fort  to  morrow,  though  the  guns 
should  first  be  overhauled  and  cleaned  and  the  elevating  screws  and 
journals  lubricated.  Beyond  that  little  is  absolutely  necessary  by  way 
of  preparation,  except  clearing  away  the  rubbish  immediately  about  the 
guns. 

The  work  now  in  progress  in  the  fort  (the  masonry)  seems  to  be  going 
on  without  much  method  and  under  no  sufficient  direction.  I have  not 
yet  had  time  to  examine  the  matter  properly,  and  am  not  informed  as 
to  the  amount  of  supervision  and  direction  I am  expected  or  desired  to 
exercise  in  that  matter.  So  far  my  time  has  been  mainly  taken  up  by 
incessant  attention  to  sanitary  matters,  as  I found  the  forts  in  a shock- 
ing condition  of  neglect  and  dirt. 

Very  respectfully, 


NEAL  DOW, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


• [Inclosure.] 

Headquarters, 

Fort  Jackson , July  17,  1862. 

Frederic  Speed, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

In  compliance  with  the  order  of  General  Neal  Dow  I respectfully 
submit,  through  you,  the  following  report  of  the  present  state  of  defense 
of  Fort  Jackson  and  what  remains  to  be  done: 

Casemates  Nos.  1 and  4,  in  the  east  front  curtain,  I find  seriously 
damaged  by  the  force  of  heavy  shells  breaking  through  the  parapet, 
No.  4 having  been  struck  four  times  and  badly  shattered.  Besides  this,, 
a bad  fissure  extends  across  all  the  arches,  which  need  to  be  laid  open 
and  keyed  up. 


524  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

In  the  northwest  front  curtain  casemates  Hos.  3,  4,  5,  and  7,  are  con- 
siderably weakened  in  the  arches  by  the  same  cause.  These  two  cur- 
tains mount  fourteen  24-pounder  smooth-bore  guns,  all  serviceable.  The 
chassis  are  good,  but  ten  of  the  carriages  are  iron,  of  a pattern  not  now 
used  in  the  United  States  service. 

I find  all  the  guns  of  the  flank  defense,  ten  24-pounder  howitzers,  m 
good  order,  but  the  two  casemates  of  the  north  bastion  are  nearly,  if 
not  quite,  unserviceable;  also  one  casemate  in  the  northwest  bastion  is 
much  damaged,  the  front  wall  being  badly  cracked.  All  the  other 
casemates  in  the  remaining  bastion,  as  well  as  the  front  sally-port,  are 
slightly  injured,*  each  being  struck  at  least. twice  by  the  shells. 

The  outer  barbette  wall  of  the  north,  west,  and  east  bastions  is 
broken  in  many  places,  but  not  seriously  damaged.  The  north  bas- 
tion mounts,  en  barbette , two  8-inch  columbfads,  one  10-inch  siege  mor- 
tar; the  east  bastion  mounts  one  8-inch  columbiad,  two  8-inch  siege 

mortars  > 

The  barbette  scarp- wall  is  badly  torn  down;  more  than  one-half  will 
have  to  be  rebuilt.  The  counter-scarp  wall  is  also  very  badly  damaged, 
and  full  two-thirds  must  be  rebuilt. 

The  water  battery  mounts  one  10-inch  columbiad,  two  8-inch  colum- 
biads,  two  32-pounder  rifled  guns,  one  10-inch  siege  coast  mortar.  This 
battery  is  greatly  in  want  of  repair  and  nearly  unserviceable.  The  guns 
were  mounted  when  the  masonry  was  too  green,  the  traverse  circles  in 
consequence  becoming  very  uneven.  In  my  judgment  these  guns  should 
be  dismounted  and  brought  within  the  fort. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  guns  mounted  en  barbette , all  service- 
able: Two  10-inch  coiumbiads;  one  42  pounder  rifled  Parrott  gun  ; six 
42-pounder  smooth-bore  guns,  old  United  States  Havy  pattern;  four- 
teen 32-pounder  smooth-bore  guns;  ten  24-pounder  smooth-bore  guns; 
two  siege  howitzers,  unserviceable;  two  32-pounder  smooth-bore  guns  ; 
two  24-pounder  smooth-bore  guns. 

The  magazines  are  all  good.  I send  inclosed  an  inventory  of  all 
ordnance  stores  within  the  fort.  The  powder  is  all  in  cartridges  and 
headed  in  barrels;  it  cannot  be  overhauled  and  aired  as  it  should  be  tor 
want  of  copper  implements.  I understand  a requisition  was  made  some 
time  since  for  them,  but  it  has  not  yet  been  filled. 

I have  no  experience  in  fortifications,  but  in  my  judgment  this  tort  is 
in  a very  good  state  of  defense,  and  this  is  daily  growing  better.  I 
have  no  doubt  that  it  can  endure  a bombardment  of  equal  severity  and 
three  times  the  length  of  the  one  it  has  just  passed  through.  To  put  it 
in  a thorough  state  of  defense,  the  casemates,  bastion,  scarp  and  counter- 
scarp walls,  which  I have  spoken  of  as  injured,  should  be  thoroughly 
repaired.  This  work  is  now  going  on;  a number  of  the  casemates  which 
were  injured  are  already  repaired.  Sufficient  brick  for  the  repair  of 
the  whole  fort  can  be  obtained  from  the  citadel,  which  is  being  demol- 
ished. With  the  present  force  of  9 masons  and  5 carpenters,  4 black- 
smiths, 69  laborers,  it  will  require,  I think,  from  three  to  four  months 
to  put  it  in  a thorough  state  of  defense. 

It  will  be  very  apparent,  in  looking  over  the  list  ot  ordnance  which 
I have  given,  that  most  of  the  guns  are  of  too  short  range  to  oppose 
modern  artillery. 

To  provide  for  an  attack  from  below  the  trees  which  now  obstruct 
the  range  of  vessels  lying  around  the  bend  of  the  river  should  be  cut 
down,  providing  more  rifled  guns  were  obtained  and  mounted. 

This  report  has  been  made  after  an  acquaintance  of  only  twenty-tour 
hours  with  the  fort,  and  I think  of  nothing  further  which  “remains  to 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  525 

be  done”  for  the  defense  of  the  fort  but  the  thorough  drill  in  artillery 
of  the  infantry  force  now  here. 

Respectfully,  yours,  FRANK  S.  HESSELTINE, 

Lieut . Col.  Thirteenth  Me.  Regt.,  Comdg.  Fort  Jackson. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La July  19,  1862. 

Editor  of  the  New  Orleans  Daily  Picayune : 

Sir:  As  an  editoral  in  your  issue  of  this  morning,  entitled  “A  warning 
to  intermeddlers,”  contains  several  misstatements  of  facts,  I am  directed 
by  the  major-general  commanding  to  make  the  following  statement  in 
regard  to  the  case,  with  the  request  that  you  will  give  it  publicity  in 

your  columns : * ^ „ 

The  young  slave  girl  indicated  was  enticed  into  the  quarters  ol  an 
United  States  officer  in  direct  violation  of  a general  order  prohibiting 
such  conduct,  and  evidently  for  improper  purposes.  An  attempt  was 
afterward  made  by  another  colored  woman  of  questionable  character  to 
conceal  the  young  girl.  Subsequently  the  mistress  called  upon  the 
general,  and  instead,  as  you  say,  of  her  experiencing  some  difficulty  in 
obtaining  admittance  to  him,  he  went  out  to  her  carriage  to  see  her,  m 
consideration  of  her  being  ill.  Upon  learning  the  particulars  of  the 
case,  he  asked  the  girl  if  she  was  willing  to  go  home  to  her  mistress  if 
well  treated  there,  and  upon  her  expressing  such  readiness  he  sent  her 
in  charge  of  an  orderly  to  her  old  home. 

Your  statement  in  relation  to  the  arrest  of  the  chaplain  of  the  regi- 
ment is  entirely  incorrect,  as  no  such  arrest  was  ever  made. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  F.  PUFFER, 
Lieutenant  and  Aide-de-Camp. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  July  19,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  W.  Phelps,  Comdg.  Forces  at  Camp  Parapet : 

General  Communications  have  this  day  been  received  through 
you  from  the  Fifteenth  Maine  Regiment  and  the  Eighth  New  Hamp- 
shire Regiment,  of  your  command,  urging  the  necessity  of  having  fresh 
beef  and  vegetables  furnished  them.  With  regard  to  the  vegetables, 
they  should  be  either  furnished  from  the  company’s  fund  or,  as  you 
suggest,  the  captains  of  companies  might  exchange  their  salt  beef  for 
them.  Of  course  they  can  be  procured  fresher  and  quite  as  cheap 
around  the  camp  as  in  the  city.  Upon  consultation  with  the  chief  com- 
missary, Colonel  Turner,  he  says  that  he  will  endeavor  to  send  you 
some  head  of  cattle  as  soon  as  possible.  It  is  impossible  to  furnish 
your  camp  with  the  meat  that  comes  out  packed  in  ice,  for  it  spoils 
almost  immediately  after  removal  from  the  vessel.  There  is  no  doubt 
but  that  tent  floors  are  almost  indispensable  in  this  climate,  but  un- 
fortunately we  have  a very  limited  supply  of  lumber  until  we  can  pro- 
cure some  from  Ship  Island  and  other  sources.  As  soon  as  any  can 
be  procured  it  shall  be  forwarded  to  your  camp. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler. 

I remain,  sir,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ . R.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


526 


w:  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Lew  Orleans,  La.,  July  19,  lobl. 

Captain  Stafford,  Assistant  Provost- Marshal : 

Sir  • The  course  pursued  by  certain  persons  in  ordering  their  slaves 
u to  go  to  the  Yankees,”  or  to  join  the  Federate,  described  m your  note, 
and  like  acts,  has  been  brought  to  my  notice  from  different  sources 
previously  to  your  communication,  and  certainly  is  a great  wrong  as 
well  to  the  Government  as  to  the  negroes.  In  order  to  correct  this 
evil  therefore,  let  it  be  known  that  all  such  declarations  by  the  owners 
to  their  slaves  will  by  the  authority  here  be  taken  and  deemed  acts 
of  voluntary  emancipation,  and  slaves  sent  away  by  their  masters  with 
such  declarations  as  you  described,  or  equiva tent ; ones . will l be  regarded 
and  treated  as  manumitted  and  emancipated.  You  will  see  to  it  that 
this  necessary  police  regulation  is  carried  into  effect. 

Respectfully,  ‘ BBNJ  BUTLER, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Western  Dist.,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Pensacola , Fla.,  July  19,  lob2. 

Mai.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans , La.. 

General  : The  steamboat  Creole  arrived  here  yesterday  and  an- 
swers  the  requirements  of  the  public  service  in  this  harbor  remarkably 
well.  I thank  yon  for  so  promptly  responding  to  my  call  tor  a rive 
steamboat.  It  wonld  afford  me  great  pleasure  to  furnish  General  But- 
ler with  anything  in  this  district  needed  for  the  public  service,  Pr0J^^ 
I could  do  so  with  propriety,  in  accordance  with  my  dutyto  my  own 
command  and ly  responsibility  to  the  commander  of  the  Department 
<?  tiiA  Qnnth  As  all  of  the  regular  officers  of  experience  serving  with 
mv  command  a^e  performing  slch  responsible  duties  at  present  that 
they  could  not  possibly  be  detached  even  for  a ^’nded  time,  and^ ^ as  my 
old  department  has  been  merged  into  the  Department  of  the  bouth, 
and  been  called  a district,  I do  not  feel  as  free  to  act  now  as  formerly, 
unless  immediate  action  is  necessary  and  the  urgency  of  the  case  de- 
mands that  I should  take  the  responsibility.  . to 

T regret  for  the  reason  cited  above,  that  I am  unable  at  tn  s 
OTatiffrou  bv  ordering  a regular  officer  to  report  to  you  for  the  pur- 
nose  stated  in  your  communication  of  the  10th  instant.  1 have  been 
IXmedlhat  your  chief  of  artillery,  &c„  can  furn  sh  me .with . ordnance 

and  ordnance  stores,  which  I require  immediately.  XoLfto  fid 
benefit  the  service  and  oblige  me  by  ordering  your  staff  officers  to  nil 
the  requisitions  made  on  them  by  my  chief  quartermaster  and  acting 
ordnance  officers,  if  the  articles  required  can  be  conveniently  supplied 
from  the  stores  on  hand  in  the  Department  of  the  Gult. 

I am,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  offiMben^servnn^ 

Brigadier-General,  U.  8.  Volunteers,  Commanding. 


» Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 
f New  Orleans , July  19,  1802. 


General  Orders, 


Each  bank  and  banking  company  in  Yew  Orleans  will  make,  under 


Chat.  XX YU.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.- — UNION. 


527 


oath  of  the  cashier,  a statement  of  the  condition  of  the  bank,  in  the 
form  heretofore  made  to  the  board  of  currency,  on  the  first  Monday  of 
May,  June,  July,  and  Monday,  July  21,  instant. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

R.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


War  Department,  Adjutant-General’s  Office,  • 

Washington , July  23,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans , La. : 

Sir:  By  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War  I respectfully  inclose  here- 
with for  your  information  a copy  of  a communication  received  from  the 
Navy  Department  in  relation  to  towing  certain  vessels  of  war  in  the 
Mississippi  River.  The  Secretary  desires  you  will  return  the  inclosed 
with  a report  in  the  case.* 

I am,  sir,  &c. 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General . 

[Inclosure.] 

Navy  Department,  June  27, 1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  a copy  of  a communication 
addressed  to  Flag-Officer  Farragut,  under  date  of  the  16th  instant,  by 
Commander  D.  D.  Porter,  and  would  respectfully  call  your  attention  to 
the  abuses  said  to  be  practiced,  to  the  great  detriment  of  naval  opera- 
tions and  the  public  interest. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GIDEON  WELLES. 


[Sub-inclosure.] 

United  States  Flag-Ship  Hartford, 

Baton  Rouge , June  16,  1862. 

Hon.  Gideon  Welles, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy , Washington , D.  C . : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  herewith  to  inclose  a letter  from  Captain  Por- 
ter, which  will  give  you  a slight  idea  of  the  difficulties  with  which  we 
have  to  contend  in  our  ascent  of  this  river. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  G.  FARRAGUT, 

Flag-Officer  West  Gulf  Blockading  Squadron . 

United  States  Steamer  Octarora, 

June  16,  1862. 

Flag-Officer  D.  G.  Farragut, 

Commanding  Western  Gulf  Squadron: 

Sir  : The  difficulties  attending  my  getting  the  mortar  flotilla  to  yon 
have  been  so  much  increased  by  the  impediments  thrown  in  my  way 


See  Butler  to  Thomas,  September  1,  p.  559. 


528  w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xxvn. 

by  persons  whose  duty  it  was  to  afford  facilities  in  every  way  for  getting 
the  vessels  up  the  river  that  I deem  it  proper  to  put  the  matter  on 

6 When  I received  your  communication  at  Pensacola,  directing  me  to 
come  to  this  place,  I also  received  a letter  from  General  Butler,  who 
urged  me  to  use  dispatch,  as  this  movement  (he  considered)  was  of  the 
utmost  importance,  promising  me  at  the  same  time  all  the  towage  I 
wanted.”  I towed  all  the  vessels  of  the  mortar  flotilla  up  to  Lew  Or- 
leans with  our  own  steamers  except  four,  which  were  very  unnecessarily 
‘picked  up  at  the  Head  of  Passes,  when  I had  six  of  our  steamers  on  the 
way  down  and  within  5 miles  of  them;  at  the  very  time  there  were  coal 
and  store-ships  at  the  Southwest  Pass  which  the  Landis  ought  to . have 
brought  up,  and  for  which  purpose  she  was  sent  down.  I addressed  a 
letter  to  General  Butler  asking  for  assistance  and  recalling  his  atten- 
tion to  the  promise  made  me  in  his  late  communication.  I asked  for 
only  two  vessels,  the  Landis  and  Fox,  and  he  said  I could  have  them. 

I little  knew  then  the  system  of  red-tapeism  I would frmv  §or 
or  I don’t  think  I should  have  had  anything  to  do  with  the  Army,  or 
that  portion  of  it  which,  through  the  naval  exertions,  now  occupies  New 
Orleans.  I found  that  the  captain  of  the  port  had  entire  control  of  the 
tow-boats,  under  the  quartermaster;  and  though  professing  to  be  doing 
^1  he  could  to  expedite  us,  the  boats  were  not  forth-coming  but  were 
engaged  in  towing  private  vessels,  having  no  connection  whatever  with 
the  Government.  On  the  9th  I was  promised  the  Fox,  which  vessel 
was  to  tow  up  three  mortars,  but  as  the  store-ship  belonging  to  the  y 
was  much  needed  I proposed  that  the  Fox  should  bring  her  up  to  New 
Orleans  and  then  tow  up  the  mortars  to  Vicksburg.  She  started  with 
this  object,  but  returned  next  day  with  two  merchant  ships,  with  whose 
owners'^  the  captain  of  the  Fox  had  made  a private  arrangement,  and  on 
which  occasion  he  felt  so  jubilant  over  his  prosperity  that  he  presented, 
himself  drunk  at  the  Saint  Charles.  This  alone  is  a 
on  the  manner  in  which  the  public  service  is  performed  under  the  captain 
of  the  port,  who  was  professing  atthe  sametime  to  be  doing  allhe  could  to 
aid  me,  and  who  didso  far  respect  the  order  received  from  General  Butler 
that  he  made  me  one  or  two  visits  on  the  occasion.  All  I derived  trom 
them,  however,  was  a delay  on  my  own  part,  and  in  consequence  sent 
off  our  own  steamers  with  a lighter  load  than  they  might  have  carried. 
I did  this  for  dispatch,. thinking  I would  certainly  get  two  vessels. 
Finding  it  impossible  to  make  any  headway,  I applied  to  the 
again  to  let  me  take  the  Empire  Parish,  a vessel  running  e 
under  a flag  of  truce  (which  finally  was  granted),  and  I applied to -the 
captain  of  the  port  to  have  her  got  ready.  Here  again .were  all  kinc  s 
of  difficulties  presented.  Provisions  had  to  be  provided  by  the  Navy. 
I had  to  select  a captain,  and  then  pay  all  the  expenses 
gineers),  which  I offered  to  do.  By  great  exertions  I got  an  order  from 
General  Butler  for  the  provisions,  but  up  to  my 

tions  could  not  be  put  on  board.  My  opinion  is  that  the Empire i Parish, 
like  the  rest,  will  never  be  employed  to  tow  a naval vessel , that ; she 
in  hands  that  will  not  hesitate  to  employ  her  for  other  purposes. 
Temptations  are  held  out  for  towing  vessels  that  men  «f  moderate  com 
science  are  not  proof  against,  and  I beg  leave  f,0,  f ^ ^ y°u  “ow  that  if 
you  have  depended  on  the  promises  made  by  the 

these  boats  to  bring  up  provisions  and  coal  you  vnll  be  much  dmap 
pointed.  I don’t  hesitate  to  say  that  there  has  been  a deliberate  at 
tempt  made  to  deceive  and  trifle  with  me,  and  whosoever  s fault  it  is  it 
should  be  made  known.  We  have  traitors  enough  to  fight  against 


Chap.  XXVIL]  * 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


529 


without  finding  them  holding  office  under  our  Government  at  posts  of 
honor  which  have  for  a moment  become  so  lucrative  that  the  holders 
thereof  fear  to  miss  the  golden  opportunity,  and  intend  to  make  hay 
while  the  sun  shines.  These  are  part  of  the  difficulties  I alluded  to  in 
my  late  communication  to  you — the  difficulties  of  getting  up  the  river 
with  stores,  coal,  &c.,  without  proper  preparation.  I wish  we  had  re- 
tained for  our  own  use  the  vessels  we  captured  and  turned  over  to  the 
Army ; and  I would  earnestly  suggest,  if  it  can  be  done,  that  we  ob- 
tain possession  of  them  again  and  employ  them  for  naval  purposes. 
They  were  appraised  and  turned  over  to  the  army  (I  mean  the  Landis 
and  Burton),  I hear,  at  $15,000.  They  would,  either  of  them,  sell  in 
market  to-morrow  for  $60,000.  They  are  burning  up  Government  coal, 
for  which  the  Government  derives  very  little  benefit.  I mention  these 
things  to  explain  the  delays  and  difficulties  I have  encountered,  and 
intending  to  have  the  matter  placed  on  record.  When  the  Army  were 
without  transportation  almost  every  steamer  belonging  to  the  flotillh 
was  engaged  in  placing  the  troops  where  they  were  required,  for  which 
they  obtained  very  little  thanks,  and  only  enabled  the  Army  to  put 
forth  pretensions  they  were  in  no  way  entitled  to  claim.  I beg  leave 
to  state  that  by  law  the  Army  is  obliged  to  comply  with  naval  requisi- 
tions, an  act  having  passed  on  purpose  to  prevent  delays  to  the  public 
service. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  D.  PORTER. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  51.  i New  Orleans , July  24,  1862. 

The  commanding  general  of  this  department  takes  pleasure  in  pub- 
lishing the  following  indorsement  from  Washington  of  what  he  has  con- 
sidered the  useful  services  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Kimball,  of  the  Twelfth 
Regiment  Maine  Volunteers,  and  the  troops  under  his  command: 

The  news  of  the  brilliant  achievement  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Kimball,  of  the  Twelfth 
Maine  Volunteers,  and  the  brave  men  under  his  command,  at  Manchac  Pass  was  very 
gratifying  to  the  Department,  and  it  entirely  approves  your  action  in  allowing  the 
regiment  to  retain  the  colors  which  they  had  so  gallantly  taken  from  the  enemy. 

Bv  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

R.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


United  States  Ram  Switzerland, 

Above  Vicksburg , July  25,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I have  the  honor  to  apply  to  you  for  instructions.  Some  of  my  offi- 
cers and  men  have  deserted  their  posts  and  disobeyed  my  orders  at  a 
period  of  great  danger  to  the  public  service.  I have  the  parties  under 
I arrest,  but  can  find  no  means,  either  through  Commodores  Farragut  or 
Davis  or  Generals  Williams  or  Grant,  to  bring  them  to  trial.  I have  been 
obliged,  in  consequence  of  the  great  amount  of  sickness  that  prevails 
among  my  crews,  to  employ  large  numbers  of  blacks,  who  came  to  me 
34  r r — vol  xv 


530 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL  | 

asking  protection.  Some  of  them  had  been  in  the  employ  of  General 
Williams,  and  left  by  him  unprovided  for  on  the  Louisiana  shore.  I am  j 
desirous  to  know  what  I am  to  do  with  these  people  after  I no  longer! 
require  their  services  and  how  I am  to  bring  these  offending  parties' 
to  trial. 

Very  respectfully, 

ALFRED  W.  ELLET, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  July  26,  1862.  ji 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  West: 

General  : I avail  myself  of  the  voyage  of  the  Tennessee  to  commu- 
nicate with  you  upon  the  subject  of  General  Williams’  brigade  at  Vicks- 
burg. 

General  Williams  was  sent  up  at  a time  when  we  should  have  had 
only  local  troops  to  meet  at  Vicksburg.  It  was  not  properly  within  my 
department,  but  the  exigencies  of  the  public  service,  as  it  seemed  to  me,| 
justified  the  movement.  It  is  now  quite  different,  as  I am  informed 
that  a division  at  least  of  your  army  is  moving  upon  Vicksburg. 

I have  great  need  of  General  Williams’  command  to  aid  me  in  clear- 
ing out  the  guerrillas  from  this  State,  who  are  doing  infinite  mischief. 
I have  therefore  ordered  his  recall,  as  his  force  since  the  re-enforcement 
by  Van  Dorn  and  Breckinridge  of  the  enemy  is  too  small  for  opera* 
tions  alone,  and  a junction  of  Generals  Grant  and  Curtis  must  give 
ample  force  for  the  reduction  of  the  place.  The  disposal  of  the  guer-j 
rilla  bands  is  easy  of  accomplishment,  but  it  requires  many  men  to  hold 
the  various  points,  which  if  not  held  only  bring  destruction  upon  oun 
friends  there. 

If  in  anything  I can  aid  your  operations  command  me.  I have  sent 
a duplicate  of  this  under  cover  to  General  Grant  for  information  as  wel) 
as  to  General  Williams : 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEKJ.  F.  BUTLER. 



Nayy  Department,  July  29,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : Knowing  that  you  fully  concur  with  me  in  the  importance  o 
capturing  Vicksburg  and  keeping  open  and  unobstructed  the  Mississipp 
River,  I beg  leave  to  submit  an  extract  from  a very  interesting  anj 
suggestive  letter  addressed  by  Commander  Porter  to  Flag-Officer  Fai 
ragut,  dated  the  13th  instant,  a copy  of  which  has  been  forwarded  t< 
this  Department.  The  long  detention  of  so  large  a naval  force  befor 
Vicksburg  in  consequence  of  the  absence  of  a sufficient  land  force  t, 
co-operate  with  the  Kavy  in  taking  and  holding  the  place  is,  I am  aware 
a source  of  regret  to  you  as  well  as  to  myself. 

It  is  a pressing  necessity  that  so  important  a place  should  not  be  he! 
by  the  rebels.  While  it  "is  in  their  possession  it  not  only  interrupt 
navigation  and  keeps  our  squadron  unemployed,  but  impairs  its  eff 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  531 

ciency  in  cutting  off  communication  and  transportation  of  stores  and 
troops  to  sustain  the  enemy.  Excuse  these  suggestions,  which  you  will 
appreciate  and  which  are  made  en  passant  in  transmitting  the  extract 
from  Commander  Porter’s  letter.  We  cannot  have  a rigid  river  police 
and  effective  interdiction  between  the  opposite  shores  while  Vicksburg 
remains  an  obstacle  to  prevent  or  at  least  retard  operations. 

I would  invite  especial  attention  to  the  remarks  in  relation  to  General 
Williams  and  his  force  and  the  opinion  expressed  that  he  can  go  any- 
where 30  miles  into  the  interior  below  Vicksburg,  and,  supported  by 
the  gunboats,  destroy  the  enemy’s  stores,  capture  the  cattle  they  have 
grazing,  and  be  instrumental  in  keeping  open  the  river.  I place  high 
value  on  Commander  Porter’s,  observations,  and  his  urgent  conviction 
that  prompt  action  should  be  taken  induces  me  to  communicate  his 
views  to  you. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GIDEON  WELLES. 


[Inclosure.  J 

United  States  Steamer  Octorara, 

New  Orleans , July  13,  1862. 

Flag-Officer  D.  G.  Farragut,  U.  S.  N., 

Commanding  Western  Gulf  Squadron , Mississippi  River : 
******* 

I have  reliable  information  that  the  rebels  are  doing  all  they  can  to 
transport  heavy  guns  to  the  river-side  and  to  make  us  believe  that 
they  have  abandoned  the  plan  of  fortifying  the  river-heights  at  Grand 
Gulf,  Cole’s  Creek,  Ellis’  Cliffs,  Loffcus  Heights,  Quitman’s  Landing, 
and  Bayou  Sara.  They  have  temporarily  taken  away  the  field  pieces 
they  had  there.  The  first  thing  that  we  will  know  some  of  our  ves- 
sels will  unexpectedly  be  fired  on  from  heavy  guns  and  unable  to  pass. 
I would  suggest  that  the  army  under  General  Williams  be  employed 
in  cleaning  out  the  above-mentioned  places  on  the  way  down  the  river, 
backed  by  one  or  two  of  our  vessels  to  cover  his  landing.  You  may 
depend,  sir,  that  General  Williams  is  frittering  away  his  time  on  that 
grand  canal,  which  will  never  amount  to  anything  while  the  river  is 
falling.  He  lost  his  chance  of  distinction  the  morning  the  ships  went 
up,  and  he  can  only  recover  his  prestige  by  going  to  work  energetically 
and  visit  every  position  on  the  Mississippi  where  a battery  can  be  built. 
His  force  is  sufficiently  strong  to  go  anywhere  30  miles  into  the  inte- 
rior below  Vicksburg.  Supported  by  the  gunboats  he  can  destroy  the 
enemy’s  stores,  capture  the  cattle  they  have  grazing  about  10  miles 
back,  and  in  fact  open  this  river;  for  I speak  within  bounds  when  I 
say  that  it  is  nearer  being  closed  up  at  this  moment  than  it  has  been 
since  we  came  into  it. 

Vicksburg,  the  finest  strategical  point  on  the  river,  is  neglected  by 
the  army  at  Memphis.  The  Navy  cannot  overcome  it  while  2,000  men 
even  remain  to  fire  the  guns  and  run  away  when  the  ships  approach. 
It  is  an  army  affair  altogether.  It  is  at  this  moment  of  more  impor- 
tance than  any  point  on  the  Mississippi.  With  a fine  railroad  into  the 
heart  of  Louisiana,  making  direct  and  rapid  communication  with 
Texas. 

The  rebels  could  get  all  they  want  if  once  in  possession  of  that  road. 
Every  day  it  is  fast  slipping  through  our  fingers,  owing  to  the  delay  in 
not  sending  troops  to  occupy  Vicksburg;  for  I consider  it  virtually 
taken  as  it  stands,  and  the  few  men  now  there  (about  8,000)  will  move 


532 


W.  FLA  , S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH.  • 

away  at  the  first  sight  of  our  army.  Now  they  are  doing  what  most  j 
benefits  the  Southern  Confederacy,  keeping  unemployed  the  largest  I 
squadron  in  the  United  States  Navy,  and  they  will  make  great  capital  out  | 
of  the  apparent  circumstances  that  Vicksburg  successfully  resisted  our  i 
largest  squadron,  while  other  places  of  superior  force  fell  before  the  fire  1 
of  our  iron-clads.  This  is  the  way  they  have  of  keeping  up  the  excite- 
ment. I heard  that  song  sung  all  the  way  down  the  river. 

Large  quantities  of  cattle  are  being  sent  into  Alabama  to  graze,  show- 
ing  that  the  rebels  are  looking  in  that  direction  for  a place  of  retreat 
in  case  they  meet  with  serious  reverses.  The  cattle  passed  at  Bayou  j 
Sara  were  destined  for  Alabama. 

At  Bayou  Sara  they  have  a 42-pounder  6 miles  back  from  the  water. 

I saw  some  evidence  of  stores  having  been  landed  from  the  Louisiana  i 
shore,  but  with  such  heavy  tows  as  my  steamers  had  it  was  impossible  f 
to  turn  and  examine  them  without  great  loss  of  time  and  interference  | 
with  the  orders  governing  my  present  move. 

In  relation  to  the  matter  of  stores  will  you  allow  me  to  make  a sug- 
gestion? One  or  two  vessels  employed  as  a river  police  (one  going 
down,  the  other  going  up),  examining  all  stores  landing  and  looking 
into  suspicious  plantations,  with  roads  leading  into  the  interior,  would 
check  any  disposition  on  the  part  of  the  people  about  here  to  supply 
stores  to  the  enemy.  Many  of  them  do  it  now  because  they  cannot 
refuse,  no  precaution  being  taken  to  prevent  it.  A guard  on  our  side 
would  give  these  people  a reasonable  excuse  for  refusing  to  supply  the 
Confederates,  which  they  are  averse  to  doing.  The  corn  crop  is  now 
coming  in.  Any  one  who  will  look  at  these  immense  crops,  planted 
along  the  river  to  the  exclusion  of  cotton  and  sugar,  must  understand 
its  destination.  Let  the  exportation  of  it  into  Secessia  be  restricted 
and  you  have  put  an  end  to  the  war.  This  can  be  effected  by  the  river 
police,  if  they  do  their  duty.  The  fact  is,  sir,  we  should  make  these' 
people  feel  our  authority  here.  They  scarcely  get  any  protection  from 
us,  and  our  rule  is  too  mild  in  many  cases'  to  inspire  that  wholesome 
fear  which  rebels  and  traitors  always  feel  when  danger  is  near  to  them. 
Therefore  in  either  case  we  make  a weak  impression. 

******* 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  D.  POBTER, 
Commander , U.  S.  Navy . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Neic  Orleans , La.,  July  30,  1862. 

The  President  : 

Sir  : I take  leave  to  present  you  Mr.  Roselius,  a gentleman  of  the 
bar,  late  attorney- general  of  the  State  of  Louisiana,  a member  of  the 
Convention,  who"  did  not  vote  for  the  secession  ordnance.  With  some 
others,  only  he  was  found  faithful  when  all  were  faithless.  Among  the 
earliest  to  welcome  the  Union  Army  to  New  Orleans,  he  has  assisted 
me  with  his  advice  and  counsel. 

Of  the  one  subject  which  is  to  be  dealt  with  here  and  now  he  is  bet- 
ter informed  than  any  man  in  the  State.  The  questions  involved,  as 
set  forth  in  my  correspondence  upon  the  action  of  General  Phelps,  are 
of  the  most  vital  and  critical  importance.  The  determination  of  then 
cannot  be  delayed,  and  it  seemed  to  me  of  sufficient  importance  thal 
the  President  should  have  the  benefit  of  the  experience  of  one  whc 


O-iP.  xxvn.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


533 


has  a most  intimate  knowledge  of  the  wishes,  opinions,  feelings,  and 
thoughts  of  the  people  of  the  State  of  Louisiana  upon  the  question  of 
slavery  as  interwoven  with  the  integrity  of  the  Union. 

I am,  most  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major - General , Commanding . 
(A  similar  letter  to  Secretary  of  State,  July  29.) 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  228.  j New  Orleans , July  30, 1862. 

The  further  publication  of  the  New  Orleans  Commercial  Bulletin  is 
suspended,  and  the  office,  its  properties,  fixtures,  books,  and  papers  are 
sequestered  for  the  action  of  the  United  States  Government,  and  the 
editor  will  be  imprisoned  at  Fort  Jackson  till  further  orders. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler : 

R.  S.  D AVIS, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  July  31,  1862. 

Count  Me  JAN,  Consul  of  France , New  Orleans : 

Sir  : I have  arrested  Charles  Heidsick,  who  smuggled  himself  across 
my  lines  in  the  disguise  of  a bar-keeper  to  the  Natchez,  a boat  with  flag 
of  truce. 

Heidsick  has  now  come  back  as  a supposed  bearer  of  dispatches 
through  my  lines  once  more.  He  desires  that  you  should  be  informed 
of  his  arrest. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  235.  1 New  Orleans , La.,  July  31,  1862. 

The  Picayune  newspaper  having  published  an  editorial  article  in  to- 
day’s issue  directly  in  violation  of  the  proclamation  of  the  commanding 
general  of  May  1,  reflecting  upon  the  officers  and  tending  to  influence 
the  public  mind  against  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  the  pub- 
lication of  said  paper  is  discontinued  until  the  publishers  and  editors 
shall  severally  exhibit  their  loyalty  by  taking  the  oath  of  allegiance, 
and  the  office  with  its  properties,  presses,  books,  and  papers  are  seques- 
tered until  further  action  of  the  Government  of  the  United  States. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler : 

R.  S.  DAYIS, 

Captain , Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


War  Department, 
Washington,  JD.  C.,  August  1,  1862. 

Hon.  Gideon  Welles, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy  : 

Sir:  The  Secretary  of  War  directs  me  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 


534  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

of  your  communication  of  the  29th  ultimo,  transmitting  an  extract  from 
a letter  addressed  by  Commodore  Porter  to  Flag-Officer  Farragut, 
which  contains  many  valuable  and  interesting  suggestions  relative  to 
the  condition  of  affairs  in  the  neighborhood  of  Vicksburg  and  the  im- 
portance of  the  capture  of  that  city  by  the  combined  operations  of  the 
fleet  and  land  forces  of  General  Williams.  I am  instructed  by  the 
Secretary  to  thank  you  for  the  pleasure  of  perusing  the  same,  and  to 
inform  you  that  your  letter  and  inclosure  have  been  referred  to  Major- 
General  Halleck,  general-in-chief,  for  such  action  as  he  may  deem  ad- 
visable to  be  taken. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ WQLCOTT 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  August  2, 1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I beg  leave  to  inclose  to  you  copies  of  orders  and  correspond- 
ence with  General  Phelps  upon  the  subject  of  arming  and  employing 

the  negroes.  . . _ . 

General  Phelps,  without  orders  and  without  my  knowledge,  has  or- 
ganized five  companies  of  negroes, iand  the  first  official  information  1 
had  of  his  doings  in  that  behalf  was  a requisition  for  arms  and  equip- 
ments. Then  it  became  more  necessary  in  my  judgment  to  employ 
them  differently,  and  I thought  by  this  means  I could  find  employment 
for  all  and  not  raise  the  question  offensively  between  General  Phelps 
and  myself  until  it  was  settled  at  Washington,  and  therefore  sent  the 
order  to  employ  the  negroes  without  sending  an  answer  to  his  requisi- 
tion, but  his  letter  of  resignation  has  left  me  no  choice  but  insist  that 
my  order  should  be  obeyed.  I submit  the  whole  matter  to  the  Depart- 
ment. I need  not  discuss  it.  General  Shepley,  who  has  been  with  you, 
can  do  it  much  better  than  I can.  Mr.  Boselius,  who  I have  sent  you 
by  the  Connecticut,  can  tell  you  much  more  fully  than  it  were  possible 
to  do  in  a dispatch  what  has  been  the  effect  of  the  course  of  General 
Phelps.  An  insurrection  broke  out  amongst  the  negroes  a few  miles 
up  the  river,  which  caused  the  women  of  that  neighborhood  to  apply  to 
an  armed  boat  belonging  to  us  passing  down  for  aid,  and  the  incipient 
revolt  was  stopped  by  informing  the  negroes  that  we  should  repel  an 
attack  by  them  upon  the  women  and  children.  All  is  for  the  determi- 
nation of  the  Department,  to  which  I shall  give  the  fullest  obedience. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant,  p>tttLEB 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Camp  Parapet,  La.,  July  30,  1862. 


Capt.  E.  S.  Davis,  , „ . , r 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Lew  Orleans , -La. : 

Sir  : I inclose  herewith  requisitions  for  arms,  accouterments,  cloth- 
ing, camp  and  garrison  equipage,  &c.,  for  three  regiments  of  Africans, 
which  I propose  to  raise  for  the  defense  of  this  point.  The  location  is 
swampy  and  unhealthy,  and  our  men  are  dying  at  the  rate  of  two  or 
three  a day. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


535 


The  Southern  loyalists  are  willing,  as  I understand,  to  furnish  their 
share  of  the  tax  for  the  support  of  the  war,  but  they  should  also  furnish 
their  quota  of  men,  which  they  have  not  thus  far  done.  An  opportunity 
now  offers  of  supplying  the  deficiency,  and  it  is  not  safe  to  neglect  op- 
portunities in  war.  I think  that  with  the  proper  facilities  I could  raise 
the  three  regiments  proposed  in  a short  time.  Without  holding  out 
any  inducements  or  offering  any  reward  I have  now  upward  of  300 
Africans  organized  into  five  companies,  who  are  all  willing  and  ready 
to  show  their  devotion  to  our  cause  in  any  way  that  it  may  be  put  to 
the  test.  They  are  willing  to  submit  to  anything  rather  than  to  slavery. 

Society  in  the  South  seems  to  be  on  the  point  of  dissolution,  and  the 
best  way  of  preventing  the  African  from  becoming  instrumental  in  a 
general  state  of  anarchy  is  to  enlist  him  in  the  cause  of  the  Republic. 
If  we  reject  his  services  any  petty  military  chieftain  by  offering  him 
freedom  can  have  them  for  the  purpose  of  robbery  and  plunder.  It  is 
for  the  interests  of  the  South  as  well  as  for  the  North  that  the  African 
should  be  permitted  to  offer  his  block  for  the  Temple  of  Freedom. 
Sentiments  unworthy  of  the  man  of  the  present  day,  worthy  only  of 
another  Cain,  could  prevent  such  an  offer  from  being  accepted. 

I would  recommend  that  the  Cadet  graduates  of  the  present  year 
should  be  sent  to  South  Carolina  and  this  point  to  organize  and  disci- 
pline our  African  levies,  and  that  the  more  promising  non-commissioned 
officers  and  privates  of  the  Army  be  appointed  as  company  officers  to 
command  them.  Prompt  and  energetic  efforts  in  this  direction  would 
probably  accomplish  more  toward  a speedy  termination  of  the  war 
and  an  early  restoration  of  peace  and  amity  than  any  other  course 
which  could  be  adopted. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

J.  W.  PHELPS, 
Brigadier-  General . 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Camp  Parapet,  La.,  July  31,  1862. 
Oapt.  R.  S.  Davis,  A.  A.  A.  G .,  New  Orleans , La. : 

Sir:  The  communication  from  your  office  of  this  date,  signed  “By 
>rder  of  Major-General  Butler,”  directing  me  to  employ  the  contrabands 
n and  about  my  camp  in  cutting  down  all  the  trees  between  my  lines 
md  the  lake,  &c.,  has  just  been  received. 

In  reply  I must  state  that  while  I am  willing  to  prepare  African  regi- 
ments for  the  defense  of  the  Government  against  its  assailants  I am  not 
billing  to  become  the  mere  slave-driver  which  you  propose,  having  no 
jualifications  in  that  way.  I am  therefore  under  the  necessity  of  ten- 
lering  the  resignation  of  my  commission  as  an  officer  of  the  Army  of 
he  United  States,  and  respectfully  request  a leave  of  absence  until  it 
s accepted,  in  accordance  with  paragraph  29,  page  12,  of  the  General 
Regulations.  While  I am  writing,  at  8.30  o’clock  p.  m.,  a colored  man 
s brought  in  by  one  of  the  pickets,  who  has  just  been  wounded  in  the 
ude  by  a charge  of  shot,  which  he  says  was  fired  at  him  by  one  of  a 
>arty  of  three  slave-hunters  or  guerrillas  a mile  or  more  from  our  line 
>f  sentinels.  As  it  is  some  distance  from  camp  to  the  lake,  the  party 
u wood-choppers  which  you  have  directed  will  probably  need  a con- 
iiaerable  force  to  guard  them  against  similar  attacks. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  PHELPS, 
Brigadier-  General . 


536 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  M.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTL 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  August  2,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  W.  Phelps  : 

General:  By  the  act  of  Congress,  as  I understand  it,  the  President 
of  the  United  States  alone  has  the  authority  to  employ  Africans  in  arms 
as  part  of  the  military  forces  of  the  United  States.  Every  law  up  to  this 
time  raising  volunteer  or  militia  forces  has  been  opposed  to  their  em- 
ployment. The  President  has  not  as  yet  indicated  his  purpose  to  em- 
ploy the  Africans  in  arms.  The  arms,  clothing,  and  camp  equipage 
which  I have  here  for  Louisiana  volunteers  are  by  the  letter  of  the  becre- 
tary  of  War  expressly  limited  to  white  soldiers,  so  that  I have  no  au- 
thority to  divert  them,  however  much  I may  desire  so  to  do. 

I do  not  think  you  are  empowered  to  organize  into  companies  negroes 
and  drill  them  as  a military  organization,  as  I am  not  surprised,  but 
unexpectedly  informed,  you  have  done.  I cannot  sanction  this  course 
of  action  as  at  present  advised,  especially  when  we  have  need  of  the 
services  of  the  blacks,  who  are  being  sheltered  upon  the  outskirts  of 
your  camp,  as  you  will  see  by  the  orders  for  their  employment  sent  you 

by  the  acting  assistant  adjutant-general.  . .. 

I will  send  your  application  to  the  President,  but  in  the  mean  time 
you  must  desist  from  the  formation  of  any  negro  military  organizations. 
I am,  your  obedient  servant,  BBNJ.  p<  BUTLEK. 

[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  2,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  W.  Phelps:  . 

General  : I was  somewhat  surprised  to  receive  your  resignation  ior 

th  When°you  were  put  in  command  at  Camp  Parapet  I se].lt  ^ej1.*‘;'na“  » 
Weitzel,  my  chief  engineer,  to  make  a reconnaissance  of  the  hnes 
Carrollton,  and  I understand  it  was  agreed  between  you  and  the  en- 
gineer that  a removal  of  the  wood  between  Lake  Pontchartram  and 
the  right  of  your  intrenchment  was  a necessary  military  precaut  on. 
The  work  could  not  be  done  at  the  time  because  of  the  stage  of  water 
and  the  want  of  men,  but  now  both  water  and  men  concur.  Ton  • 

500  Africans  organized  into  companies,  you  write  me.  ihis  y 

are  fitted  to  do.  It  must  either  be  done  by  them  or  my  soldiers  no 
drilled  and  disciplined.  You  have  said  the  location  is  unhealthy  to  the 
soldiers;  it  is  not  to  the  negro.  Is  it  not  best  that  “P??  °t\is 

Africans  should  do  this  labor  ? My  attention  is  specially  called  to  this 
m“tThe  present  time  because  there  are  reports  cd  demon^ra  iona 
to  be  made  on  your  lines  by  the  rebels,  and  m my  judgment  it  w a mac 
ter  of  necessary  precaution  thus  to  clear  the  right  ot  your  bne 
you  can  receive  the  proper  aid  from  the  gunboats  on  the  lake,  besides 
preventing  the  enemy  from  having  cover.  To  do  this  the  negro  ought 
to  be  employed,  and  in  so  employing  them  I see  no  evidence  ot  sla 
driviu0"  or  employing  you  as  a slave-d  liver.  , . , a. 

ThegsoldiSs  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  did  this  very  thing  last 
' summer  in  front  of  Arlington  Heights.  Are  tne  negroes  any  bet 
than  they  ? 


CHAP.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


537 


Because  of  an  order  to  do  this  necessary  thing  to  protect  your  front, 
threatened  by  the  enemy,  you  tender  your  resignation  and  ask  imme- 
diate leave  of  absence.  * I assure  you  I did  not  expect  this,  either 
from  your  courage,  your  patriotism,  or  your  good  sense.  To  resign 
in  the  face  of  an  enemy  has  not  been  the  highest  plaudit  to  a sol- 
dier, especially  when  the  reason  assigned  is  that  lie  is  ordered  to  do 
that  which  a recent  act  of  Congress  has  specially  authorized  a com- 
mander to  do,  i.  e .,  employ  the  African  to  do  the  necessary  work  about 
a camp  or  upon  fortifications.  General,  your  resignation  will  not  be 
accepted  by  me ; leave  of  absence  will  not' be  granted,  and  you  will  see 
to  it  that  my  orders,  thus  necessary  for  the  defense  of  the  city,  are  faith- 
fully and  diligently  executed,  upon  the  responsibility  that  a soldier  in 
the  field  owes  to  his  superior. 

I will  see  that  all  proper  requisitions  for  the  food,  shelter,  and  clothing 
of  these  negroes  at  work  are  at  once  filled  by  the  proper  departments. 
You  will  also  send  out  a proper  guard  to  protect  the  laborers  against  the 
guerrilla  force,  if  any,  that  may  be  in  the  neighborhood. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ J BENJ.  E.  BUTLER, 

Major-General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  August  2,  1862. 

Flag-Officer  Farragut,  * 

Commanding  Western  Gulf  Squadron : 

Dear  Sir  : I inclose  you  Captain  Porter’s  letter  to  me,  for  your  infor- 
mation. I will  send  him  a steam- tug,  of  whose  service  he  can  avail  him- 
self. 

I would  strongly  urge  that  one  of  the  light-draught  double-enders  be 
sent  to  him,  say  the  Westfield,  Clifton,  or  Miami,  to  clear  out  Red  River. 
As  to  the  suggestion  as  to  fortifying  Baton  Rouge  on  the  river  side,  it 
is  simply  impossible  for  want  of  proper  guns.  If  the  fleet  cannot  hold 
the  river  against  the  enemy’s  rams  or  other  boats  the  quicker  we  aban- 
don Louisiana  the  better. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major- General , Commanding . 


[Incloaure.] 

United  States  Gunboat  Essex, 

Off  Baton  Rouge , July  30,  1862. 

General  Butler, 

Hdqrs.  U.  S.  Forces , Commanding  New  Orleans , La.  : 

General:  I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  lay  before  you  the  follow- 
ing facts : 

After  running  the  blockade  at  Vicksburg  my  orders  were  to  proceed 
to  Baton  Rouge,  take  in  supplies,  and  then  to  ascend  the  Mississippi, 
constantly  cruising  between  this  point  and  Vicksburg. 

The  gunboats  Katahdin  and  Kineo,  also  the  ram  Sumter,  were  left 
with  me  here  as  a protecting  force.  The  two  former  boats  have  their 
machinery  so  deranged  that  they  are  absolutely  useless  for  active  serv- 


538  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

ice  until  thoroughly  overhauled  and  repaired.  The  Sumter  has  but 
four  men,  and  the  captain  of  her  is  the  only  officer  free  from  sickness. 

There  are  two  rebel  gunboats  up  the  Red  River  which  should  be  seen 
to  but  with  my  present  force  it  would  be  impracticable  to  attack  them 
with  success  without  some  other  light-draught  gunboats.  The  low  stage 
of  water  in  the  Red  River  would  prevent  the  Essex  going  up. 

The  enemy  are  also  fortifying  at  Ellis’  Cliffs,  some  20  miles  below 
Natchez,  and  unless  speedily  seen  to  will  eventually  cause  much  trouble. 
A powerful  steam-tug  to  tow  the  Essex  up  the  Mississippi,  and  also  to 
convey  sufficient  coal  supply,  I respectfully  solicit  may  be  sent  me  as 
early  as  practicable.  In  the  immediate  neighborhood  of  this  city  large 
bodies  of  rebel  troops  are  concentrating,  and  I would  respectfully  sug- 
gest the  immediate  fortification  of  the  place,  both  of  the  land  and  river 
side.  The  ram  Arkansas  is  still  above  water,  and  could  without  doubt, 
if  the  Essex  were  absent,  retake  the  city. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  D.  PORTER, 

Commanding  Division  of  Western  Flotilla  below  Viclcsburg. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  3,  1862. 

Flag-Officer  D.  G.  Farragut,  _ „ ^ _ 

Comdg . Western  Gulf  Squadron,  U.  S.  Sloop-of  War  Hartford: 

Sir  : I have  just  been  informed  by  a reliable  person  that  since  yester- 
day morning  a great  number  of  field  guns  have  been  placed  between 
here  and  Baton  Rouge  by  the  rebels,  the  avowed  object  being  to  sink 
my  transports  in  the  absence  of  your  cruisers.  This  information,  taken 
in  connection  with  dispatches  received  from  General  Williams,  inform- 
ing me  that  he  expected  an  attack  by  a large  force,  leads  me  to  believe 
that  my  informant  is  truthful.  I consider  it  therefore  my  imperative 
duty  to  ask  you  to  cause  one  at  least  of  your  gunboats  to  cruise  between 
here  and  Baton  Rouge  at  once,  so  that  I can  keep  my  communications 
open  with  my  forces  at  that  point  at  least  during  the  time  danger  is 
anticipated. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  BENJ  BUTLER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


General  Orders, 
No.  55. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  4,  1862. 


It  appears  that  the  need  of  relief  to  the  destitute  poor  of  the  city 
requires  more  extended  measures  and  greater  outlay  than  have  yet 
been  made.  It  becomes  a question  in  justice  upon  whom  should  this 
burden  fall.  Clearly  upon  those  who  have  brought  this  great  calamity 
upon  their  fellow-citizens.  It  should  not  be  borne  by  taxation  of  the 
whole  municipality,  because  the  middling  and  working  men  have  never 
been  heard  at  the  ballot-box  unawed  by  threats  and  unmenaced  by 
thugs  and  paid  assassins  of  conspirators  against  peace  and  good  order. 
Besides,  more  than  the  vote  that  was  claimed  for  secession  have  taken 
the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United  States. 


Chap.  XXVH.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


539 


The  United  States  Government  does  its  share  when  it  protects,  de- 
fends, and  preserves  the  people  in  the  enjoyment  of  law,  order,  and  calm 
quiet.  Those  who  have  brought  upon  the  city  this  stagnation  of  busi- 
ness, this  desolation  of  the  hearth-stone,  this  starvation  of  the  poor 
and  helpless,  should,  as  far  as  they  may  be  able,  relieve  these  dis- 
tresses. 

There  are  two  classes  whom  it  would  seem  peculiarly  fit  should  at 
first  contribute  to  this  end : First,  those  individuals  and  corporations 
who  have  aided  the  rebellion  with  their  me.ans;  and,  second,  those  who 
have  endeavored  to  destroy  the  commercial  prosperity  of  the  city,  upon 
which  the  welfare  of  its  inhabitants  depends. 

It  is  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  commanding  general  that  a 
subscription  of  $1,250,000  was  made  by  the  corporate  bodies,  business 
firms,  and  persons  whose  names  are  set  forth  in  schedule  A,  annexed 
to  this  order,  and  that  sum  placed  in  the  hands  of  an  illegal  body, 
known  as  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  for  the  treasonable  purpose 
of  defending  the  city  against  the  Government  of  the  United  States, 
under  whose  humane  rule  the  city  of  New  Orleans  had  enjoyed  such 
unexampled  prosperity  that  her  warehouses  were  filled  with  trade  of 
all  nations,  who  came  to  share  her  freedom,  to  take  part  in  the  benefits 
of  her  commercial  superiority,  and  thus  she  was  made  the  representa- 
tive mart  of  the  world. 

The  stupidity  and  wastefulness  with  which  this  immense  sum  was 
spent  was  only  equaled  by  the  folly  which  led  to  its  being  raised  at 
all.  The  subscribers  to  this  fund,  by  this  very  act,  betray  their  trea- 
sonable designs  and  their  ability  to  pay  at  least  a much  smaller  tax  for 
the  relief  of  their  destitute  and  starving  neighbors. 

Schedule  B is  a list  of  cotton  brokers  who,  claiming  to  control  that 
great  interest  in  New  Orleans,  to  which  she  is  so  much  indebted 
for  her  wealth,  published  in  the  newspapers,  in  October,  1861,  a mani- 
festo, deliberately  advising  the  planters  not  to  bring  their  produce  to 
the  city  j a measure  which  brought  ruin  at  the  same  time  upon  the  pro- 
ducer and  the  city.  This  act  sufficiently  testifies  the  malignity  of  these 
traitors,  as  well  to  the  Government  as  their  neighbors,  and  it  is  to  be 
regretted  that  their  ability  to  relieve  their  fellow-citizens  is  not  equal  to 
their  facilities  for  injuring  them.  In  taxing  both  these  classes  to  relieve 
the  suffering  poor  of  New  Orleans,  yea  even  though  the  needy  be  the 
starving  wives  and  children  of  those  in  arms  at  Richmond  and  elsewhere 
against  the  United  States,  it  will  be  impossible  to  make  a mistake  save 
in  having  the  assessment  too  easy  and  the  burden  too  light. 

It  is  therefore  ordered : 

1st.  That  sums  in  schedules  annexed,  marked  A and  B,  set  against 
the  names  of  the  several  persons,  business  firms,  and  corporations  therein 
described  be,  and  hereby  are,  assessed  upon  each  respectively. 

2d.  That  said  sums  be  paid  to  Lieut.  David  0.  G.  Field,  financial 
clerk,  at  his  office  in  the  custom-house,  on  or  before  Monday,  the  11th 
instant,  or  that  the  property  of  the  delinquent  be  forthwith" seized  and 
sold  at  public  auction,  to  pay  the  amount,  with  all  necessary  charges 
and  expenses,  or  the  party  imprisoned  till  paid. 

3d.  The  money  raised  by  this  assessment  to  be  a fund  for  the  pur- 
pose of  providing  employment  and  food  for  the  deserving  poor  people 
of  New  Orleans. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

R.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


540 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 

Schedule  A.— List  of  subscribers  to  the  million  and  a quarter  loan  placed  in  the  hands  of 
the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  for  the  defense  of  New  Orleans  against  the  United  States, 
av-d  expended  by  them , except  some  $38,000. 


Names. 


|!5j 

00  CO 
g '■d  and 

SO  .JS  .r*  © 

a js-g 

S _ bc'fl 
g ® ceP 


•g  as 

® — © . 
® ® -1  SB 

es  > S © 
S "©  '>i+J 

g 

cc 


Abat,  Generes  & Co 

Jonathan  Montgomery - - 

Thomas  Sloo,  president  Sun  Insurance  Company. 

C.  C.  Gaines 

C.  C.  Gaines  & Co 

Trustees  McDonogh  school  fund 

J.  B.  Slawson 

S.  H.  Wood 

Mrs.  S.  H.  Wood 

Jacques  Lange 

Widow  W.  P.  Welham 

Robert  Geddes 

Widow  Yogel 

J.  Lewis  & Co 

Samuel  Harby - -t 

Citizens’  Bank,  of  Louisiana — 

Giquel  & Jamison - 

E.  Booth 

Edward  Chapman 

Thomas  Layton 

D.  J.  Beagnot 

B.  Dryer  & Co 

W.  H.  Pierson 

Samuel  Looke 

Hartry  & Wintry 

Southern  Bank 

Richard  & Co 

Dr.  B.  Moss 

J.  & J.  C.  Davidson 

Dque  Lanata 

H.  Samorny 

R.  Turney 

R.  D.  Maclin 

J.  H.  Cohen 

Mrs.  C.  A.  Slocomb  . 

Committee  of  Public  Safety 

H.  Lee . - - - 

George  Zickendrath 

Hyde  & Goodrich 

Magee,  Horten  <fc  George 

Samuel  Loeb 

Valentine  Heerman 

S.  S.  Bickler 

John  M Demerest 

Thomas  O’Donnell 

Mrs.  B.  V.  B.  McMahon 

W.  H.  Letchford 

O.  F.  Thresman 

Frederick  Bauer 

John  Rickson 

McStea,  Value  & Co 

Jacob  Zoelly 

T.  Laford 

E.  C reswell 

H.  H.  O’Meallie 

Joseph  Field 

Jules  Dona  D.  Amanon 

John  Farrell 

D.  H.  Holmes 

S.  P.  Lamon 

Fanny  Hollander 

J.  W. "Stanton  & Co 

John  H.  Randolph 

Harriet  Morgan 

Rachel  Morgan 

Sarah  Morgan 

Elizabeth  Morgan 

Mary  M.  Morgan 

Margaret  Earrod 

Davis  Brothers 

Trustees  Fink  Asylum  fund 

William  Massey 


$210, 000 
40,  000 
50, 000 
2, 000 
3,  000 
340,  000 
10,  000 
5,  000 
2,  000 
7,  000 
10,  000 
10,  000 
20,  000 
10,  000 
14,  800 
306,  400 
7,500 
400 
8,000 
1,  000 

2.000  I 

1.000 

3.000 
10,000 

5.000 
10,  000 
10,  000 

3,  000 
20,  000 
9,  000 
1,  000 

1,  500 

2,  500 


$52,  500  00 
10,  000  00 
12,  500  00 
500  00 
750  00 
85,  000  00 
2, 500  00 

1,  250  00 
500  00 

1, 750  00 

2,  500  00 
2,  500  00 
5,  000  00 

2,  500  00 

3,  700  00 
76,  600  00 

1,  875  00 
100  00 

2,  000  00 
250  00 
500  00 
250  00 
750  00 

2,  500  00 

1. 250  00 
2, 500  00 
2,  500  00 

750  00 
5,  000  00 

2. 250  OO 
250  00 
375  00 
625  00 


o,  uuv 

5,  500  ! 

1 uu  uv 

1,  375  00 

865 

216  25 

150 

37  50 

200 

50  00 

1, 000  | 

250  00 

500  I 

125  00 

100  1 

25  00 

1,000  ! 

250  00 

250  I 

62  50 

100  1 

25  00 

50 

12  50 

50 

12  50 

1,  000 

250  00 

50 

12  50 

725 

181  25 

250 

62  50 

1,  000 

250  00 

1,  000 

250  00 

500 

125  00 

100 

25  00 

50 

12  00 

1,  000 

250  00 

150 

37  50 

150 

37  50 

2,  500 

625  00 

300 

75  00 

100 

25  00 

500 

125  00 

500 

125  00 

175 

43  75 

125 

31  25 

175 

43  75 

150 

37  50 

50 

12  50 

50 

12  50 

200 

50  00 

55,  000 

13,  750  00 

300 

75  00 

541 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

Schedule  A. — List  of  subscribers  to  the  million  and  a quarter  loan  placed  in  the  hands  of 
the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  for  the  defense  of  New  Orleans  against  the  United  States , 
and  expended  by  them , except  some  $38,000- — Continued. 


Names. 

Sums  subscribed 

to  aid  treason 

against  the 

United  States. 

Sums  assessed  to 

relieve  the  poor 

by  the  United 

States. 

25 

6 25 

John  J.  Adams 

1,  000 
600 

250  00 
150  00 

A W.  Bosworth ...... 

Charles  Briggs 

100 

25  00 

•T.  A.  Lima  Sc.  Co 

150 

37  00 

Charles  Loeffler 

200 

50  00 

George  C . Brower 

50 

12  50 

Patrick  Howard 

25 

6 25 

George  Cla.Tna.nn 

50 

12  50 

H.  H.  Heddon 

500 

125  00 

James  Goran 

100 

25  00 

Biseoe  &,  Simms _ _ . 

500 

125  00 

B.  C.  Young 

150 

37  50 

Dr.  A.  Benew .......... .... ....... 

125 

31  25 

Mme.  Ve  H.  Chetrew 

200 

50  00 

Henderson  Sc.  Gaines _ 

1,  000 
250 

250  00 

J.  S.  Aitkens 

62  50 

W.  O.  Deneare  __ 

1, 000 
200 

250  00 

J.  C.  McLelTan . 

50  00 

Mrs.  C.  F.  Snowden 

50 

12  50 

Louisiana  State  Bank 

7, 500 
5,000 
1,  000 
13, 125 

1, 875  00 
1,  250  00 
250  00 

Bank  of  America 

General  D.  E.  Twiggs 

J ean  Petit - 

3,  281  25 

1,  250,  865 

312, 716  25 

Schedule  B. — List  of  cotton  brokers  of  New  Orleans  who  published  in  the  Crescent,  in  Oc- 
tober last,  a card  advising  planters  not  to  send  produce  to  New  Orleans,  in  order  to  induce 
foreign  intervention  in  behalf  of  the  rebellion. 


Names. 

Sums  assessed  to 
relieve  the  starv- 
ing poor  by  the 
United  States. 

Names. 

Sums  assessed  to 
relieve  the  starv- 
ing poor  by  the 
United  States. 

Hewitt,  Norton  Sc  Co 

500 

Henderson,  Terry  Sc  Co  _ _ _ . 

100 

West  Sc  VillerA  

250 

Bradley,  Wilson  & Co 

500 

S.  E.  Belknap 

100 

West,  Rensha.w  Sc.  Cammaek 

500 

Brander,  Chambliss  Sc  Co 

500 

John  Williams  Sc  Co i. 

250 

Lewis  Sc  Oglesby 

100 

Tarlton,  Whitney  Sc.  Co 

250 

W.  A.  Johnson  Sc  Co 

250 

Bartley,  Johnson  &Co 

500 

Carroll,  Hoy  & Co 

500 

Hayes,  Gairverse  Sc  Co 

100 

Farley,  Jury  & Co 

500 

Frierson  Sc  Conway  Sc.  Co 

100 

W.  Cox  & Co 

500 

Green  Sc  Crump 

250 

James  M.  Putnam 

100 

R.  McHhenny 

250 

A.  Levi  & Co 

250 

Davis,  Jenkins  Sc  Co 

500 

Montgomery  Sc  Hall  

100 

Kirkpatrick  & Co  . 

100 

Bellocq,  Noblom  Sc  Co 

250 

McFarland  Sc.  Barksdale 

500 

Abut  & Cushman 

100 

Walker  Sc.  Co __ 

100 

Holloway  Sc  Lonsdale 

100 

John  L.  Lee 

250 

J.  W.  Champlin  Sc  Co 

250 

P.  H.  Skipwith 

100 

A.  D.  Henkel  Sc  Co 

100 

Knox  Sc  Hip-gins . . 

100 

R.  Yeatman 

100 

J.  J.  Persons  Sc  Co 

200 

Broad  well  & Havnes 

100 

Battle  Noble  & Co 

500 

Moore  Sc  Browder 

250 

R.  C.  Cummings  Sc  Co 

500 

R.  W.  Estlin  & Co 

500 

Montgomery  & White 

500 

Lane  Sc  Salter 

100 

Wright  Sc  Allen 

500 

S.  O.  Nelson  Sc  Co 

500 

Robert  L.  A dams  Sr.  Co _ . 

500 

Campbell  Sc  Strong 

250 

Horrell,  Gayle  Sc.  Co  

250 

Patton  Sc  Finney 

100 

John  Watt  Sc  Co . 

500 

542 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.XXYIL 


Schedule  B —List  of  cotton  brokers  of  New  Orleans  who  published  in  the  Crescent , in  Oc- 
tober last,  a card  advising  planters  not  to  send  produce  to  New  Orleans,  in  order  to  induce 
foreign  intervention  in  behalf  of  the  rebellion — Continued. 


Names. 


3 . oo 
a;  oa  a> 

m ®'Q'=! 


Names. 


CQ 


ps  pi-, 


Fellowes  & Co 

Payne,  Huntington  & Co. . 
T.  H.  & J.  M.  Allen  & Co.. 

F.  B.  Ernest 

Edward  Pilsbury 

George  S.  Mandeville 

Bell  & Bouligny 

Riebard  Nugent  & Co 

A.  Miltenberger  & Co 

George  Connelly  & Co  — 

J.  & G.  Cromwell 

Moses  Greenwood 

A.  Hillay  & Co 

Scruggs,  Donnegan  & Co. . 
Hughes  Hyllestead  & Co 

W.  & D.  TJrquhart 

Phelps  & Jones 

John  T.  Hardie  & Co 

Hawkins  & Norwood 

Walker  & Synder 

Gillis  & Ferguson 

J.  B.  Gribble  & Co 

Foley,  Avery  & Co 

Rosser,  Prothro  & Co 


500 
500 
500 
100 
100 
250 
250  i 
500 
250 
500 
500 
100 
500 
100 
500 
500 
100 
500 
100 
500 
250 
100 
500 
250 


Rotchford,  Brown  & Co 

M.  D.  Cooper 

Smith  & Johnson 

James  Bankhead 

McLemore,  Rayburn  & Co... 
Thomas  Henderson  & Peale 

Wood  & Low 

Gallagher  & Dyer 

Pritchard  & Flower 

Stuart  & James 

Thornhill  & Co 

Ar.  Miltenberger 

Gladden  & Seixas 

J.  N.  Burbridge  & Co 

Friedlander  & Gerson 

Warren  & Crawford 

Perkins  & Co 

Cutrer  & Harrison 

Nixon  & Co  

Copes  & Phelps 

Griffen,  Smedes  & Co 


500 

500 

100 

100 

250 

500 

500 

100 

500 

100 

500 

500 

100 

500 

250 

500 

500 

100 

500 

250 

500 


29,  200 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  August  5,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  W.  Phelps  : 

General  : Your  communication  of  to-day  has  been  received.  I had 
forwarded  your  resignation  on  the  day  it  was  received  to  the  President 
of  the  United  States,  so  that  there  will  be  no  occasion  of  forwarding 
a duplicate.  General,  not  at  liberty  to  accept  your  resignation,  I can- 
not consistently  with  my  duty  and  the  orders  of  the  War  Department 
grant  you  a leave  of  absence  till  it  is  accepted  by  the  President  for 
want  of  officers  to  supply  your  place.  I see  nothing  unusual,  nor  do  I 
intend  anything  so,  in  the  refusal  to  accept  the  resignation  of  an  officer 
where  his  place  cannot  be  at  the  present  moment  supplied.  I pray  you 
to  understand  that  there  was  nothing  intended  to  be  offensive  to  you 
in  either  the  matter  or  manner  of  my  communication  in  directing  you 
to  cease  military  organization  of  the  negroes.  I do  but  carry  out  the 
law  of  Congress,  as  I understand  it,  and  in  doing  which  I have  no 
choice.  I can  see  neither  African  nor  other  slavery  in  the  commander 
of  the  post  clearing  from  the  front  of  his  lines  by  means  of  able-bodied 
men  under  his  control  the  trees  and  underbrush  which  would  afford 
cover  and  shelter  to  his  enemies  in  case  of  attack,  especially  when  the 
very  measure — a precautionary  one — was  advised  by  yourself ; and  while 
in  deference  to  your  age  and  experience  as  a soldier  and  the  appreciation 
I have  of  your  many  good  qualities  of  heart  I have  withdrawn  and  do 
withdraw  anything  you  may  find  offensive  in  my  communication,  still  I 
must  request  a categorical  answer  to  this  question : Will  you  or  will 
you  not  employ  a proper  portion  of  the  negroes  in  cutting  down  the 


Chap.  XXVII. ] 


543 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

trees  which  afford  cover  to  the  enemy  in  the  front  and  right  of  your 
line  ? I pray  you  to  observe  that  if  there  is  anything  wrong  in  this 
order  that  wrong  is  mine,  for  you  have  sufficiently  protested  against 
it ; you  are  not  responsible  for  it  more  than  the  hand  that  executes  it ; 
it  can  offend  neither  your  political  nor  moral  sense. 

With  sentiments  of  the  utmost  kindness  and  respect,  I am,  your 
obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  E.  BUTLER. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  G,  1862. 

Lieutenant  Weitzel  : 

The  general  wishes  me  to  inform  you  that  upon  careful  examination 
of  facts  and  rumors  he  is  convinced  that  the  main  attack  has  been  made 
on  Baton  Rouge,  and  that  it  is  not  a feint  to  cover  any  assault  on  this 
place.  The  enemy  have  twelve  regiments  and  two  batteries,  in  all 
about  6,000  or  7,000  men.  With  the  force  you  have  he  thinks  you  can 
hold  Baton  Rouge;  at  all  events  he  wishes  you  to  make  the  utmost 
efforts  to  do  so,  and  if  you  repulse  the  rebels  to  follow  them  and  use 
them  up  as  much  as  possible.  If  you  are  obliged  to  evacuate  the  town, 
though  he  wishes  to  leave  much  to  the  discretion  of  yourself  and  the 
commanding  officer,  his  own  impression  is  that  the  place  should  be 
burned. 

Please  keep  us  informed  by  every  opportunity  of  all  that  occurs  with 
you. 

I am,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  DAYIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , D.  (7.,  August  7,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler:  [?] 

General:  The  confiscation  law  and  the  President’s  order  thereon 
will  instruct  you  fully  upon  the  points  concerning  which  you  desired 
information  from  this  Department. 

It  has  been  and  continues  to  be  my  anxious  desire  to  afford  you  re- 
enforcements and  whatever  may  be  required  to  enable  you  to  hold  your 
position  and  prosecute  successfully  the  operations  against  Yicksburg. 
To  that  end  earnest  application  was  made  to  General  Halleck  to  lend  you 
a helping  hand,  but  his  own  condition  would  not  permit  him  to  do  so. 

The  prospect  for  the  new  forces  is  very  favorable,  and  at  the  earliest 
possible  moment  you  will  be  strengthened  by  such  force  as  I trust  may 
be  adequate  for  your  security  and  success. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Government  must  rely  upon  your  eminent  ability 
and  that  good  fortune  that  has  hitherto  attended  your  enterprise.  You 
can  need  no  assurance  of  the  deep  interest  of  the  Government  in  your 
holding  your  position  at  New  Orleans.  In  my  judgment  it  is  worth 
more  than  many  Richmonds  to  the  Union,  and  the  utmost  confidence  is 
felt  that  everything  possible  will  be  done  by  you. 

General  Sherman  has  been  ordered  to  join  your  command  and  report 
to  you  for  duty. 

Yours,  truly, 


EDWIN  M.  STANTON. 


544 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  TEX.,  LA.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington , August  7, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

New  Orleans: 

General  : An  order  will  be  issued  to-day  adding  W est  Florida  to 
your  department,  * which  will  give  you  Pensacola,  as  you  desired. 

I have  conversed  with  General  Shepley  in  regard  to  sending  you  re- 
enforcements. It  is  impossible  to  do  so  at  the  present  time,  as  no  point 
which  we  now  hold  can  be  weakened  without  risking  its  loss.  It  is 
hoped,  however,  that  the  new  levies  and  volunteers  will  soon  enable  us 
to  move  with  vigor.  As  soon  as  it  can  possibly  be  done  a land  force 
will  be  sent  down  the  Mississippi  to  take  and  occupy  Vicksburg.  As 
Missouri  and  Tennessee  are  now  seriously  threatened  and  raids  made 
into  Kentucky  every  available  man  in  the  West  is  required  in  the  field. 
McClellan  is  barely  able  to  hold  his  position,  and  the  forces  here  are 

insufficient  for  the  defense  of  Washington. 

I find  our  entire  Army  so  divided  and  scattered  that  very  little  can 
be  done  till  they  are  more  concentrated  or  largely  re-enforced.  I am 
trying  to  do  both. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLLOK, 

General-in-  Chief , 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  7,  1862. 

Lieutenant  Weitzel  will  examine  and  determine  upon  the  best  posi- 
tions for  posting  troops  for  the  purpose  of  permanently  holding  the 
town  of  Baton  Rouge.  He  will  take  advantage  of  the  village  and  build- 
ings for  that  purpose,  aided  by  temporary  earthworks  and  abatis,  it 
necessary,  in  conjunction.  He  will  make  a report  to  these  headquarters 
as  soon  as  he  has  done  anything  or  formed  any  plan. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler : 

R.  b.  JJAVIb, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  August  7,  1862. 

Col  Halbert  E.  Paine, 

Fourth  Regiment  Wisconsin  Vols .,  Baton  Rouge  : 

Colonel  : I have  the  report  of  Colonel  Cahill  of  the  affair  at  Baton 
Rouge.  From  it  I am  inclined  to  change  the  opinion  which  I had  when 
you  left  me  with  Lieutenant  Weitzel.  Do  not  evacuate  Baton  Rouge, 
at  least  at  present.  Let  Lieutenant  Weitzel  examine  and  determine 
the  best  positions  for  holding  the  town.  Take  advantage  of  the  village  , 
and  buildings  for  that  purpose,  aided  by  temporary  earthworks  and 
abatis,  if  necessary,  in  conjunction.  The  political  importance  o±  the 
place  has  decided  me  under  the  change  of  appearing  facts.  Breck- 
inridge has  twelve  regiments,  fourteen  pieces  of  cannon,  eflectue 
strength  about  5,000  men,  and  that  is  the  entire  force  he  has  any- 


issued.  August  8,  1862. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


545 


where  under  his  command.  Let  Lieutenant  Weitzel  report  to  these 
headquarters  as  soon  as  he  has  done  what  he  can. 

Send  back  most  of  the  transports  and  all  of  the  wounded  and  pris- 
oners. Let  each  officer  commanding  a regiment  make  a detailed  report 
of  the  facts  of  the  day.  Let  Colonel  Cahill  make  a full  report,  as  com- 
mander of  the  action,  of  all  the  facts,  events,  captures,  with  the  full 
list  of  killed,  wounded,  and  missing.  I desire  this  as  the  proper  means 
of  making  my  own  report  to  the  Government. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler : 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R,  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


Special  Orders,  ) War  Department,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  183.  f Washington , August  7,  1862. 

* # * # * * * 

XV.  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  will  repair  without 
delay  to  New  Orleans  and  report  to  Maj.  Gen.  B.  F.  Butler,  U.  S.  Vol- 
unteers, commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf. 

******  * 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Baton  Rouge , August  8,  1862. 

Capt.  R.  S.  Davis, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

Captain  : I received  the  department  letter  of  yesterday  to-day,  and 
I am  compelled  to  say  that  I regret  very  much  that  the  general  has  de- 
cided to  retain  these  forces  here. 

The  ram  has  been  destroyed ; the  enemy  repulsed ; our  reconnoitering 
parties  yesterday  did  not  feel  him  anywhere  near  us  at  all ; we  are  not 
threatened  at  all  here  now ; therefore  this  is  the  time  to  evacuate.  It  can 
be  done  deliberately  and  coolly.  I consider  it  of  no  importance  what- 
ever to  hold  this  point  in  a military  point  of  view  now,  and  it  is  impor- 
tant to  show  more  strength  at  New  Orleans.  The  fact  that  we  hold  this 
place  does  not  prove  that  we  have  any  more  control  over  the  river  or 
the  river  more  opened,  because  our  transports  are  fired  on  above  and 
below  this  point,  and  unless  our  Navy  does  its  duty  we  might  occupy 
fifty  points  and  not  have  the  river  opened.  If  our  Navy  does  its  duty 
the  occupation  of  this  point  is  of  no  consequence.  If  it  is  ever  hereafter 
wanted  as  a base  of  operations  we  can  take  it  if  the  Navy  has  control 
of  the  river,  and  if  the  Navy  has  not  the  control  of  the  river  we  cannot 
hold  it  anyhow. 

I inclose  herewith  a copy  of  the  plan  of  the  defense  of  this  place. 
With  the  available  force  now  here  I consider  this  concentrated  position 
a great  deal  the  strongest.  I do  not  consider  that  an  attack  is  immi- 
nent for  some  time  at  least. 

I would  request  now  that  I be  ordered  back  to  New  Orleans.  I did 
35  R R— VOL  xv 


546  w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

not  expect  to  stay  longer  than  two  or  three  days,  and  have  consequently 
made  no  provision.  There  is  no  necessity  for  my  remaining  here,  but 
Colonel  Paine  would  not  relieve  me  willingly. 

I made  an  error  yesterday  in  the  rebel  regiments.  They  were  as  fol- 
lows : The  Fourth  and  Thirtieth  Louisiana,  the  Third,  Fourth,  Filth, 
Sixth,  and  Seventh  Kentucky,  part  of  an  Alabama,  two  Tennessee,  and 
two  Mississippi  regiments,  and  a large  number  of  guerrillas.  We  have 
five  caissons  and  a limber  deserted  by  the  enemy  about  3 miles  from 
here  on  their  retreat.  Everett’s  battery  lost  three  emissions  in  their 
camp,  which,  like  some  others,  was  in  advance  of  the  line  ol  battle.  A 
deserter  has  just  told  me  that  General  Buggies  was  killed ; Colonel  and 
Acting  Brigadier- General  Allen,  of  the  Fourth  Louisiana,  was  shot 
through  both  thighs,  and  Brigadier-General  Clark  you  know  we  have. 
A private  of  the  Ninth  Connecticut  picked  up  General  Breckinridge  s 
sword  on  the  field  and  has  it  now.  This  deserter  says  he  threw  it  away 

on  the  field.  _ , . , , 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WE11Z/LL, 

Lieut,  U.  8.  Engineers,  Chief  Engineer  Dept,  of  the  Gulf. 

[Incloauie.] 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Baton  Rouge , August  8,  1862. 

Lieutenant  : In  accordance  with  the  orders  ot  the  colonel  command- 
ing this  brigade  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  plan  of  defense 
for  this  place : With  the  small  force  in  the  command  I would  recom- 
mend as  follows : That  all  the  forces  be  drawn  within  the  arsenal  grounds 
and  quarter  them  as  much  as  possible  in  the  various  arsenal  buildings, 
and  that  the  following  line  be  then  taken  as  the  line  of  defense:  Com- 
mencing  at  the  northeast  corner,  I would  follow  the  crest  of  the  skjpe 
on  the  south  of  Bayou  Gross  to  the  eastward  of  the  high  knoll  in  the 
cemetery  ; thence  to  the  northeast  corner  of  the  wall  around  the  maga- 
zine ; thence  to  the  southeast  corner  of  this  wall ; thence  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  hospital  to  the  crest  of  the  slope  of  the  ravine  south  of  the 
magazine:  thence  to  the  fence  bordering  the  road  east  of  the  arsenal 
buildings ; thence  to  the  crest  of  the  ravine  which  runs  past  the  stable 
to  the  fence  on  the  north  of  the  hospital  ground ; thence  to  North  street 
by  a line  to  clear  the  hospital  grounds;  thence  along  the  north  side  of 
North  street  to  the  river.  I would  then  remove  all  the  powder  from  the 
magazine  and  store  it  in  a dry  room  as  remote  as  possible  from  the 
line  and  in  a bomb-proof  place  if  possible;  then  cut  down  every  house, 
tree,  fence,  &c.,  within  rifle-range  of  the  line.  The  line  should  be 
strengthened  at  all  places  where  it  runs  along  the  crest  of  a slope  by  a 
simple  trench  with  a gentle  reverse  slope.  At  all  the  ot^rparts  of 
the  line  I would  construct  abatis  with  the  trees  that  are  cut  down  and 
throw  up  a slight  breastwork  in  rear  of  abatis.  I would  pierce  the 
walls  of  all  the  buildings  with  loop-holes.  I consider  it  necessaij  to 
retain  three  gunboats,  one  to  sweep  the  ground  in  front  of  _the  left  flank, 
one  to  sweep  the  ground  in  front  of  the  right  flank,  and  thc  othcr 
sweep  the  ground  in  front  of  a line  drawn  from  the  hospital  to  the  mag- 
azine. 

1 am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient ■sen^nt^EITZEL 

Lieut.,  U.  S.  Engineers,  Chief  Engineer  Dept,  of  the  Gulf. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


547 


General  Orders,  ) War  Department,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  98.  j Washington , August  8,  1862. 

West  Florida  is  detached  from  the  Department  of  the  South  and  an- 
nexed to  the  Department  of  the  Gulf.  Brig.  Gen.  L.  G.  Arnold  will 
report  to  Major-General  Butler  accordingly. 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War  : 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  August  11  [131],  1862. 

Bear-Admiral  D.  G.  Farragut, 

Commanding  Western  Gulf  Squadron  : 

Sir  : As  you  are  about  to  leave  the  Mississippi  Eiver  for  a new  scene 
of  action,  and  I trust  victorious  operations,  before  you  go  I beg  leave 
to  inquire  of  you  whether  during  the  time  that  the  Navy  have  been  co- 
operating with  the  Army  in  this  expedition  to  the  Southern  coast  you 
have  found  myself  and  officers  willing  and  prompt  to  aid  the  naval 
operations  of  the  fleet  to  the  extent  of  our  means  and  ability.  If  we,  or 
any  of  us,  have  been  found  wanting  in  this  regard  you  will  do  me  the 
favor  to  state  frankly  wherein  we  have  been  deficient. 

Be  not  surprised  at  this  question,  to  which  I pray  for  a full  and  specific 
answer,  but  allow  me  to  say  it  arises  from  nothing  on  your  part  in  our 
intercourse  with  yourself  or  the  officers  in  your  squadron,  but  the  in- 
quiry has  now  become  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  meeting  or  yielding 
to  an  accusation. 

Believe  me,  most  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 

' Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  13,  1862. 


Oapt.  David  D.  Porter, 

Commanding  Mortar  Flotilla : 

Sir:  There  is  one  fact  that  I desire  to  set  right  in  letter  of  July  15, 
which  has  just  come  to  hand. 

The  assault  on  Fort  Saint  Philip,  as  soon  as  the  vessels  had  passed 
it  so  that  the  quarantine  station  could  be  occupied,  was  determined 
upon  months  before  the  landing  was  made,  i.  e .,  on  the  23d  of  February. 
Lieutenant  Weitzel,  of  the  Engineers,  who  finished  the  fort,  was  with 
me  for  that  purpose ; scaling-ladders  were  prepared,  boats  procured, 
and  the  scheme  fully  matured,  and  the  ground  practicable  from  actual 
experiment. 

Please,  captain,  do  not  judge  of  our  profession ; yours  will  furnish 
you  with  sufficient  scope. 

I have  directed  measures  to  be  taken  to  guard  against  the  very  as- 
sault we  intended  to  make  upon  Fort  Saint  Philip. 

Respectfully, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major- General , Commanding. 


548  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Private.]  Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  13  fill],  1862. 

Rear-Admiral  Farragut  : 

My  Dear  Sir  : I believe  you  might  well  be  surprised  at  my  official 
letter  of  to-day.  I need  not  assure  you  that  it  was  not  caused  by  any 
act  or  thought  of  yours.  It  became  necessary,  however,  to  meet  the 
representations  of  Captain  Porter,  of  the  mortar  fleet,  as  to  the  opera- 
tions of  the  Army.  I assure  you  that  never  have  I failed  publicly  and 
privately  to  acknowledge  and  add  my  testimony  to  the  concurrent 
thought  of  all  my  officers  in  their  appreciation  of  the  gallant  acts  of  the 
Navy.  My  dispatches  everywhere  show  this,  and  I only  call  your  at- 
tention to  the  fact  in  justification  of  what  I certainly  deem  an  unkind 
thought  toward  myself.  I am  not  aware  that  the  Navy  preserved  my 
army  at  Baton  Rouge;  if  so,  I will  acknowledge  it  with  pride  and  pleas- 
ure. I assure  you,  my  dear  admiral,  that  I feel  only  the  most  glorious 
exultation  at  the  exploits  of  your  branch  of  the  service.  You  need  no 
one  to  speak  of  or  herald  your  acts  ; they  speak  for  themselves.  The 
Navy  need  have  no  jealousy  of  the  Army,  especially  in  this  department ; 
and  while  I will  acquit  you  of  any  intentional  or  unintentional  neglect 
of  the  Army  or  its  acts,  yet  I will  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that 
the  only  mention  of  the  existence  of  the  army  of  this  department,  even 
in  the  official  dispatches  of  the  Navy  relating  to  the  capture  of  New 
Orleans,  is  by  Captain  Porter  in  these  words  : “I  sent  General  Butler 
in  the  Miami  around  in  the  rear  of  the  forts.”  For  this  I do  not  feel  at 
all  aggrieved  by  you  or  your  officers ; on  the  contrary,  I beg  to  repeat 
that  toward  yourself  personally  and  the  officers  of  the  squadron  I have 
none  but  the  most  cordial  feelings. 

Believe  me,  truly,  your  friend  and  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Neiv  Orleans , August  14,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : Since  the  attack  on  Baton  Rouge,  of  which  I sent  you  the  gen- 
eral description  in  my  last,  I have  directed  that  place  to  be  slightly 
intrenched  and  put  in  condition  of  defense.  My  judgment  has  been  to 
hold  the  point,  not  for  any  special  military  but  for  its  political  impor- 
tance. If  pressed  here,  however,  I must  evacuate  it,  but  shall  destroy 
it  before  I leave  it. 

We  are  now  threatened  by  the  whole  western  division  of  the  Southern 
Army,  under  Generals  Yan  Dorn,  Breckinridge,  and  Jeff.  Thompson, 
together  with  whatever  troops  can  be  gathered  from  Texas  or  on  the 
western  bank  of  the  river. 

The  withdrawal  of  the  troops  at  Vicksburg  and  the  apparent  inac- 
tivity or  withdrawal  of  troops  from  Corinth  has  allowed  the  concentra-i 
tion  of  all  their  troops  upon  us. 

Vicksburg  is  essentially  bare  of  troops.  We  are  considerably  weak- 
ened by  disease  and  discharges  of  those  whom  nine-months’  service 
have  shown  unfit  for  duty. 

I have  largely  caused  the  regiments  to  be  filled  up  by  enlistments 
here,  and  1 doubt  not  in  all  I have  enlisted  a thousand  men  in  the 
old  regiments,  and  I have  now  1,200  being  organized  as  the  First  Regi- 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


549 


meet  of  Louisiana  Volunteers,  National  Guards,  and  two  companies  of 
cavalry.  I think  I shall  get  two  regiments  besides,  but  that  is  a work 
of  time. 

I need  re- enforcements  very  much ; without  them  I cannot  co-operate 
with  the  Navy  against  Mobile.  Indeed  we  are  threatened  with  an  at- 
tack on  the  city  of  New  Orleans.  I am  not  specially  disturbed  at  that. 
If  it  becomes  at  all  imminent  I shall  call  on  Africa  to  intervene,  and  I 
do  not  think  I shall  call  in  vain. 

I have  determined  to  use  the  services  of  free  colored  men  who  were 
organized  by  the  rebels  into  the  Colored  Brigade,  of  which  we  have 
heard  so  much.  They  are  free ; they  have  been  used  by  our  enemies, 
whose  mouths  are  shut,  and  they  will  be  loyal.  I would  like  an  ex- 
perienced brigadier-general  in  place  of  the  lamented  Williams,  and 
would  again  press  the  appointment  of  Lieutenant  Weitzel,  of  the  En- 
gineers. 

If  I am  to  have  any  troops  I would  prefer  New  England  soldiers,  not 
that  they  are  any  better  than  others,  but  that  I know  them  better.  I 
would  not  ask  more  than  5,000  of  the  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut 
quota. 

I have  need  of  more  cavalry,  in  order  to  hunt  out  the  guerrillas.  A 
regiment,  with  what  I have,  would  do  immense  service.  May  I ask 
prompt  action  in  regard  to  the  re-enforcements  ? 

More  than  four  months  since  my  ordnance  officer  made  requisition 
for  some  ammunition,  .54  caliber,  and  it  has  not  yet  come.  Our  .54  rifles 
are  useless.  The  invoices  have  come,  but  no  cartridges. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  14,  1862. 

Count  Me  JAN,  French  Consul : 

Sir:  Your  official  note  to  Lieutenant  Weitzel,  assistant  military 
commander,  has  been  forwarded  to  me. 

I see  no  just  cause  of  complaint  against  the  order  requiring  the  arms 
of  private  citizens  to  be  delivered  up.  It  is  the  usual  course  pursued  in 
cities  similarly  situated  to  this,  even  without  any  exterior  force  in  the 
neighborhood. 

You  will  observe  that  it  will  not  do  to  trust  to  mere  professions  of 
neutrality.  I trust  most  of  your  countrymen  are  in  good  faith  neutral, 
but  it  is  unfortunately  true  that  some  of  them  are  not.  This  causes  the 
good  of  necessity  to  suffer  for  the  acts  of  the  bad, 

I take  leave  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  United  States 
forces  gave  every  immunity  to  Bomegass,  who  claimed  to  be  French 
consul  at  Baton  Rouge $ allowed  him  to  keep  his  arms,  and  relied  upon 
his  neutrality  $ but  his  son  was  taken  prisoner  on  the  battle-field  in 
arms  against  us. 

You  will  also  do  me  the  favor  to  remember  that  very  few  of  the 
French  subjects  hero  have  taken  the  oath  of  neutrality,  which  was 
offered  to  but  not  required  of  them  by  my  order  No.  41,  although  all 
the  officers  of  the  French  Legion  had,  with  your  knowledge  and  assent, 
taken  the  oath  to  support  the  Constitution  of  the  Confederate  States. 
Thus  you  see  I have  no  guarantee  for  the  good  faith  of  bad  men. 


550 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


I do  not  understand  how  it  is  that  arms  are  altered  in  their  effective- 
ness by  being  “ personal  property  f nor  do  I see  how  arms  which  will 
serve  for  personal  defense  (u  qui  ne  peuvent  servir  que  pour  leur  defense 
personelle”)  cannot  be  as  effectively  used  for  defensive  warfare. 

Of  the  disquiet  which  you  say  there  are  signs  manifesting  themselves 
among  the  black  population  of  a desire  to  break  their  bonds  which 
bind  them  to  their  masters  (“  certaines  dispositions  a rompre  les  liens 
qui  les  attachment  a leurs  maitres”)  I have  been  a not  inattentive  ob- 
server without  wonder,  because  it  would  seem  natural  when  their 
masters  had  set  them  the  example  of  rebellion  against  constituted  au- 
thorities that  the  negroes,  being  an  imitative  race,  should  do  likewise. 

But  surely  the  representative  of  the  Emperor,  who  does  not  tolerate 
slavery  in  France,  does  not  desire  his  countrymen  to  be  armed  for  the 
purpose  of  preventing  the  negroes  from  breaking  their  bonds. 

Let  me  assure  you  that  the  protection  of  the  United  States  against 
violence,  either  by  negroes  or  white  men,  whether  citizens  or  foreign, 
will  continue  to  be  as  perfect  as  it  has  been  since  our  advent  here,  and 
by  far  more,  manifesting  itself  at  all  moments  and  everywhere  (“  tous 
les  instants  et  partout  ”),  than  any  improvised  citizens’  organization 

can  do.  _ 

Whenever  the  inhabitants  of  this  city  will,  by  a public  and  united 
act,  show  both  their  loyalty  and  neutrality  I shall  be  glad  of  their  aid 
to  keep  the  peace,  and  indeed  to  restore  the  city  to  them.  Till  that 
time,  however,  I must  require  the  arms  of  all  the  inhabitants,  white  and 
black,  to  be  under  my  control. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 
Baton  Rouge,  August  14,  1862—9  p.  m. 


E.  s.  Davis, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General ; 

Captain  : I inclose  certain  correspondence  which  has  just  passed  be- 
tween General  Breckinridge  and  myself.  I send  it  lest  the  exigencies 
of  the  approaching  fight  should  knock  things  endwise  and  destroy  it. 
We  are  all  at  our  arms  looking  for  the  foe. 

Your  obedient  servant,  _ 

HALBERT  E.  PAINE, 
Colonel,  Commanding. 

[Inclosures.] 


Headquarters  in  the  Field, 

Near  Baton  Rouge , August  14,  1862. 

Commanding  Officer  Forces  at  Baton  Rouge: 

Sir  : The  object  of  this  communication  is  to  call  your  attention  to  acts 
of  outrage  recently  committed  in  this  part  of  the  Confederate  States 
under  the  orders  of  officers  of  the  United  States  Army  and  to  other 
acts  which  I am  informed  are  in  contemplation  under  the  same  orders. 

Many  private  houses  have  been  wantonly  burned ; much  private  prop- 
erty has  been  taken  or  destroyed  without  compensation ; many  unarmed 
citizens  have  been  seized  and  carried  into  imprisonment  upon  false  and 
frivolous  pretexts,  and  information  has  reached  these  headquarters  that 
negro  slaves  are  being  organized  and  armed  to  be  employed  against 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


551 


us.  It  is  also  stated  that  the  mayor  of  Bayou  Sara  has  been  ordered 
(in  case  he  cannot  procure  negroes)  to  impress  all  able-bodied  white  per- 
sons for  the  purpose  of  loading  coal  upon  the  boats  of  the  United  States 
fleet. 

It  has  been  the  earnest  desire  of  the  Confederate  authorities  to  con- 
duct this  war  according  to  the  usages  of  civilized  nations,  and  they  will 
adhere  to  them  so  long  as  they  are  respected  by  the  United  States. 

I am  authorized  by  Major-General  Yan  Dorn,  commanding  this  depart- 
ment, to  inform  you  that  the  above  acts  are  regarded  as  in  violation  of 
the  usage  of  civilized  warfare,  and  that  in  future,  upon  any  departure 
from  these  usages,  he  will  raise  the  black  flag,  and  neither  give  nor  ask 
quarter. 

I have  the  honor  to  request  an  answer  to  this  communication,  inform- 
ing me  of  your  future  purposes  touching  the  acts  herein  complained  of. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  C.  BRECKINRIDGE, 
Major-General , Commanding , C.  S.  A. 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Baton  Rouge , August  14,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Breckinridge,  C.  S.  A.: 

General:  In  reply  to  your  communication  of  this  date  I have  the 
honor  to  make  the  following  statement: 

None  of  the  acts  therein  referred  to  have  been  committed  to  my  knowl- 
edge in  this  part  of  the  United  States  under  the  orders  of  our  officers. 
No  private  houses  have  been  wantonly  burned.  Since  your  attack  of  the 
5th  instant  disclosed  your  purpose  to  drive  this  army  from  the  public 
property  of  the  United  States  I have  determined  to  adopt  such  meas- 
ures as  will  enable  me,  in  strict  accordance  with  the  laws  of  civilized 
warfare,  to  maintain  my  present  position.  The  accomplishment  of  this 
purpose  compels  me  reluctantly  to  burn  a small  number  of  houses,  in- 
cluding those  of  the  United  States  Government  and  of  private  persons. 
While  it  is  not  impossible  that  through  mistake  injustice  has  been 
done  in  individual  cases,  and  although  the  vigilance  of  officers  may  not 
always  suffice  to  prevent  wrong  on  the  part  of  subordinates,  yet  I be- 
lieve that  no  unarmed  citizen  has  been  seized  or  carried  into  imprison- 
ment upon  false  or  frivolous  pretexts.  No  negro  slaves  have  been  armed 
against  you  in  this  department. 

I have  no  information  respecting  the  order  alleged  to  have  been  issued 
to  the  mayor  of  Bayou  Sara. 

In  future  I shall  permit  no  wanton  destruction  of  private  property. 
I shall  permit  no  unarmed  citizens  to  be  seized  upon  false  or  frivolous 
pretexts.  I shall  not  arm  negroes  unless  in  accordance  with  the  laws 
of  the  United  States.  But  I am  informed  that  a corps  of  blacks  fought 
against  us  in  the  recent  battle  of  Baton  Rouge,  and  that  our  pickets 
were  found  tied  to  trees  shot  through  the  head,  and  I am  sorry  to  remind 
you  that  a most  barbarous  system  of  guerrilla  warfare  is  authorized  by 
your  officers  and  practiced  by  your  troops  in  this  department.  While 
we  saved  your  drowning  men  at  Memphis,  you  shot  ours  at  White  River. 

I am  informed,  too,  that  you  have  occasionally  raised  the  black  flag 
at  the  commencement  of  an  action.  Nevertheless  I shall  never  raise 
that  flag  which  all  civilized  nations  abhor;  but  I shall  try  to  maintain 
the  flag  which  you  have  too  often  promised  to  defend. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

HALBERT  E.  PAINE, 
Colonel , Commanding  United  States  Forces. 


552 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  16,  1862. 

Col.  Halbert  E.  Paine, 

Commanding  at  Baton  Rouge : 

Colonel:  Upon  the  most  mature  consideration, in  view  of  the  evi- 
dent preparations  to  attack  the  city  of  New  Orleans,  which  requires  a 
concentration  of  our  forces,  I am  constrained  to  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  it  is  necessary  to  evacuate  Baton  Rouge.  We  have  demonstrated 
our  ability  to  hold  the  place,  but  it  is  not  now  a question  of  ability. 
You  will  therefore  begin  the  movement  quietly  and  rapidly  ; get  every- 
thing off  except  your  men,  and  then  see  to  it  that  the  town  is  destroyed. 

After  mature  deliberation  I deem  this  a military  necessity  of  the 
highest  order — much  more  than  the  burning  Hampton  by  Magruder. 
That  town  was  burnt  by  its  own  friends  in  August  to  prevent  it  giving 
shelter  to  our  troops.  The  shelter  of  Baton  Rouge  to  them  is  a necessity 
in  the  long  winter  campaign,  to  say  nothing  of  its  advantages  as  a 
summer  residence. 

In  regard  to  the  poor  prisoners,  they  will  be  between  two  fires.  Use 
in  regard  to  them  your  best  judgment.  I do  not  know  that  I can  aid 
you  further  by  any  observations. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler : 

I am,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ E.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

p.  s. — With  regard  to  the  prisoners  in  the  penitentiary,  whatever  dis- 
position you  make  of  them  do  not  bring  them  down  here. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  16, 1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  This  will  be  handed  you  by  Joseph  M.  Bell,  esq.,  late  law  part- 
ner and  son-in-law  of  our  friend  the  lamented  Rufus  Choate.  Mr.  Bell 
has  been  serving  with  me  since  November  last  as  volunteer  aide-de- 
camp  and  military  secretary,  more  recently  as  provost  judge  of  the  city 
of  New  Orleans,  wherein  he  has  won  golden  opinions  from  all  right- 
minded  persons.  Major  Bell  goes  North  for  a moment  of  recruitment,  as 
he  has  good  cause  to  do,  and  I am  pleased  to  be  able  through  him  to 
communicate  so  directlv  with  the  War  Department. 

I have  but  little  doubt  that  I shall  be  attacked  here  within  the  next 
twenty  days  or  thereabouts. 

As  I predicted  some  months  since  in  my  dispatch  to  the  W ar  Depart- 
ment, I am  in  danger  from  the  dSbris  of  Beauregard’s  army  at  Shiloh. 
Some  nineteen  or  twenty  regiments  and  several  batteries  are  gathering 
in  upon  us  from  it. 

I have  ordered  the  evacuation  and  destruction  of  Baton  Rouge,  which 
will  be  effected  unless  an  attack  is  made  upon  it  by  Van  Dorn  before 
we  shall  get  away.  In  that  case  we  shall  fight.  The  pendency  of  a 
contest  there  is  imminent.  It  seems  to  be  the  tactics  of  the  enemy  to 
attempt  to  drive  us  out  of  New  Orleans  at  all  hazards.  They  agree  the 
town  will  be  destroyed  in  so  doing,  but  they  reason  that  there  is  so 
large  a foreign  interest  here  that  the  destruction  of  the  town  will  em- 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


553 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

broil  us  with  foreign  powers.  Whether  that  be  so  or  not  I do  not  pro- 
pose to  be  driven  out,  or  if  I am  driven  out  there  will  be  no  New  Or- 
leans. This  is  clearly  a necessity.  If  we  had  five  regiments,  or  5,000 
more  men  in  our  old  regiments,  there  would  be  no  attack. 

Major  Bell,  however,  understands  the  whole  subject  of  our  difficulties 
here  thoroughly,  and  will  give  you  the  fullest  information  upon  them 
you  may  desire.  • 

Ten  thousand  men  could  be  advantageously  employed  here,  however, 
and  any  expedition  to  Texas  should  start  from  here.  I am  anxious  to 
lead  one. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  August  19,  1862. 

Col.  Halbert  E.  Paine, 

Colonel , Commanding  at  Baton  Rouge , La. : 

Colonel  : Upon  your  representation,  through  Mr.  Bates,  of  the  state 
of  the  public  charitable  and  penal  institutions  at  Baton  Rouge,  wherein 
the  orphan,  the  insane,  and  the  helpless  are  confined  and  housed,  so 
that  the  innocent  and  helpless  must  be  so  greatly  the  sufferers,  I am 
inclined  to  countermand  my  order  for  burning  the  town. 

You  will  leave  it  as  whole  as  you  can,  unless  you  are  obliged  to  burn  it 
as  a matter  of  defensive  action.  I have  not  changed  my  opinion  of  the 
great  military  advantage  it  will  be  to  the  enemy  to  have  it,  but  I am 
impelled  by  a sense  of  just  humanity  to  overlook  that  advantage.  Its 
importance  is  not  such  as  to  justify  that  destruction  upon  the  unoffend- 
ing. 

With  New  Orleans  it  would  be  different,  which  must  be  held  at  all 
hazards  or  destroyed.  It  is  the  key  to  the  river  and  the  arsenal  and 
banking-house  of  the  rebellion. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

S.— You  will  not  delay  the  movement  on  account  of  the  statue  of 
Washington.  Leave  it  in  safety  if  you  do  not  bring  it  away. 


[August  20, 1862. — For  Secretary  of  State  to  Secretary  of  War  in 
the  case  of  Reilly,  a British  subject,  see  Series  III,  Yol.  II.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  20,  1862. 

Moses  Bates,  Esq., 

Superintendent  State  Penitentiary : 


Sir  : I certainly  cannot  sanction  any  law  of  the  State  of  Louisiana 
winch  enslaves  any  children  of  female  convicts  born  in  the  State  prison. 
Their  place  of  birth  is  certainly  not  their  fault.  You  are  therefore  to 


554 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

take  suck  care  of  them  as  would  be  done  with  other  destitute  children. 
If  these  children  were  born  of  female  convict  slaves  possibly  the  mas- 
ter might  have  some  claim,  but  I do  not  see  how  the  State  should  have 

any.  , ,. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedien^rvant,  BUTLER> 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  i Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf 

No.  288.  J New  Orleans , August  22, 1862. 

Edward  Le  Beau  having,  in  conjunction  with  Edgar  Le  Beau,  against 
the  orders  of  the  commanding  general  of  this  department,  destroyed 
arms  belonging  to  the  Confederate  States  for  the  purpose  of  depriving 
the  United  States  of  the  use  of  the  arms  and  having  buried  arms  for  the 
purpose  of  depriving  the  United  States  of  them,  are  sentenced  t - 
flnement  on  Ship  Island  for  the  term  of  one  year.  The  arms  will  be 
confiscated,  and  the  negro  boy  who  gave  themforiinitionofthc  <mn- 
cealed  arms— George  Washington  Walker— will  be  emancipated.  The 
proper  act  of  emancipation  will  be  made  out  by  the  provost  court  fo 
that  purpose. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Butler : g DAVIS 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  25,  18b2. 

Officer  Commanding  Forces  at  Opelousas: 

Sir:  I have  sent  Mr.  A.  Deslondes  to  you,  a well-known  gentleman 
of  this  State,  who  has  been  captured  and  held  by  me  under  his  Parole 

as  one  of  the  hostages  for  the  safety  of  Mr.  Burbank  “l^vou^forces 
ble  citizens  of  the  United  States  who  have  been  taken  by  your  forces. 
He  has  been  selected  as  a messenger  because  he  ha*  Pe®"liar 
sonal  interest  in  the  questions  presented  by  him,  and  goes  under  his 
solemn  parole  to  return  in  any  event.  , f M Hin,. 

Mr.  DesloDdes  bears  a copy  of  a letter  from  the  brotkei  A ,of  th 
bank  to  me,  disclosing  a course  of  treatment  toward  a citizen  ot  th 
State  of  Louisiana  that  I can  hardly  conceive  to  be  true. 

One  nurnose  I have  in  sending  this  note  is  to  ask  you  to  certify  to  me 
officMly  what  is  the  treatment  Recorded  to  Mr  Burbank, that  I may 
relieve  the  mind  of  the  brother  from  what  I shall  believe V™*? ' 
informed  to  the  contrary,  must  be  an  exaggeration,  and  I have  as 
sired  the  official  information  so  that  I might  be  m condition  to  act  un 
derstandingly  upon  this  and  like  cases. 

Mr.  Deslondes  is  further  desired  to  confer  with  you  whether  it  “ 
possible  that  some  arrangement  be  entered  into  by  which  the  c.tizens 

who  are  quietly  at  home  may  be  left  unmolested.  arrested 

Of  course  this  is  a matter  as  regards  numbers  that  may  be  arrestea 
of  much  more  importance  to  the  forces  which  you  command  than  it  can 
be  to  me,  yet  it  would  seem  to  be  desirable  that  some  convention  upon 
this  subject  might  be  had  which  would  relieve  the  war  of  its  piessu 
upon  the  non-combatants  on  both  sides. 


CHAP.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


555 


Mr.  Deslondes  is  informally  possessed  of  my  views  upon  this  topic, 
and  he  may  be  able  to  so  far  convey  to  me  the  views  of  the  authorities 
upon  your  behalf  as  to  make  a basis  of  more  formal  action. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEN J.  F.  BUTLEE, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington , August  26,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding , New  Orleans: 

General  : Re-enforcements  will  be  sent  to  you  as  early  as  possible. 
The  new  levies  are  only  just  beginning  to  come  in  and  are  still  unor 
ganized. 

I cannot  think  that  there  can  be  a very  large  force  under  Yan  Dorn, 
as  the  main  army  that  retreated  from  Corinth  is  now  operating  against 
Buell  and  Morgan  in  Tennessee  and  Kentucky.  They  estimate  Bragg’s 
forces  at  over  80,000,  and  it  is  known  that  very  considerable  detachments 
of  Beauregard’s  army  are  now  in  Arkansas  and  Mississippi.  It  is 
deemed  of  the  greatest  possible  importance  to  hold  New  Orleans,  and 
re-enforcements  will  be  sent  as  early  as  possible. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-Chief. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , August  27, 1862. 

General  : As  indicated  in  my  dispatch  to  the  Secretary  of  War  of 
the  16th  instant,  finding  a concentration  of  troops  by  the  enemy  I with- 
drew at  my  leisure  the  troops  at  Baton  Rouge,  and  have  them  now 
encamped  behind  my  lines  at  Carrollton.  As  the  town  of  Baton  Rouge 
is  now  held  by  two  gunboats  stationed  in  the  river,  and  if  the  enemy 
attempt  to  build  batteries  there  it  will  be  necessary  to  drive  them  out 
by  shells,  I ordered  the  State  library  to  be  brought  away,  and  Powers’ 
statue  of  Washington  from  the  State-house.  This  has  been  safely 
accomplished.  The  library  is  stored  with  the  city  library  here.  I have 
sent  the  statute  of  Washington  to  the  mayor  of  New  York,  to  be  held 
in  trust  for  the  people  of  Louisiana  until  they  shall  have  returned  to 
their  senses.  I deem  the  evacuation  of  Baton  Rouge  a matter  of  pru- 
dence, as  the  entire  force  at  Yicksburg  had  been  brought  down  to  Jack- 
son  and  Tangipahoa  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  an  attack  upon  New 
Orleans.  This  attack  will  come,  if  at  all,  in  the  course  of  twenty  days. 

I have  sent  to  Brigadier-General  Arnold,  at  Pensacola,  to  spare  me 
what  troops  he  can,  and  have  ordered  his  presence  for  consultation. 

Finding  from  your  letter  to  me  that  it  was  impossible  to  expect  re-en- 
forcements, in  time  at  least  to  meet  the  expected  movement,  yielding  to 
the  necessity  of  the  case  I have  called  upon  a portion  of  a brigade  of 
soldiers  who  were  in  the  Confederate  service,  and  are  now  ready  and 
desirous  of  doing  loyal  service  to  the  Union  here. 

I have  kept  clear  of  the  vexed  question  of  arming  the  slaves.  I am 
fortified  by  precedents  of  a half  century’s  standing,  acted  upon  by  the 
Confederate  authorities  within  six  months,  and  I believe  I have  done 


556  w.  FLA. 7 S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chad.  XXVII. 

nothing  of  which  the  most  fastidious  member  of  Jefferson  Davis’  house 
hold  political  can  rightfully  complain  ; and  since  I hud  my  acts  are  to 
be  reviewed  in  the  British  Parliament,  I have  done  only  that  which 
Great  Britain  has  done  in  the  "West  Indies  and  on  the  very  ground  upon 
which  my  Native  Guards  (colored)  are  forming. 

Inclosed  please  find  a copy  of  my  general  order  for  this  purpose. 

May  I ask  the  prompt  approval  of  the  President  of  my  action  in  this 
behalf,  as  the  only  drawback  to  two  regiments  of  these  Native  Guards 
(colored)  is  the  fear  in  their  minds  that  the  President  will  not  sustain 
my  action— a story,  by  the  by,  which  is  industriously  circulated  by  the 
rebels  here  to  prevent  the  enlistment  of  these  loyal  citizens. 

The  enlistments  of  white  men  have  succeeded  quite  to  expectations. 
A regiment  (First  Louisiana  Volunteers)  marched  to  defend  the  lines 
at  Carrollton  to-day  a thousand  strong,  as  fine  looking  a body  of  men 
as  I have  ever  seen.  More  than  a thousand  others  have  enlisted  m the 
various  regiments  to  fill  the  ranks.  Besides,  I have  three  companies 
of  cavalry  and  nearly  500  unattached  recruits. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEE, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commander -in- Chief  IT.  8.  A. 


[In  closure.] 

General  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Department  or  the  Gulf, 

No.  63.  ) New  Orleans , August  22,  1862. 

Whereas  on  the  23d  day  of  April,  in  the  year  1861,  at  a public  meet- 
ing of  the  free  colored  population  of  the  city  of  New  Orleans,  a military 
organization  known  as  the  Native  Guards  (colored)  had  its  existence, 
which  military  organization  was  duly  and  legally  enrolled  as  a part  ot 
the  militia  of  the  State,  its  officers  being  commissioned  by  Thomas  O. 
Moore,  Governor  and  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Militia  of  the  State  ot 
Louisiana,  in  the  form  following j that  is  to  say: 

The  State  of  Louisiana. 

[Seal  of  the  State.] 

By  Thomas  Overton  Moore,  Governor  of  the  State  of  Louisiana  and  Commander-in- 
J Chief  of  the  Militia  thereof. 

In  the  name  and  by  the  authority  of  the  State  of  Louisiana. 

Know  ve,  that  * * * having  been  duly  and  legally  elected  captain  of  the  Na- 

tive Guards  (colored),  First  Division  of  the  Militia  of  Louisiana,  to  serve  for  the  term 
of  the  war,  I do  hereby  appoint  and  commission  him  captain,  as  aforesaid,  to  take 
rank  as  such  from  the  2d  day  of  May,  1861.  • 

He  is  therefore  carefully  and  diligently  to  discharge  the  duties  of  his  office  by  doing 
and  performing  all  manner  of  things  thereto  belonging,  and  I do  strictly  charge  and 
require  all  officers,  non-commissioned  officers,  and  privates  under  his  command  to  be 
obedient  to  his  orders  as  captain  ; and  he  is  to  observe  and  follow  such  orders  and 
directions  from  time  to  time  as  he  shall  receive  from  me  or  the  future  Governor  of  the 
State  of  Louisiana  or  other  superior  officers,  according  to  the  Rules  and  Articles  ot 

War  and  in  conformity  to  law.  . , , ^ 

In  testimony  whereof  I have  caused  these  letters  to  be  made  patent  and  the  seal  ot 

the  State  to  be  hereunto  annexed.  ..  • fTlp 

Given  under  my  hand  at  the  city  of  Baton  Rouge  on  the  2d  day  of  May,  m the 
year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  slxty‘or,e^HOMAS  0 MQORE. 

By  the  Governor : 

P.  D.  Hardy,  Secretary  of  State , 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


557 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Orders  ? Headquarters  Louisiana  Militia, 

No.  426/  \ Adjutant- General’ 8 Office,  March  24,  1862. 

I.  Tlie  Governor  and  commander-in-chief,  relying  implicitly  upon  the  loyalty  of  the 
free  colored  population  of  the  city  and  State  for  the  protection  of  their  homes,  their 
property,  and  for  Southern  rights  from  the  pollution  of  a ruthless  invader,  and  be- 
lieving that  the  military  organization  which  existed  prior  to  the  15th  of  February, 
1862,  and  elicited  praise  and  respect  for  the  patriotic  motives  which  prompted  it,  should 

exist  for  and  during  the  war,  calls  upon  them  to  maintain  their  organization,  and  to 
hold  themselves  prepared  for  such  orders  as  may  be  transmitted  to  them. 

II.  The  colonel  commanding  will  report-without  delay  to  Major-General  Lewis,  com- 
manding State  Militia.  ) 

Bv  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor: 

M.  GRIYOT, 

Adjutant- General. 

And  whereas  said  military  organization  by  the  same  order  was  di- 
rected to  report  to  Major-General  Lewis  for  service  but  did  not  leave 
the  city  of  New  Orleans  when  he  did: 

Now,  therefore,  the  commanding  general,  believing  that  a large  por- 
tion of  this  militia  force  of  the  State  of  Louisiana  are  willing  to  take 
service  in  the  volunteer  forces  of  the  United  States  and  be  enrolled 
and  organized  to  u defend  their  homes  from  ruthless  invaders,”  to  pro- 
tect their  wives  and  children  and  kindred  from  wrong  and  outrage,  to 
shield  their  property  from  being  seized  by  bad  men,  and  to  defend  the 
flag  of  their  native  country  as  their  fathers  did  under  Jackson  at  Chal- 
mette  against  Pakenham  and  his  myrmidons,  carrying  the  black  flag  of 
“ Beauty  and  Booty :” 

Appreciating  their  motives,  relying  upon  their  u well-known  loyalty 
and  patriotism,”  and  with  u praise  and  respect”  for  these  brave  men,  it 
is  ordered  that  all  the  members  of  the  Native  Guards  aforesaid  and  all 
other  free  colored  citizens  recognized  by  the  first  and  late  Governor  and 
authorities  of  the  State  of  Louisiana  as  a portion  of  the  militia  of  the 
State  who  shall  enlist  in  the  volunteer  service  of  the  United  States 
shall  be  duly  organized  by  the  appointment  of  proper  officers,  and 
accepted,  paid,  equipped,  armed,  and  rationed  as  are  other  volunteer 
troops  of  the  United  States,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  President  of 
the  United  States.  All  such  persons  are  required  at  once  to  report 
themselves  at  the  Touro  Charity  building,  Front  Levee  street,  New 
Orleans,  where  proper  officers  will  muster  them  into  the  service  of  the 
United  States. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

R.  S.  DAVIS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Washington,  August  28,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding , &c.,  New  Orleans : 

General  : The  Secretary  of  State  has  called  the  attention  of  the  War 
Department  to  complaints  of  one  E.  Reilly  and  others,  British  subjects, 
made  through  the  British  charge  ddaffaires,  that  the  provost-marshal 
of  New  Orleans  has  required  them  to  take  an  oath  of  neutrality  before 
bringing  suits  for  recovery  of  property  and  before  receiving  passes.* 
I am  directed  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  say  to  you  that  oaths  are  not 
to  be  prescribed  by  us  to  aliens,  nor  to  be  required  of  our  own  citizens 
as  conditions  of  rights  or  privileges  in  cases  where  they  are  not  pre- 

* See  Seward  to  Stanton,  August  20,  Series  III,  Vol.  II. 


558  w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

scribed  or  required  by  law  or  general  regulations.  You,  however,  are 
authorized  to  establish  some  general  regulations  for  your  department 
or  for  New  Orleans,  which  in  case  of  doubt  will  enable  aliens  applying 
for  favors  that  can  only  be  allowed  to  loyal,  or  at  least  inoffensive,  per- 
sons to  prove  that  they  belong  to  that  class. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLJcjOIa, 

General-in - Chief , 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , September  1, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  the  Army  of  the  United  States  . 

General  : Nothing  of  interest  has  occurred  to  the  troops  of  this 
department  since  my  last  dispatch.  Our  dispositions  being  made  for 
defense,  the  forts  which  the  enemy  expected  to  surprise  being  strength- 
ened, I am  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  he  has  for  the  present  abandoned 
his  plan  of  attack.  My  informers  also  confirm  this  view  by  their  intel- 
ligence. Since  the  plan  of  attack  was  abandoned  Breckinridge  has 
gone  with  a portion  of  his  division  to  Mobile,  and  is  said  to  be  en  route 
to  Virginia.  The  condition  of  the  people  here  is  a very  alarming  one. 
They  have  literally  come  down  to  starvation,  not  only  m the  city,  but 
in  the  country.  Planters  who  in  peaceful  times  would  have  spent  their 
summers  at  Saratoga  are  now  on  their  plantations  essentially  without 
food.  Hundreds  weekly  by  stealth  are  coming  across  the  lake  to  the 
city,  reporting  starvation  on  the  lake  shore.  I am  distributing  m vari- 
ous ways  about  $50,000  per  month  in  food  and  more  is  needed.  This 
is  to  the  whites.  My  commissary  is  issuing  rations  to  the  amount  of 
nearly  double  the  amount  required  by  the  troops.  This  to  the  blacks. 
Thev  are  now  coming  in  by  hundreds,  say  thousands,  almost  daily. 
Many  of  the  plantations  are  deserted  along  the  coast,  which  phrase  in 
this  country  means  the  river  from  the  city  up  to  Natchez.  Crops  of 
sugar-cane  are  left  standing  to  waste  which  would  make  a million  of 

^GuerriUas  interfere  with  all  white  labor  which  would  be  peaceable 
and  impress  it  into  the  rebel  Army.  The  act  of  Congress  which ‘ allows 
no  proper  punishment  of  these  marauders  renders  it  impossible  to  re- 
strain them.  It  is  useless  to  tell  me  to  try  them,  send  the  record  to 
Washington,  and  then  to  shoot  them  if  the  record  is  appio\ed.  Events 
travel  altogether  too  rapidly  for  that.  In  the  mean  time  they  hang  every 
Union  man  they  catch,  and  by  their  proclamations  (see  Go\  eiaotUoore ^s, 
on  file  with  the  War  Department)  they  threaten  to  hang  every  man 
who  has  my  pass.  All  this  while  also  they  are  prating  in  their  papers 
and  by  the  message  of  Davis  about  carrying  on  a civilized  warfare.  We 
have  with  us  a great  number  of  negro  women  and  children,  barefoot 
and  half  naked.  May  I ask  in  what  way,  in  view  of  the  coming  winter, 
these  are  to  be  clothed  ! I can  house  them.  There  are  houses  of  rebel 

officers  enough  to  cover  them.  ..  , « 

I learn  by  the  secession  newspapers  that  I am  to  be  relieved  of  this 
command.  If  that  be  so,  might  I ask  that  my  successor  be  scut  as 
earlv  as  possible,  as  my  own  health  is  not  the  strongest,  and  it  worn 
seem  but? fair  that  he  should  take  some  partin  the  yellow-fever  season. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient^seiwant^  BIJTL 

Major-General , Commanding . 


Chap.  XXVI I.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION. 


559 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans  [September  — ],  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I send  inclosed  general  order  of  this  department  No.  62,  [62U  * 
wherein  honorable  mention  is  made  of  several  non-commissioned  offi- 
cers and  privates  of  this  division  for  gallant  conduct  at  Baton  Rouge. 
I would  suggest  that  the  medals  for  meritorious  services  provided  b,y 
the  act  of  Congress  for  soldiers  in  such  cases  be  forwarded  to  these 
brave  men. 

Since  I wrote  the  commanding  general  I am  more  and  more  satisfied 
that  the  immediate  attack  upon  this  city  is  put  off.  My  information 
confirms  that  from  every  source.  The  delay  is  in  part  owing  to  the 
fact  that  the  enemy  is  building  and  altering  two  gunboats  in  the  Yazoo 
River,  with  which  he  hopes  to  embarrass  the  fleet.  A movement  from 
above  might  destroy  those  boats,  which  are  only  guarded  by  a small 
militia  force.  We  cannot  reach  them  from  below,  as  we  must  pass 
Vicksburg  to  do  it. 

I take  leave  to  send,  for  the  use  of  your  office  and  that  of  the  com- 
manding general,  photographs  of  our  position  at  Carrollton  and  the 
surrounding  country,  reduced  from  a survey  that  I have  thought  it 
necessary  to  make. 

The  health  of  the  city  continues  admirable,  and  the  troops  are  fast 
recovering  from  the  sickness  and  fatigue  of  the  campaign  at  Vicksburg. 

I have  succeeded  wonderfully  in  my  enlistments  of  volunteers  here — 
a full  regiment,  three  companies  of  cavalry,  600  to  form  a new  regiment, 
and  more  than  1,200  men  enlisted  in  the  old  regiments  to  fill  up  the 
ranks.  I shall  also  have  within  ten  days  a regiment,  1,000  strong,  of 
Native  Guards  (colored),  the  darkest  of  whom  will  be  about  the  com- 
plexion of  the  late  Mr.  Webster. 

I shall  have  the  honor  to  have  increased  my  division  by  at  least  3,000 
men  (one-fifth  of  the  whole)  after  a nine-months’  campaign  in  the  un- 
healthy South. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

[BENJ.  F.  BUTLER.] 

[Indorsement.] 


War  Department, 

September  11,  1862. 

Received  this  day  by  mail,  in  an  envelope,  from  Major-General  Butler, 
postmarked  New  Orleans,  but  with  the  date  of  the  postmark  so  blurred 
as  to  be  illegible. 

P.  H.  WATSON, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Neic  Orleans , La .,  September  1,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant-General : 

General  : A press  of  other  much  more  important  engagements  has 
prevented  my  reporting  upon  the  letter  of  Captain  Porter.  + 


See  reports,  p.  42. 


t See  Thomas  to  Butler,  July  23,  p.  527. 


560 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


With  the  Commodore  (now  Admiral)  Farragut  there  has  ever  been  the 
utmost  reciprocity  of  aid  and  the  warmest  sympathy. 

I was  very  anxious  that  the  expedition  should  get  off  to  Vicksburg 
as  early  as  possible,  and  I did  everything  I could  do  to  speed  it.  Cap- 
tain  Porter,  in  his  letter  to  me,  expressly  so  states.  The  steamer  Em- 
nire  Parish,  which  was  a boat  belonging  to  private  parties  here  that 
had  come  to  the  city  relying  upon  my  safeguard,  was  as  much  within 
his  control  as  mine.  Nay,  at  the  very  time  Captain  Porter  complains, 
as  will  be  seen  by  the  affidavits  herewith  submitted,  the  Empire  Par- 
ish was  seized  by  him  and  wholly  under  his  control.  It  will  be  seen 
also  that  at  the  very  time  Captain  Porter  complains  to  the  Department 
of  the  delays  of  the  steamer  Fox  she  was  under  the  orders  of  Commo- 
dore Morris,  his  seuior  officer,  and  in  his  employ.  I inclose  the  original 
order,  which  I desire  preserved.  It  is  true  that  the  master  of  that 
steamer  got  drunk  and  behaved  badly  at  the  Passes.  That  truth  Co  - 
modore  Porter  states,  but  he  omits  to  state  that  for  such  conduct  the 
master  was  punished  by  instant  discharge.  Why  suppress  that  fact, 
which  was  known  to  Captain  Porter  t If  there  is  a naval  officer  on  this 
station  that  will  not  bear  the  fullest  testimony  to  the  exertions  of  my- 
self and  command  to  aid  the  Navy  everywhere  and  at  all  ‘ 

the  exception  of  Captain  Porter,  they  certainly  will  do  very  difteiently 
from  what  they  have  personally  stated  to  me.  My  chief  quartermaster, 
Colonel  Shaffer,  knows  the  facts  relating  to  this  transaction,  and  I de- 
sire  the  fullest  inquiry  should  be  made  of  him. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  E.  BU-LLM, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

United  States  Steamer  Octorara, 

Southwest  Pass , July  15,  1862. 

Mai.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans  . 

Sir:  Your  letter  of  July  15  has  been  received*  You  must  not  sup- 
nose  that  I wrote  to  you  while  under  any  excitement  from  the  fact  that 
you  had  applied  the  word  misstatement  to  the  report  made  to  you  in 
my  previous  letter.  It  was  some  time  after  receiving  the  eommumea- 
tionof  Lieutenant-Commander  Breese  that  I wrote  my  letter  of  the 

5tOnnhearing  what  was  alleged  against  me  I examined  carefully  my  first 
letter  to  see  if  I had  inadvertently  said  anything  to  offend  yon,  and  also 
handed  it  to  several  of  my  officers,  who  could  see  in  it  nothing  th 
could  possiblv  reflect  upon  you  or  the  Army. 

In  the  first  place,  I supposed  from  your  letter  ducted  to  me^SLn 
Island  (in  which  yon  urged  me  to  use  dispatch),  that  the  expedition 
was  one  started  by  yourself,  and  that  you  were  more  interested  in  it  e\  en 
than  I was,  it  was  most  natural  I should  look  to  you  for  support  when 
I found  that  your  subordinates  were  careless  m the  performance  of 'you 
orders.  Had  those  subordinates  been  officers  in  ^e  f my  I should 
have  said  but  little  on  the  subject,  and  I wish  to  say  here  that  I do  not 
consider  any  of  them  as  connected  with  the  Army  corps  m any ^w ^ y. 
They  were  civilians  in  every  respect  to  me,  apparently  indifferent  about 
obeying  orders  received  from  the  highest  authority.  


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  561 

It  was  my  duty  to  report  the  facts  as  they  appeared  to  me  and  in 
the  plain  manner  I am  always  accustomed  to  do. 

In  regard  to  the  application  you  make  of  the  word  “ misstatement,” 
I am  constrained,  general,  to  differ  from  you,  though  you  are  more  ac- 
customed to  argue  such  matters  than  I am.  In  a legal  sense  u misstate- 
ment” supposes  that  a man  may  have  erred  intentionally  or  uninten- 
tionally. We  know  that  a great  many  things  are  said  in  court  room  that 
would  scarcely  he  considered  worthy  of  a second  thought  there,  while 
such  expressions  used  to  an  officer  (especially  of  a different  branch  of 
the  service,  where  it  is  desirable  the  greatest  courtesy  should  exist)  are 
very  unusual  and  become  offensive. 

I do  not  think  you  are  happy  in  your  illustration  of  the  word  u mis- 
statement,” when  you  refer  to  my  official  report  to  Flag-Officer  Farragut, 
in  which  I said  “ the  steam-ram  Louisiana  appeared  to  be  moving  about 
quite  lively.”  It  was  a matter  of  little  consequence  whether  she  was 
moving  or  not ; that  part  of  my  communication  was  a mistake,  predi- 
cated on  the  reports  of  officers  and  seamen  aloft.  It  could  in  no  way 
be  considered  as  a misstatement  any  more  than  could  your  report  that 
you  were  landing  troops  at  quarantine,  preparatory  to  making  an  attack 
on  Fort  Saint  Philip,  which  the  nature  of  the  country  absolutely  for- 
bids. I have  since  learned  that  the  steam-ram  Louisiana  could  not 
move  lively  with  her  own  power,  and  I have  no  doubt  you  have  since 
learned  that  an  assault  on  Fort  Saint  Philip  at  that  time  was  a most 
impracticable  thing.  You  were  only  mistaken  in  saying  you  would 
have  assaulted  it,  and  in  no  way  could  be  accused  of  making  a misstate- 
ment, for  your  antecedents  show  that  you  are  not  afraid  of  placing  your 
troops  in  a position  no  matter  how  hazardous.  No  one  would  therefore 
have  a right  to  apply  the  expression  u misstatement  ” to  you  in  any 
official  statement.  You  made  it  at  that  time  as  regards  what  you  in- 
tended to  do. 

Conceiving  as  I did  the  word  u misstatement”  to  be  used  offensively, 
and  having  been  educated  to  look  upon  it  in  a different  light  from  that 
placed  upon  it  by  you,  I felt  myself  aggrieved  and  considered  it  as 
infringing  my  personal  honor.  Our  word  is  our  bond  in  the  Navy. 
Affidavits  with  us  give  no  more  force  to  an  assertion  than  it  possessed 
when  coming  from  the  lips  of  a truthful  man.  Excuse  me,  general,  for 
following  your  example  in  drawing  illustrations ; they  are,  however,  as 
apt  in  one  case  as  the  other. 

I should  be  very  sorry  if  there  should  remain  any  cause  of  personal 
grievance  between  us  after  your  explanation,  which  no  doubt  you  have 
made  with  the  intention  of  being  satisfactory  ; as  such  I am  content  to 
receive  it. 

I trust  you  will  consider  me  sincere  in  what  I said  in  my  letter  of 
the  5th  instant  in  relation  to  the  prompt  manner  in  which  you  person- 
ally acceded  to  my  wishes.  I still  remain  of  the  same  opinion,  and 
should  do  so  even  though  I might  consider  myself  personally  aggrieved 
by  you. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  D.  POBTER, 

Commanding  Flotilla . 


[Inclosuve  No.  2.] 

I,  Percy  F.  Edey,  hereby  certify  that  on  or  about  the  12th  day  of 
June,  1862,  while  acting  as  captain  of  the  port,  I received  an  order  from 

36  r r — vol  xv 


562 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Colonel  Shaffer,  chief  quartermaster  Department  of  the  Gulf,  to  send 
two  tow-boats  to  Captain  Porter,  commanding  United  States  mortar 
fleet. 

All  the  tow-boats,  with  exception  of  steamer  Fox,  were  at  the  South- 
west Pass,  and  it  was  impossible  to  communicate  with  them,  the  Fox 
having  no  steam  or  coal  at  the  time. 

I reported  this  fact  to  Captain  Porter,  and  at  the  same  time  informed 
him  that  the  Empire  Parish,  a steamboat  sailing  under  flag  of  truce 
and  then  lying  at  the  levee,  could  be  substituted  for  one  of  the  tow- 
boats. He  directed  me  to  see  her  owners  and  ascertain  if  they  would 
charter  their  boat  to  him. 

I had  an  interview  with  her  agents,  and  they  told  me  they  could  not 
charter  their  vessel  to  Captain  Porter.  . 

Captain  Porter  then  seized  the  Empire  Parish,  and  requested  me  to 
procure  a crew  for  her,  which  was  done,  and  the  vessel  reported  ready 
for  use  the  same  evening. 

The  steamer  Fox  was  made  ready  the  same  day  and  orders  given  her 
to  report  to  Captain  Porter  for  orders. 

About  3 p.  m.  of  the  next  day  she  towed  the  United  States  steamer  Mc- 
Clellan, then  lying  in  the  stream  (in  a disabled  condition),  to  the  wharf, 
and  the  captain  of  the  Fox,  instead  of  obeying  his  orders  to  report  to 
Captain  Porter,  moved  his  vessel  to  the  dock,  for  which  he  was  dis- 
charged the  next  morning  on  my  becoming  acquainted  with  the  fact. 

Another  master  was  placed  in  charge  of  steamer  Fox,  who  was  di- 
rected to  report  immediately  to  Captain  Porter,  but  before  he  could  do  so 
Captain  Morris,  commanding  United  States  steamer  P ensacola,  and  senior 
naval  officer  in  port,  made  a requisition  in  writing  for  the  steamer  Fox. 
He  was  informed  she  was  required  for  the  use  of  Captain  Porter.  He 
however  insisted  that  she  should  obey  his  orders,  and  he  would  explain 
the  matter  with  Captain  Porter.  She  was  accordingly  directed  to  obey 
Captain  Morris’  instructions,  and  she  was  employed  the  greater  part  of 
the  dav  in  doing  so. 

The  "next  day,  July  16, 1862,  she  took  in  tow  the  mortar  schooners 
Nos.  17  and  19,  and  proceeded  up  the  river. 

[In closure  No.  3.] 

AN  AFFIDAVIT. 

1,  Edward  T.  Thompson,  on  or  about  the  13th  of  June,  1862,  took 
charge  of  the  steamer  Empire  Parish,  as  captain,  by  order  of  Capt,  D. 
D.  Porter,  commanding  mortar  fleet.  Proceeded  first,  at  or  about  3 
o’clock  p.  m.,  to  Algiers  to  take  in  coal,  but  finding  no  coal-wheelers, 
returned  to  the  city  at  once.  I reported  to  Captain  Porter  at  or  about 
6 o’clock  the  same  evening,  who  ordered  me  to  use  all  dispatch,  take 
in  my  coal,  get  the  schooners  of  mortar  fleet  in  tow,  and  proceed  up 
the  river  to  Vicksburg.  At  or  about  7 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the 
14th  June,  1862,  having  coal- wheelers  on  board,  I proceeded  to  Algiers, 
coaled  the  boat,  and  about  2 o’clock  of  the  same  day  returned  to  the 
city  landing  and  took  in  provisions.  At  or  about  6 o’clock  same  day 
left  the  city  and  took  in  tow  two  schooners  of  the  mortar  fleet,  and 
passed  up  the  river  to  Nine  Mile  Point. 

1 E.  T.  THOMPSON. 

[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

U.  S.  Sloop  Pensacola,  off  New  Orleans , June  14,  1862. 
Captain  of  the  Steamer  Fox: 

Sir  : I wish  you  to  tow  up  as  soon  as  possible  the  bark  Saint  Mary^ 


chap.xxvii.1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


563 


a coal  vessel,  now  lying  abreast  of  the  French  market,  and  put  her 
alongside  of  the  steamer  Ooatazacoalcos,  to  coal  her.  I will  see  Cap- 
tain Porter  and  explain  to  him  the  necessity  of  my  giving  this  order. 
Very  respectfully, 

HENRY  W.  MORRIS, 
Captain  and  Senior  Officer. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  September  2,  1862. 

Santa  Maria  Clara, 

Superior  and  Sister  of  Charity  : 

Madame  : I had  no  information  until  the  reception  of  your  note  that 
so  sad  a result  to  the  Sisters  of  your  community  had  happened  from 
the  bombardment  of  Donaldsonville. 

I am  very,  very  sorry  that  Rear-Admiral  Farragut  was  unaware  that 
he  was  injuring  your  establishment  by  his  shells.  Any  injury  must 
have  been  entirely  accidental.  The  destruction  of  that  town  became 
a necessity.  The  inhabitants  harbored  a gang  of  cowardly  guerrillas, 
who  committed  every  atrocity,  amongst  others  that  of  firing  upon  an 
unarmed  boat,  crowded  with  women  and  children,  going  up  the  coast 
returning  to  their  homes,  many  of  them  having  been  at  school  in  New 
Orleans. 

It  is  impossible  to  allow  such  acts,  and  I am  only  sorry  that  the  right- 
eous punishment  meted  out  to  them  in  this  instance,  as  indeed  in  all 
others,  fell  quite  as  heavily  upon  the  innocent  and  unoffending  as  upon 
the  guilty. 

No  one  can  appreciate  more  fully  than  myself  the  holy,  self-sacrific- 
ing labors  of  the  Sisters  of  Charity.  To  them  our  soldiers  are  daily 
indebted  for  the  kindest  offices.  Sisters  to  all  mankind,  they  know  no 
nation,  no  kindred,  neither  war  nor  peace.  Their  all-pervading  charity 
is  like  the  boundless  love  of  u Him  who  died  for  all,”  whose  servants 
they  are,  and  whose  pure  teachings  their  love  illustrates. 

I repeat  my  grief  that  any  harm  should  have  befallen  your  Society 
of  Sisters,  and  cheerfully  repair  it  so  far  as  I may,  in  the  manner  you 
suggest,  by  filling  the  order  you  have  sent  to  the  city  for  provisions 
and  medicines. 

Your  Sisters  in  the  city  will  also  further  testify  to  you  that  my  offi- 
cers and  soldiers  have  never  failed  to  do  to  them  all  in  our  power  to 
aid  them  in  their  usefulness  and  to  lighten  the  burden  of  their  labors. 

With  sentiments  of  the  highest  respect,  believe  me,  your  friend, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER. 


[September  2,  10,  11,  and  18,  1862. — For  communications  from  the 
War  Department  to  General  Butler,  transmitting  correspondence  re- 
ceived from  the  Department  of  State  in  reference  to  complications  with 
foreign  consuls,  &c.,  see  Series  III,  Yol.  II.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans,  September  4,  1862. 
Treasurer  of  the  City  of  New  Orleans  : 

Sir:  Inclosed  herewith  please  find  $3,182.50,  being  the  amount  re- 


564 


W.  FLA. 7 S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXY1I. 


covered  by  my  order  from  Mr.  Pilffi,  late  city  surveyor,  which  was 
taken  from  the  treasury  unjustifiably  under  the  following  circum- 


stances : 

Messrs.  Pilie,  father  and  son,  have  held  the  office  as  city  surveyors 
for  forty  years  or  thereabouts.  Of  course  in  the  execution  of  the  office 
it  was  their  duty,  without  other  reward  than  their  salaries,  to  have  put 
upon  the  city’s  books  all  the  real  property  of  the  city  which  had  come 
to  their  knowledge,  and  this  they  did  do,  but  Pilie  the  younger,  being 
about  to  resign  his  office  on  the  1st  of  June  last,  because  he  would  not 
take  the  oath  of  allegiance,  claimed  of  the  city  5 per  cent,  commission 
for  property  to  which  he  had  ascertained  the  title  of  the  city  and  put 
upon  his  books.  This  claim  covered  the  time  from  1846  to  the  present. 

The  finance  committee  of  the  government,  themselves  about  to  retire 
for  the  same  reason,  being  the  same  men  who  had  wrongfully  invested 
almost  one-third  of  a million  of  the  charity  fund  of  the  city  intrusted  to 
them,  approved  that  bill,  by  means  whereof  this  $3,000  was  taken  out 
of  the  city  without  the  knowledge  of  the  acting  mayor.  This  seemed 
to  be  part  of  the  last  desperate  plunge  of  the  hands  of  unprincipled 
men  in  the  city  treasury,  and  this  amount,  as  soon  as  it  came  to  my 
knowledge,  I caused  to  be  disgorged  and  now  return  it  to  you. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 

Major- General , Commanding .' 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , September  9,  1862. 

Rear-Admiral  D.  G.  Farrag-ut, 

Commanding  Western  Gulf  Fleet : 

My  Dear  Admiral  : A week  or  two  since  there  were  imminent  threats 
of  attack  upon  New  Orleans.  I believe  now  that  has  been  put  off  till 
about  the  middle  of  October,  when  the  iron-clad  fleet  in  the  Yazoo  will 
be  finished.  This  my  information  gives  me  as  the  settled  plan.  The 
Government  should  give  us  one  of  the  new  iron-clads  to  end  these  hopes 
of  the  rebels. 

I have  now  an  expedition  upriver  under  convoy  of  the  Mississippi. 
The  Essex  is  here,  not  at  the  mouth  of  Red  River,  where  she  is  needed. 

I will  be  able,  I think,  to  aid  you  at  Mobile;  at  any  rate  I will  see 
you  within  the  next  ten  days. 

It  would  be  impossible  to  spare  the  New  London  on  the  lake.  I am 
causing  a crew  to  be  enlisted  for  the  Calhoun ; we  shall  need  her  also 
to  be  just  as  we  could  be  in  event  of  an  attack. 

My  advices  are  such  that  I shall  quarantine  Pensacola  no  longer, 
although  it  was  fortunate  that  I stopped  the  Rhode  Island. 

The  health  of  the  city  is  improving.  You  will  hear  fearful  news  from 
Washington,  but  I hope  not  so  bad  as  it  looks. 

You  will  be  pleased  to  learn  of  the  promotion  of  Lieutenant  Weitzel 
to  brigadier- general. 

Truly,  your  friend, 

’ BENJ.  F.  BUTLER. 


[September  10,  1862. — For  Butler  to  Halleck,  report  in  case  of 
Charles  Heidsick,  see  series  III,  Yol.  II.] 


Chap.  XXVII  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


565 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , September  10,  1862. 


Dr.  W.  N.  Mercer, 

President  Bank  of  Louisiana : 

Sir:  I have  carefully  examined  the  memoranda  of  resolutions  passed 
by  your  board  of  directors  and  submitted  to  me  on  the  subject  of  draw- 
ing against  the  specie  of  your  bank  now  not  in  its  vaults. 

The  proposed  arrangements,  if  carried  out  in  good  faith,  would  re- 
assure the  standing  of  the  bank,  save  its  stockholders  from  loss,  and 
benefit  the  currency  of  New  Orleans. 

With  these  views  I consent  to  it  on  behalf  of  the  United  States  Gov- 
ernment. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , September  10,  1862. 
General  Richard  Taylor,  Commanding , &c.: 

General:  I received  your  letter  by  the  Hon.  R.  C.  Wickliffe.  in 
whom  I once  recognized  a gentleman  of  the  highest  respectability,  but 
I take  leave  to  suggest  that  a flag  of  truce  bearing  communications 
from  one  military  officer  to  another  is  usually  in  charge  of  an  officer  of 
the  command  of  the  party  sending  it.  I am  pleased  to  be  informed  as 
to  the  command  of  the  Confederate  forces  on  the  western  side  of  the 
Mississippi. 

No  information  has  reached  these  headquarters  save  by  your  note 
of  the  occurrences  of  which  you  write. 

The  troops  at  the  Bayou  des  Allemands  were  an  advance  post,  guard- 
ing a railroad  bridge,  and  not  an  expedition  at  all,  nor  were  they  allowed 
to  go  on  any  expedition  up  the  coast  or  elsewhere,  so  that  upon  this 
topic  I am  constrained  to  believe  you  were  misinformed. 

I need  not  say  that  acts  such  as  you  describe  are  neither  ordered  nor 
tolerated  by  the  Government  or  by  myself. 

I inclose  a copy  of  my  general  order  and  also  the  order  of  the  War 
Department  upon  this  subject. 

That  unlicensed  acts  are  committed  by  troops  on  marching  service  is 
the  well-known  fact  of  all  civilized  warfare. 

If  any  deeds  such  as  you  describe  have  been  committed,  and  you 
will  send  me  the  written  evidence  which  you  have,  together  with 
the  parties,  my  acts  heretofore  should  convince  you  that  they  will  be 
properly  punished.  Therefore  if  you  have  the  guilty  parties  you  will 
do  well  to  allow  them  to  be  exchanged,  as  it  will  be  impossible  for  me 
to  ascertain  their  guilt  if  you  retain  them.  I could  have  wished  that 
this  answer  to  your  communication  could  have  ended  here  and  that 
you  could  have  contented  yourself  not  to  threaten. 

It  is  true  you  have  136  men  duly  enlisted  in  the  Eighth  Vermont  Regi- 
meut,  including  their  officers,  but  how  captured  ? A part  by  ambush  of 
a supply  train.  This  savors  rather  of  Indian  than  of ‘civilized  warfare. 

But  the  worst  remains  behind.”  I am  informed  that  the  guerrilla 
orce  which  made  the  capture  of  the  post  at  Bayou  des  Allemands  raised 
a nag  of  truce ; that  it  was ‘answered  by  another  flag  from  my  men,  the 
bearers  of  which  were  seized  and  detained ; that  a second  flag  was  sent 


566 


W*.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

out  to  request  the  return  of  the  first  5 that  this  also  was  seized,  and  the 
bearers  of  both  were  placed  at  the  head  of  the  advancing  column,  so 
that  my  men  could  fire  only  upon  their  friends.  Is  this  civilized  or  savage 
warfare  ? It  reads  precisely  like  the  history  of  similar  strategy  by  Tous- 
saint  L’Ouverture  toward  the  French  forces  in  San  Domingo,  and  would 
seem  therefore  to  be  not  even  original. 

I say  most  unhesitatingly,  general,  that  I do  not  suspect  even  that 
this  act  was  in  any  way  known  to  or  sanctioned  by  yourself,  educated 
in  the  United  States,  and  the  son  of  one  who  led  the  United  States  ar- 
mies to  victory  and  died  the  recipient  of  his  whole  country’s  highest 
honors.  The  mischief  arises  from  the  employment  of  a guerrilla  force 
of  undisciplined  and  lawless  men,  brought  from  a neighboring  State 
into  a community  where  they  have  neither  interest  nor  restraint. 

Now  I am  aware  that  your  authorities  have  called  this  force  Parti- 
san Rangers ; but  that  neither  alters  their  condition,  their  habits,  their 
disposition,  nor  acts.  Lawless  violence  has  been  and  ever  will  be  the 
distinguishing  characteristics  of  such  force.  Organized  originally  in 
Spain  and  Mexico,  from  a part  of  which  these  men  came,  it  is  known 
what  they  will,  nay,  what  they  must,  do.  Now,  although  I have  some 
30  of  the  very  men  who  so  abused  a flag  of  truce,  I shall  make  no 
threats  of  reprisal 

I take  leave  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  I submitted  through 
Mr.  Deslondes  a proposition  to  you  that  some  arrangement  should  be 
made  by  which  non-combatants  might  have  some  protection  from  the 
severities  and  hardships  of  war. 

You  are  reported  to  me  by  Thomas  O.  Moore,  who  assumed  to  be  the 
commander  of  the  forces  at  Opelousas  and  took  upon  himself  to  answer 
my  communication  to  that  office  through  some  supposed  adjutant-gen- 
eral, to  have  declined  any  arrangements  for  the  protection  of  non-com- 
batants, because  they  would  need  none  if  the  war  was  conducted  on  our 
side  as  the  Confederate  Government  had  always  conducted  it,  according 
to  the  rules  of  civilized  warfare. 

I am  at  a loss  to  distinguish  between  the  conduct  of  the  State  and 
Confederate  Governments. 

If  the  proclamation  of  the  late  Governor  Moore,  which  promises  “ short 
shrift”  to  those  who  may  buy  even  provisions  to  keep  them  from  starving 
in  New  Orleans,  which  threatens  each  person  leaving  my  lines  with  my 
pass  with  imprisonment  $ if  in  it^  intent,  its  meaning,  and  scope  that 
proclamation  is  according  to  any  rules  or  usages  of  either  civilized  or 
uncivilized  warfare  I have  failed  to  have  been  informed  of  them. 

That  burning  cotton  of  peaceable  planters,  rolling  their  sugar  into 
the  river,  and  destroying  their  sugar-houses,  as  has  been  done  all  along 
the  river  by  Partisan  Rangers,  and  that  too  to  their  very  friends  and 
sympathizers,  for  the  crimes  of  only  desiring  to  sell  their  crop  and  get- 
ting something  to  buy  provisions  for  themselves  and  their  negroes,  is  not 
civilized  I certainly  need  not  remind  a late  soldier  of  the  United  States 
Army.  Firing  upon  an  unarmed  boat  filled  with  women  and  female 
school  children,  and  almost  with  those  only,  is  neither  civilized  nor 

t)r£LV6  ' 

As  an  example  of  the  unacquaintance  of  the  rules  of  civilized  war  of 
a portion  of  the  forces  under  your  command  please  take  the  firing  of  30 
men,  protected  by  a village,  with  double-barrel  shot-guns,  uj3on  a United 
States  steam  sloop-of-war  passing  quietly  down  the  river. 

I shall  only  fatigue  you  by  enumeration.  I have  within  my  lines  and 
in  my  power  five  times  130  officers  and  men  of  the  Confederate  service 
as  prisoners  of  war,  from  a brigadier-general  to  the  inconsiderate  lad 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


567 


of  sixteen.  1 shall  treat  these  with  every  courtesy  due  their  position. 
No  hair  of  the  head  of  one  of  my  captured  soldiers  ought  to  be  touched 
upon  any  pretext  of  reprisal  or  retaliation.  I trust  you  will  reconsider 
your  determination  to  do  so  in  any  event. 

That  I punish  the  guilty  marauders  with  promptness  the  women  and 
children  of  New  Orleans,  who  sleep  in  calm,  undisturbed  quiet  under 
our  flag,  will  tell  you;  that  I deal  generously  with  my  enemies  a thou- 
sand and  nineteen  families  of  Confederate  soldiers  now  being  fed  from 
my  rations  will  testify.  That  I will  take  care  of,  protect,  and  avenge 
the  wrongs  and  lives  of  my  fellow-soldiers  confided  to  my  care  you  as  a 
soldier  can  judge. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major - General,-  Commanding. 

P.  S. — Since  writing  this  note  I have  received  a letter  from  Commo- 
dore Porter,  a copy  of  which  I inclose.  I state  frankly  I do  not  believe 
the  report  made  by  Commodore  Porter.  If  true,  it  only  adds  another 
example  of  the  infelicity  of  employing  such  partisan  forces;  if  false,  it 
shows  the  damage  of  reprisals  and  retaliation  upon  any  report  whatever. 

Bespectfully, 

B.  F.  B. 


[Inclosure.] 

On  Board  United  States  Gunboat  Essex, 

Off  New  Orleans , September  — , 1862. 

General  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding  United  States  Forces  at  New  Orleans , La. : 

General  : I understand  you  have  this  day  captured  some  guerrillas. 

On  the  15th  August  my  fourth  master,  Mr.  Spencer  Kellogg,  with 
four  of  my  seamen  from  the  Essex,  were  made  prisoners  by  some  guer- 
rillas at  Port  Hudson  when  engaged  in  cutting  adrift  some  flat-boats 
used  by  the  rebels  for  conveyance  of  supplies  from  the  west  bank  to 
the  east  bank  of  the  Mississippi ; the  next  day  they  were  hanged,  so  I 
understand  from  a citizen  of  Bayou  Sara  in  whom  I have  much  confi- 
dence. 

I would  ask  you  under  the  circumstances  that  retribution  be  car- 
ried out,  and  would  respectfully  suggest  that  for  each  seaman  of  mine 
hanged  one  guerrilla  be  shot,  and  for  my  officer  ten. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  D.  POBTER, 
Commodore , United  States  Navy. 


War  Department, 
Washington , September  10,  1862. 

Hon.  W.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State : 

Sir:  The  Secretary  of  War  directs  me  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of 
your  letter  of  yesterday’s  date,  and  to  inform  you  that  a copy  thereof, 
as  well  as  of  the  translation  of  the  Spanish  minister’s  communication 
which  accompanied  it,  has  been  transmitted  to  Maj.  Gen.  B.  F.  Butler,  * 


Documents  referred  to  will  appear  in  Series  III,  Vol.  II. 


568 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  & MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII 


with  instructions  to  submit  to  this  Department  as  early  as  practicable 
full  explanations  in  regard  to  the  complaints  alleged  by  Mr.  Tassara 
against  that  officer’s  administration  of  the  quarantine  laws  at  the  port 
of  New  Orleans. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  H.  WATSON, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen’s.  Office, 

No.  235.  f Washington,  September  11,  1862. 

^ -K1  ^ 

III.  Maj.  Gen.  Cassius  M.  Clay,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  is  assigned  to  duty 
in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  and  will  report  in  person  to  Major- 
General  Butler.* 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck: 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , September  13,  1862. 

Hon.  Gideon  Welles  : 

Dear  Sir  : I send  inclosed  herewith  the  communication  referred  to 
me  by  Commodore  Morris. 

I need  not  tell  you  that  I do  all  in  my  power  to  prevent  either  pillage 
or  plunder.  The  boats  were  sent  to  obtain  sugar  for  the  use  of  the  com- 
missaries of  this  department,  a matter  not  subject  to  criticism  by  Lieu- 
tenant Boe. 

The  tenor  of  the  whole  communication  is  so  remarkable,  that  I for- 
ward it  to  the  Navy  Department  with  the  indorsement  made  by  me  at 
the  time  of  its  receipt. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  E.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 

United  States  Gunboat  Katahdin, 

Mississippi  River , September  11,  1862. 

Commodore  Henry  W.  Morris, 

Commanding  Naval  Forces , New  Orleans,  La. : 

Sir  : I was  overhauled  yesterday  by  Lieutenant  Commanding  Lowry, 
of  the  Sciota,  while  at  Bonnet  Carre  Point,  and  directed  by  him  to  follow 
on  as  convoy  of  three  transports  of  the  United  States  Army.  Upon 
arriving  at  Donaldsonville  this  day  the  transports  landed  at  the  upper 
part  of  the  town,  landed  a party  of  troops,  and  commenced  receiving 


* This  order  was  never  obeyed.  No  record  of  its  revocation  is  found  in  the  Adjutant- 
General’s  Office,  but  in  his  personal  history  filed  in  that  office  General  Clay  states  that 
this  order  “was  revoked  by  President  Lincoln  in  his  own  handwriting,  he  sending 
me  on  a secret  political  mission  to  the  Kentucky  Legislature  to  see  if  that  State 
would  submit  to  a proclamation  of  freedom  to  the  slaves.” 


Chap.  XXVII  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  569 

on  board  sugar  and  other  merchandise.  A few  hours  after  I received 
positive  information  that  a company  of  these  troops  had  entered  a large 
mansion,  situated  near  to  the  landing  of  the  steamer  Saint  Maurice,  had 
pillaged  it  in  a brutal  manner,  and  carried  off  wines,  liquors,  silver 
plate,  and  clothing  belonging  to  ladies.  I am  informed  that  several  of 
the  soldiers  were  drunk  from  the  use  of  the  liquor  and  wine  thus  ap- 
propriated. This  house  was  inhabited  in  the  morning.  During  this 
time  the  Katahdin  was  at  anchor,  with  her  guns  trained  upon  shore 
over  the  Saint  Maurice  for  her  protection. 

I respectfully  request  instructions  if  the  guns  of  the  Katahdin  are 
to  be  used  for  the  protection  of  soldiers  upon  a marauding  expedition, 
and  if  I am  to  use  them  in  the  protection  of  drunken,  undisciplined,  and 
licentious  troops  in  the  wanton  pillage  of  a private  mansion  of  wines, 
plate,  silk  dresses,  the  misses  and  female  apparel,  to  say  nothing  of  the 
confiscation  of  sugar,  which  I believe  to  be  without  proper  and  lawful 
reasons  therefor.  I confess,  sir,  that  I blush  to  report  that  while  the 
troops  of  the  Saint  Maurice  were  thus  engaged  in  this  unsoldierly  and 
ungallant,  not  to  say  disgraceful,  operation  I opened  my  fire  upon 
guerrillas  hovering  in  the  rear,  apparently  occupied  in  preventing  such 
acts  of  the  United  States  troops. 

I feel  quite  ready  to  place  the  Katahdin  and  her  guns  under  the  fire 
of  an  enemy.  I am  desirous  of  encountering  enemies  and  of  injuring 
them  in  every  manly  manner,  but  I cannot  further  prostitute  the  dig- 
nity of  my  profession,  as  I conceive  I have  done  to-day,  without  an 
earnest  and  respectful  appeal  to  your  authority.  It  is  disgraceful  and 
humiliating  to  me  to  be  ordered  on  guard  duty  of  soldiers  employed  in 
pillaging  ladies’  dresses  and  petticoats,  and  I respectfully  request  that 
I may  be  relieved  from  such  service. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  A.  KOE, 

Lieutenant , Commanding. 

On  the  within  communication  the  major-general  commanding  made 
the  following  indorsement: 


[Indorsement.] 

The  acts  of  the  troops  in  pillaging  (if  true)  are  without  palliation  or 
excuse ; certainly  no  more  to  be  justified  than  this  improper,  bombas- 
tic, and  ridiculous  rhodomontade  of  a sub-lieutenant  of  the  Kavy. 
September  13,  1862. 

BENTJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Office  Chief  of  Artillery, 
Pensacola , Fla.,  September  13,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lewis  G.  Arnold, 

United  States  Volunteers , Pensacola , Fla. : 

General  : In  obedience  to  your  instructions  I submit  a report  upon 
the  means  adopted  for  the  defense  of  Pensacola,  as  follows : 

Woods  and  thick  undergrowth  sweep  well  up  to  the  town  on  every 
side,  except  where  cleared  away  for  our  own  fire  or  on  the  different 
lines  of  approach.  Generally  the  line  of  defense,  including  the  princi- 
pal portion  of  the  city  within  its  limits,  is  A-shaped,  the  flanks  resting 
on  the  beach  east  and  west  and  a redoubt  at  the  apex  to  the  north, 


570 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  (Chap.  XXVn. 


which  in  conjunction  with  gunboats  lying  off  the  prolongation  of  the 

lines  afford  ample  security.  , . , 

On  the  east  beach  the  mill  has  been  surrounded  with  abatis,  loop- 
holed,  and  otherwise  arranged  so  as  to  be  serviceable  for  and  against 
musketry  and  field  artillery.  The  swamp  to  the  front  and  left  has  been 
diked  and  overflowed  across  the  approaches  leading  in  west  of  the 
swamp.  A breast-height  has  been  thrown,  embrasured  for  one  gun 
(12-pounder  field  howitzer),  and  flanked  by  rifle  trenches.  A line  of 
abatis  runs  from  this  point  to  the  cotton-press,  the  8-foot  fence  around 
which  is  loop-holed  for  a rifle  trench  and  platformed  for  another  tier  of 
musketry.  The  brick  wall  forming  part  of  the  north  side  has  been 
loop-holed  and  embrasured  for  one  gun  (12-pounder  howitzer),  which 
bears  up  the  line  of  railroad.  Abatis  connects  this  point  with  the 
rebel  Ex- Senator  Mallory’s  house,  now  the  headquarters  of  Colonel  Wil- 
son the  fence  around  which  is  loop-holed  and  trenched,  and  a gun 
(12-pounder  field  howitzer)  placed  in  position  on  the  northeast  corner, 
which  flanks  the  abatis  to  the  east,  and  also  the  line  of  the  abatis 
running  up  to  the  redoubt.  A stockade  crosses  the  road  leading  into 
the  town  past  Colonel  Wilson’s  headquarters.  ^ 

The  redoubt  is  built  on  the  site  of  the  old  Spanish  fort  San  Miguel, 
an  eminence  which  commands  the  town  and  vicinity ; is  a half  bastion, 
with  flanks  and  wings  running  back  to  meet  the  abatis  on  each  side ; 
is  furnished  with  two  30-pounder  Parrott  rifles,  one  10-pounder  Parrott 
rifle,  two  12-pounder  field  howitzers,  and  two  roomy  magazines ; is 
closed  at  the  gorge  and  flanked  by  its  own  fire  as  well  as  that  from 
positions  occupied  within  the  lines.  Abatis  runs  from  this  point  to 
the  plateau  on  the  west  of  the  town,  where  another  work  has  been 
thrown  up,  commanding  the  Mobile  approaches,  and  consisting  of  a 
ditch  and  breast-height  embrasured  for  four  12-pounder  field  howit- 
zers. There  is  also  at  this  point  a battery  of  two  mountain  howitzers, 
to  be  used  as  required.  From  this  point  to  the  west  beach  the  line 
consists  of  abatis,  swamps,  and  rifle  trenches,  and  is  throughout  its 
whole  extent  arranged  for  a close  flank  fire  of  musketry. 

The  Fifteenth  Maine  Regiment  now  holds  the  east  of  the  town  as  tar 
as  the  cotton-press,  which  is  garrisoned  by  three  companies  of  the  Sixth 
Regiment  New  York  Volunteers.  Colonel  Wilson’s  headquarters  are 
held  by  two  companies  of  the  Sixth;  the  Lyon  house,  just  northward 
and  within  the  lines,  by  one  company  of  the  Sixth.  There  is  here  a bat- 
tery of  two  mountain  howitzers,  to  be  used  as  required.  The  llyer 
house,  just  in  rear  of  the  redoubt,  is  held  by  one  company  of  the  Sixth. 
Two  companies  of  the  Ninety-first  New  York  are  camped  between  this 
point  and  the  redoubt,  and  one  company  of  the  Sixth  garrisons  the  re- 
doubt. Four  companies  of  the  Ninety -first  hold  the  work  on  the  Mobile 
plateau,  and  four  companies  of  the  same  regiment  are  quartered  on  the 
lines  by  the  bay  in  the  southwest  part  of  the  town.  My  own  company, 
mounted,  with  a battery  of  four  Napoleon  guns,  occupies  the  center  ot 

the  town.  „ „ . , , 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully ,^our^>beaient^ser^d,^ 

Captain,  Chief  of  Artillery. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Troops  in  West  Florida, 

Pensacola , September  lo,  1862. 

Approved,  and  respectfully  forwarded  for  theinformationof  the  Gen- 
eral-in-Chief of  the  Army. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  571 

When  Major  Tower,  Engineer  Corps,  was  ordered  hence  to  Washing- 
ton soon  after  the  military  occupation  of  this  city  by  the  troops  under 
my  command,  Captain  Closson,  chief  of  artillery  on  my  staff,  was 
charged  with  the  additional  duties  of  acting  chief  engineer.  Lieutenant 
Duer,  First  Artillery,  was  detailed  as  his  assistant. 

The  credit  for  planning  and  constructing  (under  my  orders)  of  the 
admirable  defenses  around  Pensacola  is  mainly  due  to  those  officers.  I 
feel  that  I do  but  imperfect  justice  to  Captain  Closson  when  I com- 
pliment him  for  the  ability  displayed  by  him  in  his  plans,  arrangements, 
and  construction  of  these  lines  of  defense,  and  to  Lieutenant  Duer  for 
his  zeal  and  intelligence  in  carrying  out  the  orders  of  his  chief. 

L.  G.  ABNOLD, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  op  the  Gulf, 

No.  71.  / New  Orleans , September  13,  1862. 

As  in  the  course  of  ten  days  it  may  become  necessary  to  distinguish 
the  disloyal  from  the  loyal  citizens  and  honest  neutral  foreigners  resid- 
ing in  this  department : 

It  is  ordered  that  each  neutral  foreigner  resident  in  this  department 
shall  present  himself,  with  the  evidence  of  his  nationality,  to  the  nearest 
provost-marshal  for  registration  of  himself  and  his  family. 

This  registration  shall  include  the  following  particulars : 

The  country  of  birth. 

The  length  of  time  the  person  has  resided  within  the  United  States. 

The  names  of  his  family. 

The  present  place  of  residence,  by  street,  number,  or  other  descrip- 
tion. 

The  occupation. 

The  date  of  protection  or  certificate  of  nationality,  which  shall  be  in- 
dorsed by  the  passport  clerk  u registered,”  with  date  of  register. 

All  false  or  simulated  claims  of  foreign  allegiance  by  native  or  natu- 
ralized citizens  will  be  severely  punished. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  C.  STBONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  September  14,  1862, 

Brig.  Gen.  M.  0.  Meigs, 

Quartermaster- General : 

General  : It  will  be  absolutely  essential  for  the  operation  of  this 
department  this  autumn  and  for  the  safety  of  the  city,  if  we  are  to  be 
attacked  through  the  lake,  that  we  have  two  or  three  light-draught 
steamers  fitted  to  go  outside  in  the  sea  if  necessary  and  sufficiently 
shallow  to  run  up  the  bayous.  Beside  their  capacity  for  carrying 
troops,  they  should  carry  some  guns  as  a protection,  with  canister, 
against  the  ambush  of  the  guerrillas  in  the  canebrake,  and  to  protect 
landings.  If  you  will  cast  your  eye  upon  the  map  of  the  part  of  Louis- 
iana west  of  the  river,  and  so  down  to  the  coast,  you  will  see  the  per- 
fect net-work  of  bayous,  lakes,  rivers,  and  inlets  which  cover  that 


572 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTI. 


country  and  render  every  part  accessible  by  water ; indeed  in  no  other 
way.  Now,  all  these  bayons  have  this  remarkable  condition  in  com- 
mon : At  the  mouth  of  each  is  a bar,  leaving  but  4 or  5 feet  depth  of 
water,  while  insid’e  there  will  be  10  to  30  feet.  To  meet  this  state  of 
facts  (the  Navy  have  no  boat  that  draws  less  than  7 feet  when  loaded, 
so  that  they  are  useless  for  the  service)  I have  taken  two  steamers 
(river),  and  am  so  altering  and  strengthening  them  as  to  fit  them  for 
the  service  desired.  They  will  draw  when  loaded  about  4 feet  of  water, 
and  I shall  come  then  with  power  enough  to  resist  any  guerrilla  or 
[other]  attack.  The  expense  with  new  boilers ' for  one  will  be  in  the 
neighborhood  of  $12,000. 

There  is  another  difficulty  uuder  which  we  labor.  These  are  high- 
pressure  boats,  which  advertise  their  approach  3 miles,  so  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  capture  anybody  or  to  get  any  supplies  that  can  be' moved 
or  got  out  of  the  way.  I desire,  therefore,  a light-draught  low-pressure 
boat  that  can  burn  hard  coal.  Such  a one  I find  here  in  the  Nassau, 
and  if  she  is  suitable  in  other  respects  1 desire  authority  to  purchase 
her.  I shall  take  her  until  I get  a return  frorn  this  note,  and  endeavor 
to  do  so  with  privilege  of  buying  her,  deducting  her  use.  The  exigen- 
cies of  public  service,  in  my  judgment,  clearly  call  for  the  expenditure. 
She  will  cost  in  the  neighborhood  of  $40,000;  less  perhaps.  Any  delay 
with  the  necessary  alterations  will  embarrass  it  much. 

An  early  reply  is  requested. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  E.  BUTLEE, 
Major - General , Commanding. 


Washington,  D.  O.,  September  14,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  New  Orleans : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  re- 
port of  the  1st  instant. 

The  rumor  in  regard  to  your  removal  from  the  command  is  a mere 
newspaper  story,  without  foundation.  Probably  some  one  who  wished 
the  changes  proposed  made  the  publication  as  a feeler  of  public  senti- 
ment. 

The  matter  of  feeding  the  negroes  on  your  hands  is  one  of  serious 
importance,  and,  if  possible,  some  measures  should  be  taken  to  make 
them  earn  their  own  living.  The  law  of  humanity  forbids  us  from 
permitting  them  to  starve,  but  if  we  adopt  the  principle  of  feeding  all 
who  come  within  our  lines  the  only  alternative  may  be  starvation  to 
ourselves.  I leave  the  matter,  however,  entirely  to  your  discretion, 
hoping  that  you  will  economize  the  expenses  as  much  as  jiossible.  In 
regard  to  guerrilla  bands  and  marauders,  the  act  of  the  last  Congress 
has  completely  tied  the  hands  of  our  officers;  they  can  now  do  noth- 
ing to  abate  this  terrible  evil. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  73.  / New  Orleans , September  18,  1862. 

I.  All  transfers  of  property  or  rights  of  property,  real,  mixed,  per- 
sonal, or  incorporeal,  except  necessary  food,  medicine,  and  clothing, 


Chaf.XXVH.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


573 


either  by  way  of  sale,  gift,  pledge,  payment,  lease,  or  loan,  by  an  inhab- 
itant of  this  department  who  has  not  returned  to  his  or  her  allegiance 
to  the  United  States  (having  once  been  a citizen  thereof),  are  forbidden 
and  void,  and  the  person  transferring  and  the  person  receiving  shall  be 
punished  by  fine  or  imprisonment  or  both. 

II.  All  registers  of  the  transfer  of  certificates  of  stock  or  shares  in 
any  incorporated  or  joint  stock  company  or  association  in  which  any 
inhabitant  of  this  department  who  has  not  returned  to  his  or  her  alle- 
giance to  the  United  States  (having  once  been  a citizen  thereof)  has  any 
interest  are  forbidden,  and  the  clerk  or  other  officer  making  or  record- 
ing the  transfer  will  be  held  equally  guilty  with  the  transferer. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  September  19,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  the  inclosed  report  to  the  State 
Department*  for  information,  as  an  exposition  of  some  of  the  difficulties 
with  which  I have  to  contend  here. 

The  city  is  in  a very  excited  condition  and  sufficiently  uneasy,  but  I 
think  I shall  have  no  trouble.  As  the  day  on  which  the  confiscation 
act  goes  into  operation  approaches  the  uneasiness  and  disquiet  are  more 
apparent,  but  all  will  be  held  firmly  and  calmly. 

I believe  all  danger  of  outward  attack  has  for  the  present  disap- 
peared, and  as  soon  as  the  weather  is  less  oppressive  I propose  to  take 
the  offensive. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  74.  j New  Orleans , September  19,  1862. 

I.  It  having  been  made  to  appear  to  the  commanding  general  that 
upon  marches  and  expeditions  soldiers  of  the  United  States  Army 
have  entered  houses  and  taken  therefrom  private  property  and  appro- 
priated the  same  to  their  own  use  : 

It  is  therefore  ordered  that  a copy  of  General  Orders,  No.  107,  cur- 
rent series,  from  the  War  Department  be  distributed  to  every  com- 
missioned officer  of  this  command,  and  that  the  same  be  read,  together 
with  this  order,  to  each  company  in  this  department  three  several  times 
at  different  company  roll  calls. 

II.  It  is  further  ordered  that  all  complaints  that  private  property  has 
been  taken  from  peaceable  citizens  in  contravention  of  said  General 
Orders,  No.  107,  be  submitted  to  a board  of  survey,  and  that  the  amount 
of  damage  determined  shall  be  deducted  from  the  pay  of  the  officers 


•Report  is  upon  the  case  of  C.  McDougall  Fogo  and  effects  of  Reverdy  Johnson’s 
mission,  and  will  appear  in  Series  III,  Vol.  II. 


574 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.}  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


commanding  the  troops  committing  the  outrage  in  proportion  to  their 
rank. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler  : 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Department  of  New  Mexico , Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Carleton  com- 
manding, for  the  month  of  September,  1862  ( headquarters  Santa  F6,  N.  Mex.). 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  presont. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent  at  last 

monthly  return. 

Officers. 

Men. 

11 

11 

12 

8 

7 

184 

260 

283 

410 

10 

327 

380 

425 

146 

8 

188 

306 

457 

416 

1 

17 

18 

18 

16 

8 

166 

253 

297 

54 

2 

71 

89 

91 

91 

7 

94 

124 

147 

147 

5 

138 

171 

172 

172 

2 

52 

71 

80 

80 

2 

186 

222 

273 

* 146 

268 

335 

1 

78 

93 

98 

482 

64 

1,  501 

1,  998 

2,  353 

2,  771 

50~ 

1, 252 

1,  523 

1,  725 

Command. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico:  Brig.  G-en.  J.  H. 
Carleton. 

FortMarcy,  Lieut.  Col.  T.  H.  Dodd,  2d  Colorado  Volunteers: 
Companies  A and  B,  2d  Colorado  Volunteers,  and  H and  K, 
1st  Hew  Mexico  Volunteers).  „ . _ , 

Fort  Garland,  Colo.,  Maj.  A.  H.  Mayer, 1st  Hew  Mexico  Vol- 
unteers: Company  C,  3d  Cavalry ; D and  M,  1st  New  Mex- 
ico Volunteers;  H and  K,  1st,  and  H,  2d  Colorado  Volun- 

Fort  Union,  N.  Mex.,  Capt.  P.  W.  L.  Plympton,  7th  U.  S.  In- 
fantry : Companies  C,  F,  and  H,  7th  Infantry ; B and  F,  1st, 
and  C,  2d  Colorado  Volunteers.  _ 

Fort  Union  Depot,  Capt.  W.  It.  Shoemaker,  M.  S.  K.:  Ordnance 


company.  ~ 

Peralta,  N.  Mex.,  Cant.  H.  B.  Bristol.  5th U.  S.  Infantry : Com 


panics  D,  E,  F,  and  G,  5th  U.  S.  Infantry . 

Cubero,  N.  Mex.,  Capt.  J.  C.  S^aw,  1st  New  Mexico  Volun- 
teers : Company  F,  1st  New  Mexico  Volunteers. 

Loa  Lunas,  N.  Mex.,  Col.  C.  Carson,  1st  New  Mexico  Vol- 
unteers : Companies  A and  G,  1st  New  Mexico  Volunteers. 

Polvadera,  N.  Mex.,  Maj.  Arthur  Morrison,  1st  New  Mexico 
Volunteers:  Companies  Band  I,  IstN.  Mexico  Volunteers. 

Gallisteo,  N.  Mex.,  Capt.  J.  D.  Sena,  1st  New  Mexico  Volun- 
teers: Company  C,  1st  New  Mexico  Volunteers. 

Fort  Craig,  N.  Mex.,  Capt.  Samuel  Archer,  5th  U.  S.  In- 
fantry : Companies  A,  B,  I,  and  K,  5th  U.  S.  Infantry. 

En  route  for  Arizona,  Capt.  J.  UpdegrafF,  5th  U.  S.  Infantry : 
Five  companies  of  the  5th  Infantry  and  Company  F,  2d  Colo- 
rado Volunteers,  mounted. 

Camp  near  Fort  Craig,  Maj.  E.  W.  Wynkoop,  1st  Colorado 
Volunteers:  Four  companies  1st  Colorado  Volunteers. 

Camp  Wingate,  N.  Mex.,  Capt.  H.  It.  Selden,  5th  U.  S.  In- 
fantry: Companies  D and  G,  1st  Cavalry,  U.  S.  Army. 


Total . 


Aggregate  of  the  “Column  from  California”  borne  on  the  re- 
turns of  the  Department  of  the  Pacific,  but  serving  within 
the  Department  of  New  Mexico. 


By  authority  of  instructions  from  Headquarters  of  the  Army,  dated  June  12  and  August  15,  1861, 
the  companies  of  the  Tenth  Infantry,  the  First,  Second,  and  Third  Cavalry,  were  ordered  to  report  to 
the  commanding  officer  of  Fort  Leavenworth,  Nans.,  pursuant  to  Department  S.O.,  No.  168,  ooptem- 
ber  18,  1862,  but  a portion  of  this  order  being  rescinded,  two  companies,  D and  G,  First,  and  Company 
C,  Third  U.  S.  Cavalry  remained  on  duty  within  this  department. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

No.  85.  J Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  September  21, 1862. 

In  entering  upon  the  duties  that  remove  him  from  immediate  asso- 
ciation with  the  troops  constituting  the  Column  from  California  the 
commanding  general  desires  to  express  his  grateful  acknowledgment 
of  the  conduct  and  services  of  the  officers  and  men  of  that  command. 


Chap.  XXYH.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  575 

Traversing  a desert  country,  that  has  heretofore  been  regarded  as  im- 
practicable for  the  operations  of  large  bodies  of  troops,  they  have 
reached  their  destination  and  accomplished  the  object  assigned  them, 
not  only  without  loss  of  any  kind,  but  improved  in  discipline,  in  morale , 
and  in  every  other  element  of  efficiency.  That  patient  and  cheerful 
endurance  of  hardships,  the  zeal  and  alacrity  with  which  they  have 
grappled  with  and  overcome  obstacles  that  would  have  been  insur- 
mountable to  any  but  troops  of  the  highest  physical  and  moral  energy, 
the  complete  abnegation  of  self,  and  subordination  of  every  personal 
consideration  to  the  grand  object  of  our  hopes  and  efforts,  give  the 
most  absolute  assurance  of  success  in  any  field  or  against  any  enemy. 

California  has  reason  to  be  proud  of  the  sons  she  has  sent  across  the 
continent  to  assist  in  the  great  struggle  in  which  our  country  is  now 
engaged. 

The  commanding  general  is  requested  by  the  officer  who  preceded 
him  in  the  command  of  this  department  to  express  for  him  the  gratifi- 
cation felt  by  every  officer  and  soldier  of  his  command  at  the  fact  that 
troops  from  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  slope — from  the  mountains  of  Cal- 
ifornia and  Colorado,  acting  in  the  same  cause,  impelled  by  the  same 
duties,  and  animated  by  the  same  hopes — have  met  and  shaken  hands 
in  the  center  of  this  great  continent. 

JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 

Brigadier -General,  U.  S.  Army , Commanding  Department. 


[September  23, 1862. — For  Butler  to  acting  Prussian  consul  in  ref- 
erence to  the  ship  Essex,  see  Series  III,  Vol.  II.] 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  76.  f New  Orleans , September  24,  1862. 

All  persons,  male  or  female,  within  this  department,  of  the  age  of 
eighteen  years  or  upward,  who  have  ever  been  citizens  of  the  United 
States  and  have  not  renewed  their  allegiance  before  this  date  to  the 
United  States,  or  who  now  hold  or  pretend  any  allegiance  or  sympathy 
with  the  so-called  Confederate  States,  are  ordered  to  report  themselves, 
on  or  before  the  1st  day  of  October  next,  to  the  nearest  provost-mar- 
shal, with  a descriptive  list  of  all  their  property  and  rights  of  property, 
both  real,  personal,  and  mixed,  made  out  and  signed  by  themselves 
respectively,  with  the  same  particularity  as  for  taxation.  They  shall 
also  report  their  place  of  residence  by  number,  street,  or  other  proper 
description,  and  their  occupation,  which  registry  shall  be  signed  by 
themselves,  and  each  shall  receive  a certificate  from  the  marshal  of 
registration  as  claiming  to  be  an  enemy  of  the  United  States. 

Any  persons  of  those  described  in  this  order  neglecting  so  to  register 
themselves  shall  be  subject  to  fine  or  imprisonment  at  hard  labor  or 
both,  and  all  his  or  her  property  confiscated  by  order  as  punishment 
for  such  neglect. 

On  the  1st  day  of  October  next  every  householder  shall  return  to  the 
provost-marshal  nearest  him  a list  of  each  inmate  of  his  or  her  house 
of  the  age  of  eighteen  years  and  upward,  which  list  shall  contain  the 
following  particulars:  The  name,  se?,  age,  and  occupation  of  each  in- 
mate j whether  a registered  alien,  one  who  has  taken  the  oath  of  alle- 
giance to  the  United  States,  a registered  enemy  of  the  United  States,  or 
one  who  has  neglected  to  register  himself  or  herself  either  an  alien,  a 
loyal  citizen,  or  a registered  enemy.  All  householders  neglecting  to 


576 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

make  such  returns  or  making  a false  return  shall  be  punished  by  fine 
or  imprisonment  with  hard  labor  or  both. 

Each  policeman  will  within  his  beat  be  held  responsible  that  every 
householder  failing  to  make  such  return  within  three  days  from  the 
1st  of  October  is  reported  to  the  provost-marshal,  and  five  dollars  for 
such  neglect  for  every  day  in  which  it  is  not  reported  will  be  deducted 
from  such  policeman’s  pay  and  he  shall  be  dismissed  5 and  a like  sum 
for  conviction  of  any  householder  not  making  his  or  her  return  shall 
be  paid  to  the  policeman  reporting  such  householder. 

Every  person  who  shall  in  good  faith  renew  his  or  her  allegiance  to 
the  United  States  previous  to  the  1st  day  of  October  next  and  shall 
remain  truly  loyal  will  be  recommended  to  the  President  for  pardon 
for  his  or  her  previous  offenses. 

Bv  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  0.  STRONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 
Santa  Fe,  V.  Mex.,  September  30,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo.  Thomas, 

Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  G. : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  I relieved  General 
Canby  in  the  command  of  this  department  on  the  18th  instant  and  he 
left  this  city  for  Washington,  D.  0.,  four  days  afterward.  I find  that 
during  the  raid  which  was  made  into  this  Territory  by  some  armed  men 
from  Texas,  under  Brigadier-General  Sibley,  of  the  Army  of  the  so-called 
Confederate  States,  the  Indians,  aware  that  the  attention  of  our  troops 
could  not  for  the  time  be  turned  toward  them,  commenced  robbing  the 
inhabitants  of  their  stock  and  killed  in  various  places  a great  number 
of  people.  The  Navajoes,  on  the  western  side,  and  the  Mescalero  Apa- 
ches, on  the  eastern  side  of  the  settlements,  both  committing  these  out- 
rages at  the  same  time  and  during  the  last  year  that  has  passed,  have 
left  the  people  greatly  impoverished.  Many  farms  and  settlements  near 
Fort  Stanton  have  been  entirely  abandoned.  To  punish  and  control 
the  Mescaleros  I have  ordered  Fort  Stanton  to  be  reoccupied.  That 
post  is  in  the  heart  of  their  country,  and  hitherto,  when  troops  occupied 
it,  those  Indians  were  at  peace.  I have  sent  Col.  Christopher  Carson 
(Kit  Carson),  with  five  companies  of  his  regiment  of  New  Mexican  Vol- 
unteers, to  Fort  Stanton.  One  of  these  companies  on  foot  will  hold  the 
post  and  guard  the  stores,  while  four  companies  mounted,  under  Carson, 
will  operate  against  the  Indians  until  they  have  been  punished  for  their 
recent  aggressions. 

The  lieutenant-colonel,  with  four  companies  of  the  same  regiment, 
will  move  into  the  Navajo  country,  and  establish  and  garrison  a post 
on  the  Galto,  which  was  selected  by  General  Canby;  it  is  called  Fort 
Wingate.  I shall  endeavor  to  have  this  force,  assisted  by  some  militia 
which  have  been  called  out  by  the  Governor  of  the  Territory,  perform 
such  service  among  the  Navajoes  as  will  bring  them  to  feel  that  they 
have  been  doing  wrong.  The  small  posts  at  Gallisteo,  Los  Lunas,  Pol- 
vadero,  and  Cubero  have  been  broken  up,  and  their  garrisons  go  to 
make  up  those  of  Fort  Stanton  apd  Fort  Wingate. 

Light  Company  A,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery,  with  its.  small  battery  of 
two  howitzers  and  two  6-pounder  guns,  will,  together  with  two  com- 
panies of  Fifth  U.  S.  Infantry,  be  at  Albuquerque.  Six  other  com- 
panies of  the  Fifth  will  be  at  Peralta,  20  miles  below  Albuquerque. 


Chap.  XXVII. J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  577 

These  troops  will  be  considered  as  in  a central  position,  to  be  moved 
in  any  direction  which  the  exigencies  of  the  service  may  require. 

The  great  mass  of  subsistence  stores  which  are  now  in  this  Territory 
are  at  Fort  Craig  and  Fort  Union.  These  two  points  will  claim  all  our 
efforts  in  their  defense  should  the  Territory  be  again  invaded.  I have 
ordered  a company  of  cavalry  100  miles  down  the  Canadian  Biver,  to 
remain  there  for  the  winter  as  an  outpost,  to  watch  the  Fort  Smith 
road,  which  comes  up  that  river.  Colonel  Carson  will  be  directed  to 
keep  one  of  his  companies  at  the  junction  of  Bonito  and  Pecos  Bivers,  to 
guard  us  against  being  surprised  by  a force  coming  up  the  Pecos  from 
Fort  Lancaster.  I shall  cause  the  route  by  the  Waco  Tanks  to  be 
watched  from  an  advanced  point,  as  well  as  that  coming  into  the 
country  by  Fort  Quitman.  This  done,  I shall  adopt  such  interior 
arrangements  for  safety  and  defense  as  my  means  may  justify,  and 
await  the  turn  of  events. 

Until  I have  authority  from  the  War  Department  I cannot  incorpo- 
rate the  troops  and  material  brought  from  the  Department  of  the  Pacific 
into  the  force  and  material  of  this  department.  (See  General  Orders, 
No.  20,  series  1862.)  I beg  to  be  instructed  in  this  matter  at  an  early 
date,  as  the  records  and  returns  of  the  two  forces  cause  much  labor 
and  no  little  embarrassment. 

I respectfully  request  that  the  Fifth  Begiment  Infantry  California 
Volunteers  may  be  ordered  into  Arizona  and  on  to  the  Bio  Grande.  I 
have  two  comj)anies  here  now,  and  probably  by  this  time  three  at 
Apache  Pass  and  at  Tucson.  The  other  five  are  at  Fort  Yuma,  where 
a garrison  of  three  companies  is  enough  (there  are  quarters  there  for 
three  companies),  which  three  companies  could  be  furnished  from  the 
Fourth  Infantry  California  Volunteers  now  at  Los  Angeles.  With  the 
whole  of  the  Fifth  Infantry  California  Volunteers  in  this  department 
the  service  would  in  my  opinion  be  greatly  benefited.  These  troops 
can  use  the  transportation  now  employed  to  haul  supplies  from  Fort 
Yuma  to  Tucson,  aud  not  cost  the  Government  an  additional  dollar  to 
be  placed  on  the  Bio  Grande.  The  supplies  here  are  abundant.  It  is 
rumored  that  another  demonstration  will  be  made  against  this  country 
from  Texas.  In  this  event  the  troops  from  California  asked  for  by 
General  Canby  in  his  telegraphic  dispatch  of  the  date  of  August  10 
would  be  greatly  needed.  Whatever  the  War  Department  might  see 
fit  to  order  in  the  matter  should  be  done  at  once. 

I earnestly  beg  that  all  the  officers  who  belong  to  the  companies  of 
the  Fifth  and  Seventh  Infantry  and  First  Cavalry  and  Third  Artillery, 
now  serving  here,  both  field  and  staff*,  may  be  ordered  at  once  to  join 
those  companies,  and  I desire  to  have  an  engineer  officer  and  a topo- 
graphical engineer  officer  assigned  to  duty  in  this  department.  Their 
services  are  greatly  needed  now. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  CABLETON, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


On  Board  or  the  Transport  Pinta, 

Port  of  New  Orleans , September  30,  1862. 
Dr.  Charles  McCormick, 

Medical  Director,  Present : 

Dear  Sir  : Having  been  requested  in  your  behalf  to  state  how  Her 
Catholic  Majesty’s  transport  Pinta,  under  my  command,  has  been  treated 

37  R R — VOL  xv 


578 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 

at  the  quarantine  station,  I have  much  pleasure  in  declaring  that  I 
have  no  cause  to  complain  of  the  manner  in  which  that  service  has 
been  performed,  finding  the  same  to  be  in  accordance  with  what  is 
practiced  for  like  purposes  in  other  countries ; and,  further,  I should  add 
that  myself  and  officers  have  been  treated  by  those  on  duty  at  the 
quarantine  ground  with  all  courtesy  and  beseemingness,  all  of  which  | 
I will  have  great  satisfaction  to  communicate  to  my  Government.  My 
only  complaint  consists  in  having  been  ordered  to  observe  a quarantine 
of  thirty  days,  since,  according  to  sections  3 and  5 of  the  act  supple- 
mentary to  an  act  on  quarantine  of  the  State  of  Louisiana,  approved 
on  the  15th  March,  1855,  handed  to  me  on  arrival,  I apprehended  that 
the  Pinta  should  have  been  permitted  to'pass  without  detention,  or  at 
all  events  with  a much  more  limited  one,  on  account  of  her  having  had 
more  than  ten  days*  passage  from  Havana,  of  her  having  come  in 
ballast,  and  of  her  being  free  of  any  sickness  on  board. 

I am,  dear  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JOAQUIN  DEL  RAYO, 

Commandant, 


[October  1,  1862.— For  Butler  to  Secretary  of  War  in  reference 
to  correspondence  between  the  Spanish  legation  and  Department  of 
State,  transmitted  September  10  and  18,  see  Series  III,  Vol.  II.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  October  10,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General,  TJ.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C.  : 

General  : I have  to  inform  you  that  when  the  Texan  troops  aban- 
doned New  Mexico  in  July  last  they  were  in  great  disarray  and  sorely  ; 
pressed  for  food  as  well  as  transportation.  They  knew  the  advance 
guard  of  the  Column  from  California  had  arrived  upon  the  Rio  Grande 
and  believed  it  to  be  in  hot  pursuit.  Under  these  circumstances  they 
found  a purchaser  for  their  battery  of  artillery  among  the  people  in 
Mexico.  The  guns  were  taken  across  the  Rio  Grande,  and,  as  I learn, 
moved  to  Chihuahua.  The  person  who  bought  them  is  the  father-in- 
law  of  one  Simeon  Hart,  a man  who  did  more  than  any  other  to  bring 
Sibley’s  force  into  this  country,  who  did  more  than  almost  all  others  to 
keep  it  supplied  while  here,  and  who,  when  it  fled,  went  with  it  to  Texas. 
The  guns  would  have  fallen  into  our  hands  but  for  this  act  of  Hart’s 


father-in-law.  It  was  no  doubt  committed  at  the  instigation  of  Hart 


and  with  Hart’s  money,  and  should  the  Tex&ns  return  there  is  not  a 
doubt  but  these  guns  would  be  resold  to  them,  recross  the  Rio  Grande,, 
and  be  used  against  us. 

As  the  purchasing  of  these  guns  by  a friendly  power,  or  rather  by  a 
citizen  of  a friendly  power,  the  passing  of  them  as  other  property  through 
the  custom-house  at  Paso,  was  in  my  opinion  a grave  wrong  to  the  United 
States,  I have  written  the  inclosed  letter  to  the  Governor  of  Chihuahua 
on  the  subject.  I submit  if  the  Mexicans  should  not  be  obliged  to  give 
up  those  guns  now,  before  by  a possibility  they  can  be  used  against  us. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


579 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe.  N.  Mex..  October  12,  1862. 

Col.  Christopher  Carson, 

First  New  Mexico  Vols.,  en  route  to  Fort  Stanton , N.  Mex. : 

Colonel  : Inclosed  you  will  find  a confidential  communication  to 
Colonel  West,  commanding  the  District  of  Arizona ; it  is  dated  the 
11th  instant,  and  directs  him  to  send  two  expeditions  against  the  Mes- 
calero  Indians,  starting  them  on  the  15th  of  next  month.  I desire  you 
to  send  one  of  your  mounted  companies  down  to  the  junction  of  the 
Eio  Hondo  with  the  Pecos,  to  act  as  an  outpost  to  this  country,  to 
keep  scouts  well  down  the  river  toward  Delaware  Creek,  to  see  that  no 
force  advances  up  the  Pecos  from  the  direction  of  Fort  Lancaster,  in 
Texas,  without  your  having  timely  notice  of  the  fact,  so  that  you  can 
send  me  word. 

As  your  scouts  from  this  company  come  near  the  mouth  of  the  Pe- 
nasco  they  will  doubtless  find  plenty  of  Mescaleros.  It  was  near  that 
point  where  Captain  [H.  W.]  Stanton  was  killed  by  them.  In  this  case 
you  could,  if  you  thought  it  advisable,  move  the  company  down  to  the 
mouth  of  the  Penasco,  to  produce  an  impression  upon  the  Indians : at 
the  same  time  [guard]  the  approaches  to  New  Mexico  by  the  way  of  the 
Pecos  j but  under  no  circumstances  will  it  leave  the  valley  of  the  river 
un watched.  The  other  three  companies  you  can  divide  as  you  please, 
out  with  these  you  will  make  war  upon  the  Mescaleros  and  upon  all  other 
Inmans  you  may  find  in  the  Mescalero  country,  until  further  orders. 
Ail  Indian  men  of  that  tribe  are  to  be  killed  whenever  and  wherever 
you  can  find  them]  the  women  and  children  will  not  be  harmed,  but 
you  will  take  them  prisoners  and  feed  them  at  Fort  Stanton  until  you 
receive  other  instructions  about  them.  If  the  Indians  send  in  a flag 
and  desire  to  treat  for  peace  say  to  the  bearer  that  when  the  people  of 
New  Mexico  were  attacked  by  the  Texans  the  Mescaleros  broke  their 
treaty  ot  peace  and  murdered  innocent  people  and  run  off  their  stock ; 
that  now  our  hands  are  untied  and  you  have  been  sent  to  punish  them 
lor  their  treachery  and  their  crimes  ; that  you  have  no  power  to  make 
peace ; that  you  are  there  to  kill  them  whenever  you  find  them  ; that 
it  they  beg  for  peace  their  chiefs  and  20  of  their  principal  men  must 
come  to  Santa  Fe  to  have  a talk  here;  but  tell  them  fairly  and  frankly 
that  you  will  keep  after  their  people  and  slay  them  until  you  receive 
orders  to  desist  from  these  headquarters;  that  this  making  of  treaties 
tor  them  to  break  whenever  they  have  an  interest  in  breaking  them  will 
not  be  done  any  more;  that  that  time  has  passed  by;  that  we  have  no 
taith  in  their  promises ; that  we  believe  if  we  kill  some  of  their  men  in 
lair  open  war  they  will  be  apt  to  remember  that  it  will  be  better  for 
them  to  remain  at  peace  than  to  be  at  war.  I trust  that  this  severity, 
in  the  long  run,  will  be  the  most  humane  course  that  could  be  pursued 
toward  these  Indians. 


You  observe  that  there  is  a large  force  helping  you.  I do  not  wish 
to  tie  your  hands  by  instructions.  The  whole  duty  can  be  summed  up 
in  a lew  words : The  Indians  are  to  be  soundly  whipped,  without  parleys 
r councils  except  as  above.  Be  careful  not  to  mistake  the  troops 
from  oelow  for  Texans.  If  a force  of  rebels  come  you  know  how  to 
annoy  it— how  to  stir  up  their  camps  and  stock  by  night ; how  to  lay 
waste  the  prairies  by  fire;  how  to  make  the  country  very  warm  for 
you^o*  r°a(^  a one*  this,  and  keep  me  advised  of  all 


I am,  colonel,  respectfully,  your  friend, 

JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


580 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chap.  XXVIL 


[In  closure.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Sante  Fe,  FT.  Mex.,  October  11,  1862. 

Col.  Joseph  R.  West,  # 

Commanding  the  District  of  Arizona , Mesilla  : 

Colonel:  I have  ordered  Colonel  Carson,  with  five  companies  of  his 
regiment,  to  reoccupy  Fort  Stanton.  These  troops  are  already  en  route 
to  that  point.  They  will  immediately  commence  hostile  operations 
against.the  Mescalero  and  Navajo  Indians  who  may  be  in  that  vicinity 
and  southward  of  it. 

You  will  order  the  following  troops  into  the  Mescalero  country  to  co- 
operate with  Colonel  Carson,  yet  to  be  independent  of  him.  Captain 
McCleave  you  will  place  in  command  of  one  expedition,  to  be  composed  ol 
; his  own  and  one  company  of  your  regiment.  He  will  start  with  this  force, 
increased  by  20  good  Mexican  spies  and  guides,  which  you  are  authorized 
to  employ  at  reasonable  rates,  on  the  15th  of  next  month  and  to  be 
absent  until  the  31st  day  of  December,  1862.  He  will  proceed  by  the 
way  of  Dog  Canon  and  operate  to  the  eastward  and  southward  ot  that 
noted  haunt  of  the  Mescaleros.  You  will  order  Captain  Roberts,  ot 
your  regiment,  to  command  another  expedition  against  these  Indians. 
His  force  will  be  composed  of  all  the  effective  men  of  his  own  company  ; 
all  the  effective  men  of  Captain  Pishon’s  company  now  m the  valley  ot 
the  Rio  Grande  north  of  Fort  Quitman,  and  20  first-rate  Pueblo  Indians 
or  Mexicans,  whom  you  are  authorized  to  employ  at  Isleta,  Socorro,  and 
San  Elizario.  This  last  20  I would  suggest  you  employ  Don  Gregorio 
Garcia,  of  San  Elizario,  to  command.  He  has  often  been  on  expeditions 
against  the  Mescaleros  and  had  good  luck;  he  knows  the  country  well. 
Captain  Roberts  will  start  from  Franklin,  Tex.,  on  the  loth  of  Novem- 
ber next  and  be  absent  until  December  31,  1862.  He  will  proceed  by 
the  Waco  Tanks,  and  thence  northeastwardly  to  such  points  as  will  be 
most  likely  to  be  occupied  by  Apaches.  Assistant  Surgeon  Eittredge 
will  accompany  Captain  McCleave  ; Assistant  Surgeon  McKee  will  ac- 
company Captain  Roberts.  There  is  to  be  no  council  held  with  the  In- 
dians nor  any  talks.  The  men  are  to  be  slain  whenever  and  wherever 
they  can  be  found.  The  women  and  children  may  be  taken  as  prisoners, 
but  of  course  they  are  not  to  be  killed.  From  Dog  Canon  and  froin  the 
Waco  Tanks  subsistence  stores  and  ammunition,  &c.,  willdoutless  na\e 
to  be  transported  on  pack  mules.  I have  ordered  75  pack-saddles  to  be 
sent  down  from  Fort  Union  for  the  use  of  the  two  expeditions.  I would 
suggest  a depot  being  formed  by  each  expedition  well  out  mto  the  Mesca- 
lero country,  farther  out  than  Dog  Canon  or  Waco  Tanks  it  practicable 
a depot  that  may  be  reached  by  wagons,  and  thence  operate  with  pack 
mules,  leaving  a few  men  in  depot  to  guard  the  supplies  not  immediately 
required.  I send  a copy  of  this  letter  to  Colonel  Carson  that  he  may 
know  when  you  are  to  act  and  where  your  forces  ai*e  t°  operate,  and  he 
will  shape  his  plans  accordingly.  Much  is  expected  of  the  California 
troops.  I trust  that  these  three  demonstrations  will  give  those  Indians 
a wholesome  lesson.  They  have  robbed  and  murdered  the  people  with 

impunitv  too  long  already.  , T 

If  the  movements  are  kept  from  being  made  public,  so  the  Indians, 
through  the  Mexicans,  may  not  know  of  your  plans  until  the  troops  ta  '<- 
the  field,  it  will  be  better  so.  If  the  Indians  want  to  negotiate,  Carson 
will  send  the  chief  under  a flag  to  Santa  Fe  for  that  ~ 

While  Captain  Boberts’  company  is  in  the  field  you  will  station  Cap 
tain  Willis  with  a portion  of  his  company  at  Franklin  and  leav  e another 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


581 


portion  under  Lieutenant  Whittemore  to  guard  Hart’s  Mill.  Both  Mc- 
C leave  and  Boberts  will  be  instructed  to  keep  a journal  of  every  day’s 
march  and  work,  of  the  estimated  courses  and  distances  traveled,  of  the 
kind  of  country  passed  over,  of  the  water-courses,  springs,  grass,  &c., 
which  they  find.  These  journals  will  be  forwarded  to  department  head- 
quarters as  soon  as  the  campaign  is  over  and  copies  of  them  to  Wash- 
ington. 

The  several  commands  will  be  entirely  independent  of  each  other,  un- 
less they  u happen  to  join  to  do  duty  together,”  and  the  commanding 
officers  will  have  full  powers  to  sub-divide  their  forces  when  once  they 
have  got  into  the  Indian  country  in  such  manner  as  in  their  judgment 
will  be  the  best,  having  in  view  the  punishment  of  the  Indians. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


[October  12, 13,  and  — *,  1862. — For  Butler  to  Stanton  in  reference 
to  complaints  of  the  Spanish,  Prussian,  and  French  legations,  see  Series 
III,  Yol.  II.] 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  82.  ( New  Orleans , October  17,  1862. 

All  persons  holding  powers  of  attorney  or  letters  of  authorization 
from,  or  who  are  merely  acting  for,  or  tenants  of,  or  intrusted  with,  any 
moneys,  goods,  wares,  property,  or  merchandise,  real,  personal,  or  mixed, 
of  any  person  now  in  the  service  of  the  so-called  Confederate  States,  or 
any  person  not  known  by  such  agent,  tenant,  or  trustee  to  be  a loyal 
citizen  of  the  United  States,  or  a bona  fide  neutral  subject  of  a foreign 
government,  will  retain  in  their  own  hand,  until  further  orders,  all  such 
moneys,  goods,  wares,  merchandise,  and  property,  and  make  an  accu- 
rate return  of  the  same  to  David  C.  G.  Field,  esq.,  the  financial  clerk  of 
this  department,  upon  oath,  on  or  before  the  1st  day  of  November  next. 
Every  such  agent,  tenant,  or  trustee  failing  to  make  true  return,  or  shall 
pay  over  or  deliver  any  such  moneys,  goods,  wares,  merchandise,  and 
property  to  or  for  the  use,  directly  or  indirectly,  of  any  person  not 
known  by  him  .to  be  a loyal  citizen  of  the  United  States,  without  an 
order  from  these  headquarters,  will  be  held  personally  responsible  for 
the  amount  so  neglected  to  be  returned,  paid  over,  or  delivered.  All 
rents  due  or  to  become  due  by  tenants  of  property  belonging  to  persons 
not  known  to  be  loyal  citizens  of  the  United  States  will  be  paid  as 
they  become  due  to  D.  O.  G.  Field,  esq.,  financial  clerk  of  the  depart- 
ment. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Executive  order  establishing  a provisional  court  in  Louisiana. 

Executive  Mansion, 
Washington  City , D.  <7.,  October  20,  1862. 
The  insurrection  which  has  for  some  time  prevailed  in  several  of  the 
States  of  this  Union,  including  Louisiana,  having  temporarily  subverted 

* Transmitted  to  Department  of  State  by  Secretary  of  War  November  3, 1862. 


582  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

and  swept  away  the  civil  institutions  of  that  State,  including  the  judi- 
ciary and  the  judicial  authorities  of  the  Union,  so  that  it  has  become 
necessary  to  hold  the  State  in  military  occupation,  and  it  being  indis- 
pensably necessary  that  there  shall  be  some  judicial  tribunal  existing 
there  capable  of  administering  justice,  I have  therefore  thought  it 
proper  to  appoint,  and  I do  hereby  constitute,  a provisional  court,  which 
shall  be  a court  of  record,  for  the  State  of  Louisiana,  and  I do  hereby 
appoint  Charles  A.  Peabody,  of  New  York,  to  be  a provisional  judge  to 
hold  said  court,  with  authority  to  hear,  try,  and  determine  all  causes, 
civil  and  criminal,  including  causes  in  law,  equity,  revenue,  and  ad- 
miralty, and  particularly  all  such  powers  and  jurisdiction  as  belong  to 
the  district  and  circuit  courts  of  the  United  States,  conforming  his  pro- 
ceedings so  far  as  possible  to  the  course  of  proceedings  and  practice 
which  has  been  customary  in  the  courts  of  the  United  States  and  Lou- 
isiana, his  judgment  to  be  final  and  conclusive,  And  I do  hereby 
authorize  and  empower  the  said  judge  to  make  and  establish  such  rules 
and  regulations  as  may  be  necessary  for  the  exercise  of  his  jurisdiction, 
and  empower  the  said  judge  to  appoint  a prosecuting  attorney,  marshal, 
and  clerk  of  the  said  court,  who  shall  perform  the  functions  of  attorney, 
marshal,  and  clerk  according  to  such  proceedings  and  practice  as  be- 
fore-mentioned and  such  rules  and  regulations  as  may  be  made  and  es- 
tablished by  said  judge.  These  appointments  are  to  continue  during 
the  pleasure  of  the  President,  not  extending  beyond  the  military  occu- 
pation of  the  city  of  New  Orleans  or  the  restoration  of  the  civil  author- 
ity in  that  city  and  in  the  State  of  Louisiana.  These  officers  shall  be 
paid  out  of  the  contingent  fund  of  the  War  Department  compensation 
as  follows : The  judge,  at  the  rate  of  $3,500  per  annum;  the  prosecuting 
attorney,  including  the  fees,  at  the  rate  of  $3,000  per  annum;  the  mar- 
shal, including  the  fees,  at  the  rate  of  $3,000  per  annum,  and  the  clerk, 
including  the  fees,  at  the  rate  of  $2,500  per  annum ; such  compensa- 
tions to  be  certified  by  the  Secretary  of  War.  A copy  of  this  order,  cer- 
tified by  the  Secretary  of  War  and  delivered  to  such  judge,  shall  be 
deemed  and  held  to  be  a sufficient  commission. 

ABRAHAM  LINCOLN, 
President  of  the  United  States. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , October  22,  1862. 

Hon.  Salmon  P.  Chase, 

Secretary  of  the  Treasury  : 

Sir  : I have  taken  the  liberty  to  address  you  directly  upon  this  mat- 
ter, which  seems  to  be  more  appropriate  to  the  Treasury  than  to  the 
War  Department.  As  you  are  aware,  from  the  time  that  I came  here 
I have  endeavored  in  every  possible  way  to  open  trade  in  cotton  through 
the  rebel  lines.  I have  supposed  that  this  was  consonant  with  the  wish 
of  the  Government. 

Owing  to  the  peculiar  action  of  the  Confederate  authorities  I have 
not  been  ablq  as  yet  much  to  succeed.  The  difficulty  has  been,  as  I 
believe,  not  so  much  with  the  Confederate  authorities  as  in  the  peculiar 
relation  they  find  themselves  with  their  people.  They  instructed  and 
advised  their  people  to  burn  their  cotton,  and  those  who  did  do  so  will 
not  now  permit  their  more  prudent  neighbors  to  ship  that  which  had  not 
been  destroyed  at  an  enormous  jirofit.  These  difficulties  are  gradually 
being  smoothed  over.  I think  now  that  the  trade  can  be  opened,  but 
am  in  doubt  as  to  the  interpretation  of  your  Treasury  circular. 

As  early  as  the  29th  of  July  I forwarded  a communication  to  the 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


583 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


commanding  officer  at  Mobile,  a copy  of  which  is  inclosed.  That  com- 
munication has  since  been  forwarded  to  Richmond,  and  formally  sanc- 
tioned by  the  appointment  of  commissioners  by  the  Confederate  Gov- 
ernment. Shall  I get  out  the  cotton  upon  the  basis  proposed?  Of 
course  I shall  let  all  cotton  come  out  under  the  arrangement  which  may 
offer  before  I may  hear  from  the  Government. 

I desire  therefore  a reply  by  return  mail.  While  this  letter  is  being 
copied  I have  received  from  Admiral  Farragut  the  inclosed  instruction 
of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy.  Whether  these  have  been  had  upon  full 
consideration  of  the  subject  set  forth  above  I do  not  know.  If  literally 
carried  out  they  would  starve  the  neighboring  country  and  would 
greatly  embarrass  us  here  for  supplies  of  lumber,  wood,  naval  stores, 
and  fresh  provisions.  We  have  to  get  these  through  the  rivers  and 
over  the  lakes  in  exchange  for  provisions.  I do  not  mean  to  make  this 
a matter  of  favoritism ; under  favor,  that  this  is  not  the  way  the  war  is 
carried  on  here.  I desire  but  to  carry  out  the  policy,  as  I supposed,  of 
the  Government,  and  I administer  to  the  necessities.  I have  no  per- 
sonal wish  on  the  subject.  It  becomes  therefore  of  the  utmost  impor- 
tance to  know  exactly  what  the  Government  desires,  and  I need  not 
assure  you  that  I shall  govern  myself  with  strictness  by  its  direction. 

Acting  under  this  same  policy  I allowed  the  West  Florida  to  go  out 
to  Sabine  Pass,  having  cleared  for  Matamoras  with  a cargo  not  con- 
traband of  war,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  cotton  from  Texas.  She 
belonged  to  a loyal  citizen,  and  in  order  that  there  might  be  no  mistake 
I gave  the  permit,  a copy  of  which  is  inclosed.  The  West  Florida  has 
been  detained  and  sent  to  Pensacola.  You  will  remember  that  I pub- 
lished a correspondence  with  the  Hon.  Reverdy  Johnson  upon  this  sub- 
ject of  cotton,  and  I learned  that  I had  been  approved  by  the  State 
Department  through  a letter  to  General  Shepley,  military  governor. 
May  I ask  your  intervention  to  have  the  Florida  released,  whatever 
may  be  the  decision  of  the  Government  as  to  her  proceeding  on  her 
voyage?  * 

You  will  see  that  by  the  form  of  the  letter  it  was  to  go  to  the  admiral 
for  the  purpose  of  preventing  all  misunderstanding.  It  is  impossible 
to  overrate  the  importance  of  this  question  of  obtaining  a supply  of 
cotton  to  the  Northern  manufacturer,  to  say  nothing  of  the  effect  upon 
European  powers. 

It  is  infinitely  of  more  importance  to  get  the  cotton  even  for  our  sails 
and  tents  than  whether  A or  B loses  or  gains  in  the  exchange  of  com- 
modities. Being  purchased  in  this  manner  prevents  the  Jews  from 
gathering  up  all  the  gold  in  the  country  to  exchange  it  with  the  Con- 
federates for  cotton.  The  day  of  cotton-burning  is  past. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  truly,  yours, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major- General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 


Navy  Department, 

September  21,  1862. 


Rear-Admiral  D.  G.  Farragut, 

Comdg.  West  Gulf  Blockading  Squadron , Pensacola: 


Sir: 


* # # # * # * 
Hereafter  you  will  allow  no  vessel  to  import  or  export  merchandise 

* See  Stanton  to  Butler,  November  11,  p.  591. 


584 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


at  any  port  of  the  blockaded  country.  New  Orleans  is  the  only  port 
open  for  general  traffic  within  the  limits  of  the  Western  Gulf  Blockad- 
ing Squadron. 

You  will  not  regard  what  are  called  “permits”  from  any  officer  ex- 
cept the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  War,  or  Navy,  as  authorizing  the 
ingress  or  egress  of  auy  vessel  in  violation  of  the  blockade. 

There  must  be  no  favoritism  or  license  given  to  any  one  or  more  of 
our  countrymen  to  traffic  within  the  blockaded  region  or  to  import  or 
export  merchandise.  That  would  be  justly  considered  as  evasive  of  the 
blockade  and  in  bad  faith. 

No  officer  of  the  Army  or  Navy  is  authorized  to  grant  permits,  and 
you  will  seize  all  vessels  engaged  in  illegal  traffic. 

Such  vessels  as,  under  the  authority  of  the  War  or  Navy  Department, 
may  be  engaged  to  carry  supplies  to  the  Army  or  Navy  will  take  no 
return  cargo. 

The  blockade  is  intended  to  interdict  all  trade  whatever  with  the 
country  blockaded  during  its  continuance  and  should  be  rigidly  en- 
forced. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GIDEON  WELLES, 
Secretary  of  the  Navy . 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , September  24,  1862. 

Officers  of  the  Blockading  Squadron: 

The  West  Florida  (schooner)  has  been  loaded  with  her  present  cargo 
and  cleared  for  Matamoras  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  out  cotton  from 
Texas.  She  proposes  to  make  the  Sabine  Pass,  exchange  her  cargo  for 
cotton,  and  then  make  a port  in  Cuba  or  New  Orleans,  as  may  be  best. 

The  owner,  a loyal  citizen,  has  property  here  to  insure  his  good  faith. 
You  will  therefore  aid  what  I understand  to  be  the  policy  of  my  Gov- 
ernment in  getting  cotton  to  foreign  ports  by  passing  this  vessel.  This 
course  of  trade  should  be  secret  of  course  to  be  successful. 

You  will  not  therefore  allow  any  information  of  this  pass  of  this 
vessel  to  be  made  public,  but  will  report  the  matter,  with  a copy  of  this 
letter,  to  Admiral  Farragut  or  your  superior  officer. 

Respectfully, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , October  26,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Neal  Dow, 

Commanding  at  Pensacola  : 

General  : I was  very  much  surprised  and  grieved  and  the  public 
service  was  considerably  interfered  with  by  your  detention  of  the  Saint 
Mary’s.  Indeed  it  would  have  been  better  for  the  service  to  have  lost 
the  Creole  than  to  have  suffered  the  delay.  The  steamer  was  sent  to 
Pensacola  for  special  service,  with  written  orders,  under  my  own  hand, 
for  the  utmost  dispatch,  and  in  such  case  the  boat  must  never  be  in- 
terfered with.  It  has  been  informally  reported  to  me  that  your  expe- 
dition was  sent  for  furniture  up  the  Blackwater.  If  that  was  neces- 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  585 

sary  for  the  comfortable  occupation  of  your  quarters  of  course  I should 
not  seriously  object,  but  the  fewer  of  such  expeditions  the  better. 

I cannot  permit  the  shipping  of  furniture  or  other  articles  North  by 
any  officer  for  his  own  use.  Such  taking  of  private  property,  whether 
belonging  to  rebels  or  others,  comes  under  the  order  of  the  War  De- 
partment, No.  107,  a copy  of  which  I send  you,  and  is  there  denomi- 
nated “ plundering.”  If,  in  your  judgment,  any  property  should  be- 
long or  does  belong  to  the  United  States,  and  can  be  better  disposed  of 
North  than  here,  and  should  be  properly  shipped  and  sold,  you  will 
take  the  same  course  that  I did  with  the  bells  captured  at  New  Or- 
leans— send  it  to  the  United  States  quartermaster  at  Boston  or  New 
York  to  be  disposed  of  on  account  of  the  Government,  but  upon  no 
consideration  and  under  no  pretense  for  the  private  account  of  any  officer. 
I must  of  course  submit  such  matters,  with  these  instructions,  to  the 
discretion  of  an  officer  as  high  in  command  as  yourself,  not  doubting 

that  it  will  be  properly  used.* 

# # # * # # * 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


[October  27  and  28, 1862. — For  Butler  to  Secretary  of  War  in  refer- 
ence to  Avendano  Brothers  and  the  Spanish  men-of-war,  see  Series  IIIr 
Yol.  II.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , October  29,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  the  reports  of  my  medical  director 
and  the  surgeon  of  the  quarantine  station  in  regard  to  the  action  of  Mr. 
Pierce,  consul  at  Matamoras,  who,  it  would  seem,  needs  some  instruc- 
tion in  the  way  of  his  duty.  He  gives  clean  bills  of  health  when  epi- 
demic is  raging. 

We  have  thus  far  succeeded,  in  the  providence  of  God,  by  the  most 
strenuous  exertions,  in  keeping  all  pestilence  away  from  the  city,  and 
the  inclosed  communications  will  give  some  idea  of  the  difficulties  under 
which  we  labor. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 

Major - General,  Commanding . 


[In  closure.] 

Medical  Director’s  Office,  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , October  28,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

General  : I herewith  inclose  to  you  the  bill  of  health  of  the  schooner 
Planet,  from  Matamoras,  Mex.,  and  a copy  of  a letter  of  Dr.  J.  A.  G. 


Some  matters  of  detail  omitted. 


586 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,’  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XX YU. 

Fisher,  the  quarantine  physician  at  the  station  below  New  Orleans, 
dated  October  20,  1862,  giving  statements  of  some  of  the  passengers  of 
the  schooner  Planet. 

On  the  16th  September,  1862,  the  Mexican  schooner  Jicaltipec  ar- 
rived from  Matamoras,  Mex.,  having  a clean  bill  of  health  from  the 
United  States  consul  at  that  port.  This  schooner  had  on  board  6 United 
States  soldiers,  escaped  prisoners  from  the  rebels.  On  the  21st  Sep- 
tember Dr.  Fisher  reported  that  Private  O.  Sparks,  of  the  Eighth  In- 
fantry, who  came  as  a passenger  on  the  Jicaltipec,  was  taken  sick  with 
yellow  fever,  and  on  the  27th  September  Dr.  Fisher  reports  that  this 
man  had  died  the  previous  day  (the  26th  September),  black  vomit  hav- 
ing set  in,  thus  proving  to  be  an  unmistakable  case  of  yellow  fever. 
Still  this  vessel  had  a clean  bill  of  health. 

Again,  on  the  16th  October,  1862,  the  schooner  Planet  arrived  here 
from  Matamoras,  having  inclosed  clean  bill  of  health  from  Mr.  L. 
Pierce,  jr.,  the  United  States  consul  at  that  port,  although  this  vessel 
had  93  passengers  on  board  from  Texas,  who  stated  to  Dr.  Fisher  that 
yellow  fever  in  an  epidemic  form  existed  at  Brownsville,  Tex.,  at  the  time 
of  their  departure.  This  has  been  the  second  case  of  a vessel  arriving 
from  Matamoras  with  a clean  bill  of  health  from  Mr.  L.  Pierce,  jr.,  the 
United  States  consul,  while  it  is  a well  known  fact  that  a severe  epi- 
demic of  yellow  fever  existed  during  the  season  along  the  whole  coast 
of  Texas  and  Mexico. 

Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

CHABLES  McCOKMICK, 
Medical  Director  Department  of  the  Gulf. 

[Sub-inclosures.] 


[Form  No.  121.] 

BILL  OF  HEALTH. 

Consulate  of  the  U.  S.  of  A.  at  Matamoras, 

October  3,  1862. 

I,  consul  of  the  United  States  of  America  for  the  port  of  Matamoras, 
Mex.,  do  hereby  certify  that  the  schooner  called  the  Planet,  of  Nassau, 
N.  P.,  of  the  registered  burden  of  76  tons,  whereof  J.  Chandlee  is 
master,  navigated  by  6 men,  and  having  on  board  75  passengers,  being 
in  all  81  persons  on  board,  cleared  this  day  at  this  port  for  New 
Orleans. 

I hereby  further  certify  that  in  this  port  and  vicinity  and  among  the 
shipping  thereof  good  health  prevails,  without  any  suspicion  of  plague, 
yellow  fever,  or  any  other  contagious  or  pestilential  diseases  whatever 
in  either  an  epidemic  or  sporadic  form  ; and  that  no  such  disease  has 

existed  either  in  the  place  or  among  the  shipping  for  the  past 

weeks  or  months. 

Given  under  my  hand  and  seal  of  this  consular  office  the  day  and 
year  above  written. 

L.  PIEECE,  Jr., 

United  States  Consul. 

This  schooner  arrived  at  quarantine  October  16,  1862 j ordered  to 
observe  a strict  obedience  to  existing  regulations  until  further  orders. 

JNO.  A.  G.  FISHEB, 
Resident  Physician  Quarantine  Station. 


Chap.  XX VII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


587 


Quarantine  Station,  Mississippi  River, 

October  20,  1862. 

Dr.  Charles  McCormick,  U.  S.  A., 

Medical  Director  Department  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans  : 

Sir  : Inclosed  please  receive  bill  of  health  issued  by  the  American 
consul  at  Matamoras,  Mex.,  to  the  schooner  Planet. 

In  conversation  with  some  of  the  Texas  refugees,  passengers  on  board 
schooner  Planet,  I learn  that  the  yellow  fever  was  declared  as  an  epi- 
demic at  Brownsville,  Tex.,  yet  this  consul  certifies  to  health  in  the 
port,  among  the  shipping,  and  in  the  vicinity  of  Matamoras. 

My  informant  declares  this  to  be  so,  having  read  the  publication  in 
the  Brownsville  paper  a few  days  prior  to  their  departure. 

The  order  from  Major-General  Butler  in  relation  to  sending  the 
schooner  and  men  back  to  the  fort  was  complied  with.  I on  Saturday 
went  down  and  examined  their  condition  ; found  some  sick  with  remit- 
tent fever,  gastric  and  bilious  complication,  and  deemed  it  advisable 
to  bring  the  schooner,  crew,  and  passengers  up  again  to  the  station  and 
await  the  result  of  a few  days.  I have  two  bad  cases  now  in  hospital, 
and  from  appearances  among  the  others  shall  have  more. 

Some  10  or  12  of  these  refugees  are  willing  to  enlist,  but  the  remainder 
refuse,  on  the  ground  of  having  left  their  families  behind  in  Texas,  and 
are  desirous  of  entering  a column  which  is  to  be  composed  of  and  com- 
manded by  Texans.  They  say  that  their  pledge  is  given  to  join  General 
Hamilton’s  corps. 

Respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

JNO.  A.  G.  FISHER, 
Resident  Physician  Quarantine  Station . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , October  30,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Weitzel, 

Commanding  Reserve  Corps , Thibodeaux , La. : 

General  : I have  received  your  reports  of  the  28th  and  29th  instant, 
the  last  inclosing  a list  of  killed  and  wounded.*  I cannot  speak  too 
highly  of  the  admirable  conduct  of  your  troops  and  your  own  brilliant 
success  in  the  expedition.  I have  pushed  forward  the  opening  of  the 
road  as  vigorously  as  possible.  Colonel  Stafford  left  Wednesday  after- 
noon with  timber  sufficient,  as  he  said,  to  repair  the  bridge  at  Bayou 
des  Allemands,  and  he  assured  me  that  he  would  be  able  to  do  it  in 
two  days  or  three  at  outside.  I have  directed  Colonel  Thomas,  by  the 
same  messenger,  to  push  forward  the  bulk  of  his  regiment  as  fast  as 
he  can  repair  the  track  and  to  join  you  at  Thibodeaux. 

Your  requisition  shall  be  filled  and  forwarded  at  the  earliest  prac- 
ticable moment. 

Buchanan  was  to  have  made  his  attack  on  Tuesday  at  Berwick, 
with  what  success  of  course  I cannot  say  as  yet.  We  were  delayed 
three  days  by  a most  terrible  storm,  which  disabled  the  Diana,  but  I 
have  got  her  in  working  order,  and  she  has  gone  around. 

I have  ordered  over  the  Second  Native  Guards  (colored),  who  will 
hold  the  road  while  Stafford  pushes  on  to  Thibodeaux. 

I sympathize  with  you  in  the  matter  of  the  negroes.  By  the  act  of 


See  reports,  p.  167. 


588  w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


Congress  they  are  clearly  free;  still  you  must  not  encumber  yourself 
with  them.  Make  them  stop  at  Thibodeaux,  from  whence,  when  we  get 
cars  running,  we  can  transport  them  to  Algiers,  if  necessary.  If  they 
pillage  of  course  we  cannot  help  it.  It  is  one  of  the  necessary  evils 
following  this  system  of  labor  and  the  rebellion  as  far  as  I can  see. 

Everything  is  quiet  here.  We  have  had  no  arrivals  from  the  North. 
Through  secesh  channels  we  learn  that  Bragg  has  evacuated  Kentucky . 

The  elections  in  Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  and  Indiana  have  been  in  favor 
of  the  Democracy,  so  secesh  reports,  but  with  this  we  have  nothing  to 
do,  as  I suppose  it  will  not  affect  the  prosecution  of  the  war. 

Push  on  to  Brashear  City  as  soon  as  possible,  to  be  able  to  act  in 


conjunction  with  Buchanan. 

I have  a dispatch  from  Colonel  Holcomb  at  Donaldsonvdle ; he  re- 
ports everything  quiet  there.  The  Essex  has  gone  up  there. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEN.J.  E.  BUTLER, 

Major-  General , Commanding  y 
By  WM.  L.  G.  GREEN, 

Lieutenant  and  Aide-de-Camp . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , October  30,  1862. 

Consul  of  the  United  States  at  Matamoras: 

Sir  : I am  intending  within  the  next  thirty  days  to  send  a boat  to 
Matamoras  to  take  off  such  Union  Texan  refugees  as  would  like  to 
enlist  in  a Texas  regiment  which  I am  organizing  here,  and  hope  shortly 
to  send  them  to  Galveston.  Will  you  therefore  notify  all  loyal  Texans 
within  your  power  to  come  into  Matamoras  for  this  purpose. 

Please  inform  me  by  earliest  return  conveyance  how  many  of  such 
persons  there  will  probably  be  sent  forward. 

Bespectfully,  yours,  BENJ.  p.  BUTLER. 


[November  1,  1862. — Eor  Butler  to  Stanton,  transmitting  corre- 
spondence with  French  consul  concerning  blankets  claimed  by  Barriere 
Brothers  and  seized  by  the  United  States,  see  Series  III?  Yol.  II.] 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

N0>  88.  ) New  Orleans , November  1,  1862. 

I.  No  person  will  be  arrested  as  a slave  by  any  policeman  or  other 
person  and  put  in  confinement  for  safekeeping  unless  the  person  arrest- 
ing knows  that  such  person  is  owned  by  a loyal  citizen  of  the  United 
States 

II.  The  inspector  and  superintendent  of  prisons  is  authorized  to  dis- 
charge from  confinement  all  slaves  not  known  to  be  slaves  of  loyal 


owners. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

0 


GEO.  C.  STRONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General . 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


589 


Washington,  D.  0.,  November  3, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

New  Orleans , La. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  October  24  is  just  received.*  You  are  mis- 
informed in  regard  to  there  being  any  troops  in  New  England  ready  for 

the  field.  _ „ a.  , 

For  the  last  two  months  we  have  been  urging  the  Governors  ot  states 
to  complete  their  regiments  and  to  send  them  forward  as  fast  as  they 
are  ready.  Every  one  has  been  ordered  into  the  field  as  soon  as  re- 
ported. The  delay  in  sending  you  re- enforcements  has  not  been  the 
fault  of  the  War  Department.  It  is  hoped  that  some  will  be  ready  to 
start  as  soon  as  the  November  elections  are  over.  Brigadier-generals 
will  be  sent  with  these  re-enforcements. 

Attention  has  been  called  to  your  Special  Orders,  No.  434,  in  connec- 
tion with  General  Orders,  No.  12,  of  February  6.  It  is  to  be  regretted 
that  you  have  overlooked  the  latter  order  in  making  appointments 
which  you  are  not  authorized  by  law  to  make.  A general  can  nomi- 
nate, but  he  cannot  appoint,  “subject  to  the  approval  of  the  President 
of  the  United  States,”  and  the  persons  so  appointed  by  you  can  exer- 
cise no  legal  authority. 

These  illegal  appointments  will  be  regarded  as  recommendations  to 
the  President  and  their  names  submitted  for  appointments. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


[November  4,  1862.— For  Secretary  of  War  to  Butler  in  reference 
to  his  charges  of  October  13  against  the  Spanish  war  vessels,  see 
Series  III,  Yol.  II.] 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  90.  f New  Orleans , November  6,  1862. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1,  C.  S.  A., 

New  Orleans , La.,  March  20,  1862. 

* « * * # * * 

XII.  All  process  from  any  court  of  law  or  equity  in  the  parishes  of  Orleans  and 
Jefferson  for  the  ejection  of  families  of  soldiers  now  in  the  service  of  the  Government, 
either  on  land  or  water,  for  rent  past  due,  is  hereby  suspended,  and  no  such  collec- 
tions shall  be  forced  until  further  orders. 


* * * * 
By  command  of  Major-General  Lovell : 


# 


« 


* 


J.  G.  PICKETT, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


The  above  extract  from  orders  of  the  rebel  General  Lovell  is  ac- 
cepted, and  ordered  as  referring  to  the  families  of  soldiers  and  sailors 
now  in  the  service  of  the  United  States. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


See  reports,  p.  158. 


590  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

General  Orders,  ) War  Department,  Adjt.  Gen’s.  Office, 

No.  184.  ) Washington , November  8,  1862. 

By  direction  of  tlie  President  of  the  United  States  Maj.  Gen.  N.  F* 
Banks  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  in- 
cluding the  State  of  Texas. 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Washington,  D.  C.,  November  9, 1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks,  Commanding , dvc. : 

General:  The  President  of  the  United  States  having  assigned  you 
to  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  you  will  immediately  pro- 
ceed with  the  troops  assembling  in  transports  at  Fort  Monroe  * to  New 
Orleans  and  relieve  Major-General  Butler.  An  additional  force  of  some 
10,000  men  will  be  sent  to  you  from  Boston  and  New  York  as  soon  as 
possible.  The  first  military  operations  which  will  engage  your  atten- 
tion on  your  arrival  at  New  Orleans  will  be  the  opening  of  the  Missis- 
sippi and  the  reduction  of  Fort  Morgan  or  Mobile  City,  in  order  to 
control  that  bay  and  harbor.  In  these  expeditions  you  will  have  the 
co-operation  of  the  rear-admiral  commanding  the  naval  forces  in  the 
Gulf  and  the  Mississippi  River.  A military  and  naval  expedition  is  or- 
ganizing at  Memphis  and  Cairo  to  move  down  the  Mississippi  and  co- 
operate with  you  against  Yicksburg  and  any  other  points  which  the 
enemy  may  occupy  on  that  river.  As  the  ranking  general  in  the  South- 
west, you  are  authorized  to  assume  control  of  any  military  forces  from 
the  Upper  Mississippi  which  may  come  within  your  command.  The  line 
of  division  between  your  department  qnd  that  of  Major-General  Grant  is 
therefore  left  undecided  for  the  present,  and  you  will  exercise  superior 
authority  as  far  north  as  you  may  ascend  the  river. 

The  President  regards  the  opening  of  the  Mississippi  River  as  the 
first  and  most  important  of  all  our  military  and  naval  operations,  and 
it  is  hoped  that  you  will  not  lose  a moment  in  accomplishing  it. 

This  river  being  opened,  the  question  will  arise  how  the  troops  and 
naval  forces  there  can  be  employed  to  the  best  advantage.  Two  objects 
are  suggested  as  worthy  of  your  attention : First,  on  the  capture  of 
Vicksburg,  to  send  a military  force  directly  east  to  destroy  the  railroads 
at  Jackson  and  Marion,  and  thus  cut  off  all  connection  by  rail  between 
Northern  Mississippi  and  Mobile  and  Atlanta.  The  latter  place  is  now 
the  chief  military  depot  of  the  rebel  armies  in  the  West.  Second,  to 
ascend  with  a naval  and  military  force  the  Red  River  as  far  as  it  is  nav- 
igable, and  thus  open  an  outlet  for  the  sugar  and  cotton  of  Northern 
Louisiana.  Possibly  both  of  these  objects  may  be  accomplished  if  the 
circumstances  should  be  favorable.  It  is  also  suggested  that,  having 
Red  River  in  our  possession,  it  would  form  the  best  base  for  operations 
in  Texas. 

It  is  believed  that  the  operations  of  General  Rosecrans  in  East  Ten- 
nessee, of  General  Grant  in  Northern  Mississippi,  and  of  General  Steele 
in  Arkansas  will  give  full  employment  to  the  enemy’s  troops  in  the  West, 
and  thus  prevent  them  from  concentrating  in  force  against  you.  Should 
they  do  so,  you  will  be  re-enforced  by  detachments  from  one  or  more  of 
these  commands. 


•For  correspondence,  etc.,  relating  to  the  organization  of  this  expedition,  see  Series 
HI,  Vol.  II. 


CHAP.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION 


591 


These  instructions  are  not  intended  to  tie  your  hands  or  to  hamper 
your  operations  in  the  slightest  degree.  So  far  away  from  headquarters^ 
you  must  necessarily  exercise  your  own  judgment  and  discretion  in 
regard  to  your  movements  against  the  enemy,  keeping  in  view  that  the 
opening  of  the  Mississippi  River  is  now  the  great  and  primary  object  of 
your  expedition,  and  I need  not  assure  you,  general,  that  the  Govern- 
ment has  unlimited  confidence  not  only  in  your  judgment  and  discre- 
tion, but  also  in  your  energy  and  military  promptness. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


General  Orders, 
No.  93. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , November  11, 1862. 

I.  Any  commissioned  officer  who  is  found  drinking  intoxicating  liquors 
in  any  public  house  within  this  department  will  be  recommended  to  the 
President  for  dismissal  from  the  service. 

II.  All  police  officers  are  ordered  to  report  in  writing  to  these  head- 
quarters all  instances  of  the  violation  of  this  order  which  may  com© 
under  their  notice. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : ^ ^ DAVIS 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , November  11,  1862. 


Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

New  Orleans , La. : 

The  Secretary  of  the  Navy  has  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  President 
the  pass  issued  by  you  to  the  United  States  vessel  West  Florida  to  pro- 
ceed from  New  Orleans  to  Matamoras,  &c.  The  pass  was  not  respected 
by  the  blockading  squadron  in  that  quarter,  and  the  vessel  was  seized 
as  a prize.*  As  it  is  presumed,  however,  that  the  document  was  given 
in  good  faith  the  restitution  of  the  vessel  will  in  this  instance  be  or- 
dered; but  it  is  expected  that  you  will  not  in  future  issue  similar  passes 
without  further  instructions  from  this  Department. 


I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  November  12,  1862. 

Mr.  Pierce,  United  States  Consul  at  Matamoras : 

Sir:  I propose  to  send  down  the  First  Regiment  Texas  Volunteers 
with  some  other  troops  to  Galveston.  I will  arrange  with  Colonel 
Davis,  of  that  command,  and  with  Rear-Admiral  Farragut  that  refu- 


* See  Butler  to  Chase,  October  22,  p.  582. 


4592 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 


gees  who  may  desire  may  be  sent  to  Galveston  from  Texas  and  Mexico; 
some  of  them  will  enlist,*  doubtless,  in  the  service  of  the  United  States. 
The  preference  in  granting  passage,  as  a rule,  will  be  given  to  those 
who  are  physically  able.  . 

Of  course  it  will  be  improper  to  enlist  even  Americans  as  soldiers  on 
Mexican  soil,  but  there  can  be  no  impropriety  in  sending  Americans  to 
do  their  duty  to  their  country.  . 

The  letters  of  Colonel  Davis,  commanding  the  Texas  regiment,  and 
the  instructions  to  the  commander  of  the  blockading  vessel  will  explain 
what  is  desired.  Any  other  aid  that  I can  furnish,  if  suggested  by  you, 
will  be  promptly  attended  to. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ J BENJ.  F.  BUTLER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


[November  13, 1862.— For  Butler  to  Secretary  of  War  in  reference 
to  Ed.  Gautherin  & Co.,  see  Series  III,  Vol.  II.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , November  14,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  addressed  you  directly  in  this  dispatch  because  the  sub- 
ject relates  to  other  matters  than  the  movements  of  troops  in  the  field. 

As  you  may  have  learned  from  the  dispatches  to  General  Halleck,  I 
have  moved  Brigadier-General  Weitzel  into  the  La  Fourche  country 
and  have  taken  possession  of  the  richest  portion  of  Louisiana.  Thou- 
sands of  hogsheads  of  sugar  of  the  value  of  at  least  a million  of  dollars 
ought  at  once  to  pass  into  the  hands  of  the  United  States,  together 
with  much  other  property.  I have  therefore  organized  a commission 
to  take  charge  of  the  business,  so  as  if  possible  to  save  this  property  to 
the  United  States,  and  have  put  the  ablest  and  most  honest  men  I have 

at  the  head  of  it.  , „ j , „ 

I annex  the  copy  of  the  Orders,  No.  91,  and  of  the  memorandum  of 

contract,  which  will  explain  themselves. 

The  experiment  of  free  labor  which  I am  trying  is  succeeding  admi- 
rably, and  I hope  large  results,  not  so  much  in  profit  to  the  United  States 

as  in  example.  . _ _ 

Will  you  allow  me  to  avail  myself  of  this  note  to  ask  ot  you  re-en- 
forcements ? I have  had  none  save  my  free  Native  Guards  (colored), 
and  while  they  are  doing  good  service,  still  I find  trouble,  because  they 
are  not  formally  recognized  by  the  Department. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  F.  BUTLEB, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

[Inclosures.] 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , November  9,  1862 

The  commanding  general  being  informed  and  believing  that  the  dis 
trict  west  of  the  Mississippi  Biver  lately  taken  possession  of  by  the 


General  Orders, 
No.  91. 


I !HAP.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


593 


United  States  troop-s  is  most  largely  occupied  by  persons  disloyal  to 
the  United  States  and  whose  property  has  become  liable  to  confisca- 
tion under  the  acts  of  Congress  and  the  proclamation  of  the  President, 
and  that  sales  and  transfers  of  said  property  are  being  made  for  the 
purpose  of  depriving  the  Government  of  the  same,  has  determined,  in 
order  to  secure  the  rights  of  all  persons  as  well  as  those  of  the  Govern- 
ment, and  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  the  crops  now  growing  to  be 
taken  care  of  and  secured  and  the  unenqiloyed  laborers  to  be  set  at 
work  and  provision  made  for  payment  of  their  labor,  to  order  as  follows : 

I.  That  all  the  property  within  the  district  to  be  known  as  the  Dis- 
trict of  La  Fourche  be,  and  hereby  is,  sequestered,  and  all  sales  and 
transfers  thereof  are  forbidden  and  will  be  held  invalid. 

II.  The  District  of  La  Fourche  will  comprise  all  the  territory  in  the 
State  of  Louisiana  lying  west  of  the  Mississippi  Eiver  except  the  par- 
ishes of  Plaquemines  and  Jefferson. 

III.  That  Maj.  Joseph  M.  Bell,  provost  judge,  president ; Lieut.  Col. 
J.  B.  Kinsman,  aide-de-camp  ; Captain  Fuller  (Seventy-fifth  New  York 
Volunteers),  provost-marshal  of  the  district,  be  a commission  to  take 
possession  of  the  property  in  said  district,  to  make  an  accurate  inven- 
tory of  the  same,  and  gather  up  and  collect  all  such  personal  property, 
and  turn  over  to  the  proper  officers  upon  their  receipts  such  of  said 
property  as  maybe  required  for  the  use  of  the  United  States  Army;  to 
collect  together  all  the  other  personal  property  and  bring  the  same  to 
New  Orleans  and  cause  it  to  be  sold  at  public  auction  to  the  highest 
bidders,  and  after  deducting  the  necessary  expenses  of  care,  collection, 
and  transportation  to  hold  the  proceeds  thereof  subject  to  the  just 
claims  of  loyal  citizens  and  those  neutral  foreigners  who  in  good  faith 
shall  appear  to  be  the  owners  of  the  same. 

IV.  Every  loyal  citizen  or  neutral  foreigner  who  shall  be  foim<i  m 
actual  possession  and  ownership  of  any  property  in  said  district,  not 
having  acquired  the  same  by  any  title  since  the  18th  of  September  last, 
may  have  his  property  returned  or  delivered  to  him  without  sale  upon 
establishing  his  condition  to  the  judgment  of  the  commission. 

V.  All  sales  made  by  any  person  not  a loyal  citizen  or  a foreign  neu- 
tral since  the  18th  day  of  September  shall  be  held  void ; and  all  sales 
whatever  made  with  the  intent  to  deprive  the  Government  of  its  rights 
of  confiscation  will  be  held  void  at  what  time  soever  made. 

VI.  The  commission  is  authorized  to  employ  in  working  the  planta- 
tion of  any  person  who  has  remained  quietly  at  his  home,  whether  he 
be  loyal  or  disloyal,  the  negroes  who  may  be  found  in  said  district,  or 
who  have  or  may  hereafter  claim  the  protection  of  the  United  States 
upon  the  terms  set  forth  in  a memorandum  of  a contract  heretofore 
offered  to  the  planters  of  the  parishes  of  Plaquemines  and  Saint  Bernard 
or  white  labor  may  be  employed,  at  the  election  of  the  commission. 

VII.  The  commissioners  will  cause  to  be  purchased  such  supplies  as 
may  be  necessary,  and  convey  them  to  such  convenient  depots  as  to 
supply  the  planters  during  the  making  of  the  crop,  which  supplies  will 
r>*>  charged  the  crop  manufactured  and  shall  constitute  a lien  thereon. 

VIII.  The  commissioners  are  authorized  to  work  for  the  account  of 
the  United  States  such  plantations  as  are  deserted  by  their  owners  or 
are  held  by  disloyal  owners,  as  may  seem  to  them  expedient  for  the 
purpose  of  saving  the  crops. 

IX.  Any  persons  who  have  not  been  actually  in  arms  against  the 
United  States  since  the  occupation  of  New  Orleans  by  its  forces  and 
who  shall  remain  peaceably  upon  their  plantations,  affording  no  aid  or 

38  R R— you  IX 


594 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


comfort  to  the  enemies  of  the  United  States  and  who  shall  return  to 
\ heir  allegiance  and  who  shall  by  all  reasonable  methods  aid  the  United 
States  when  called  upon,  may  be  empowered  by  the  commission  to  work 
their  own  plantations,  to  make  their  own  crop,  and  to  retain  possession 
of  their  own  property,  except  such  as  is  necessary  for  the  military  uses 
of  the  United  States.  And  to  all  such  persons  the  commission  are  au- 
thorized to  furnish  means  of  transportation  for  their  crops  and  supplies 

at  iust  and  equitable  prices.  . , , „ 

X.  The  commissioners  are  empowered  and  authorized  to  hear,  de- 
termine, and  definitely  report  upon  all  qu  estions  of  the  loyalty , disloyalty , 
or  neutrality  of  the  various  claimants  within  said  district ; and,  further, 
to  report  such  persons  as  in  their  judgment  ought  to  be  recommended 
by  the  commanding  general  to  the  President  for  amnesty  and  pardon, 
so  that  they  may  have  their  property  returned  5 to  the  end  that  all  per- 
sons that  are  loyal  may  suffer  as  little  injury  as  possible  and  that  all 
persons  who  have  been  heretofore  disloyal  may  have  opportunity  now 
to  prove  their  loyalty  and  to  return  to  their  allegiance  and  save  their 
property  from  confiscation,  if  such  shall  be  the  determination  of  the 
Government  of  the  United  States. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler:  ^ Q STRONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Memorandum  of  an  arrangement  entered  into  between  the  planters,  loyal 
citizens  of  the  United  States , in  the  parishes  of  Saint  Bernard  and  Blague- 
mines , in  the  State  of  Louisiana,  and  the  civil  and  military  authorities  of 
the  United  States  in  said  State. 


Whereas  many  of  the  persons  held  to  service  and  labor  have  left 
their  masters  and  claimants  and  have  come  to  the  city  of  Xew  Orleans 
and  to  the  camps  of  the  Army  of  the  Gulf  and  are  claiming  to  be  eman- 
cipated and  free:  and  whereas  these  men  and  women  are  111  a destitute 
condition:  and  whereas  it  is  clearly  the  duty,  by  law  as  well  as  m hu- 
manity, of  the  United  States  to  provide  them  with  food  and  clothing 
and  to  employ  them  in  some  useful  occupation ; and  whereas  it  is  neces- 
sary that  the"  crop  of  cane  and  cereals  now  growing  and  approaching 
ma  turity  in  said  parishes  shall  be  preserved  and  the  levees  repaired  and 
strengthened  against  floods;  and  whereas  the  planters  claim  that  these 
persons  are  still  held  to  service  and  labor  and  of  right  ought  to  labor 
for  their  masters,  and  the  ruin  of  their  crops  and  plantations  will  hap- 
pen if  deprived  of  such  services ; and  whereas  these  conflicting  rights 
and  claims  cannot  immediately  be  determined  by  any  tribunals  now  exist- 
ing in  the  State  of  Louisiana:  „ 

In  order  therefore  to  preserve  the  rights  of  all  parties,  as  well  those 
of  the  planters  as  of  the  persons  claimed  as  held  to  labor  and  service 
and  claiming  their  freedom  and  those  of  the  United  States,  and  to  pre- 
serve the  crops  and  property  of  loyal  citizens  of  the  United  States  and 
to  provide  profitable  employment  at  the  rate  of  compensation  fixed  y 
act  of  Congress  for  those  persons  who  have  come  within  the  lines  of  the 

Army  of  the  United  States — , J ...  , rtll 

It  is  agreed  and  determined  that  the  United  States  will  employ  all 
the  persons  heretofore  held  to  labor  on  the  several  plantations  in  t e 
parishes  of  Saint  Bernard  and  Plaquemines  belonging  to  loyal  citizens 
as  they  have  heretofore  been  employed,  and  as  nearly  as  may  be  under 
the  charge  of  the  loyal  planters  and  overseers  of  said  parishes  and  other 
necessary  directions. 


Chap.  XXVZL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  595 

The  United  States  will  authorize  or  provide  suitable  guards  and  pa- 
trols to  preserve  order  and  prevent  crime  in  the  said  parishes. 

The  planters  shall  pay  for  the  services  of  each  able-bodied  male  per- 
son $10  per  month,  $3  of  which  may  be  expended  for  necessary  clothing; 

and  for  each  woman  $ , and  for  each  child  above  the  age  of  ten 

years  and  under  the  age  of  sixteen  years  the  sum  of  $ , all  the  per- 

sons above  the  age  of  sixteen  years  being  considered  as  men  and  women 
for  the  purpose  of  labor. 

Planters  shall  furnish  suitable  and  proper  food  for  each  of  these  la- 
borers and  take  care  of  them  and  furnish  proper  medicines  in  case  of 
sickness. 

The  planters  shall  also  suitably  provide  for  all  the  persons  incapaci- 
tated by  sickness  or  age  for  labor,  bearing  the  relation  of  parent,  child, 
or  wife  of  the  laborer  so  laboring  for  him. 

Ten  hours  each  day  shall  be  a day’s  labor,  and  any  extra  hours  dur- 
ing which  the  laborer  may  be  called  by  the  necessities  of  the  occasion 
to  work  shall  be  reckoned  as  so  much  toward  another  day’s  labor. 

Twenty-six  days  of  ten  hours  each  shall  be  deemed  a month’s  labor, 
except  in  the  month  of  December,  when  twenty  shall  make  a month’s 
labor.  It  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  overseer  to  keep  a true  and  exact 
account  of  the  time  of  labor  of  each  person,  and  any  wrong  or  inaccu- 
racy therein  shall  forfeit  a month’s  pay  to  the  person  so  wronged. 

No  cruel  or  corporeal  punishment  shall  be  inflicted  by  any  one  upon 
the  persons  so  laboring  or  upon  his  or  her  relatives,  but  any  insubor- 
dination or  refusal  to  perform  suitable  labor  or  other  crime  or  offense 
shall  be  at  once  reported  to  the  provost-marshal  for  the  district,  and 
punishment  suitable  for  the  offense  shall  be  inflicted  under  his  orders, 
preferably  imprisonment  in  darkness  on  bread  and  water. 

This  arrangement  to  continue  at  the  pleasure  of  the  United  States. 

If  any  planter  of  the  parishes  of  Saint  Bernard  or  Plaquemines  re- 
fuses to  enter  into  this  arrangement  or  remains  a disloyal  citizen  the 
persons  claimed  to  be  held  to  service  by  him  may  hire  themselves  to 
any  loyal  planter  or  the  United  States  may  elect  to  carry  on  his  planta- 
tions by  their  own  agents,  and  other  persons  than  those  thus  claimed 
may  be  hired  by  any  planter  at  his  election.  It  is  expressly  understood 
and  agreed  that  this  arrangement  shall  not  be  held  to  affect,  after  its 
termination,  the  legal  rights  of  either  master  or  slave,  but  that  ques- 
tions of  freedom  or  slavery  are  to  be  determined  by  considerations  wholly 
outside  of  the  provisions  of  this  contract ; provided  always  that  the 
abuse  of  any  master  or  overseer  of  any  person  laboring  under  the  pro- 
visions of  this  contract  shall,  after  trial  and  adjudication  by  the  mili- 
tary or  other  courts,  emancipate  the  person  -so  abused. 


[November  14, 1862. — For  Secretary  of  War  to  Brigadier-General 
Hamilton,  transmitting  his  appointment  as  military  governor  of  Texas, 
see  Series  III,  Yol.  II.] 


Special  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  513.  i New  Orleans , November  14,  1862. 

The  Daily  Advocate  having,  after  warning,  published  the  following 
article — 

The  Ballot-Box. — This  palladium  of  our  liberties,  this  charter  of  our  rights,  this 
emblem  of  democracy,  has  been  speaking  in  a voice  of  thunder,  as  we  knew  it  would 


596  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

if  the  people  could  be  aroused  from  their  slumber.  It  has  been  our  unceasing  en- 
deavor  to  awake  them  throughout  the  nation.  We  were  the  first  to  tell  our  readers 
of  its  success  in  Pennsylvania,  Ohio,  and  Indiana,  and  now  we  have  gratifying  re- 
norts  from  Illinois,  New  Jersey,  and  New  York.  If  these  reports  be  confirmed  an 
armistice  will  soon  follow.  Negotiations  once  commenced,  there  will  not  be  any  more 
fighting  Whether  an  armistice  results  from  the  Democratic  success  or  Irom  toreign 
intervention,  we  shall  hail  it  as  a peace  measure  to  be  welcomed  by  all  parties— 

the  publication  of  that  journal  will  be  discontinued  from  this  date. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : ^ q STRONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Headquarters  District  of  Arizona, 

Mesilla , November  14,  1862. 

Capt.  William  McCleave, 

First  Cavalry , California  Volunteers , Camp  Johnson: 

Captain  • You  are  placed  in  command  of  a force  composed  of  your 
own  company  and  C,  First  Infantry,  California  Volunteers,  to  operate 
against  the  Mescalero  Apache  Indians  in  the  vicinity  of  Dog  Canon. 
You  will  move  with  your  own  company  to  Las  Cruces  to-morrow  and 
be  there  joined  by  the  infantry  of  your  command. 

This  expedition  has  been  designed  by  the  general  commanding  the 
Department  of  New  Mexico,  and  copies  of  his  original  letter  to  me,  giv- 
ing the  order,  dated  October  11,  and  a copy  of  his  letter  to  Col.  Chris- 
topher Carson,  dated  October  12,  with  a marked  map  of  the  country  m 
which  you  are  to  operate,  have  been  placed  in  your  hands.  The  general 
plan  of  operations  and  the  kind  of  warfare  to  be  conducted  against  the 
Indians  are  so  fully  set  forth  in  the  above-named  correspondence  as  to 
merely  devolve  upon  me  the  necessity  of  giving  you  a few  instructions 

as  to  details.  „ , . , . , , , 

You  will  observe  that  it  is  the  wish  of  the  general  commanding  that 
a depot  for  your  force  be  established  that  can  be  reached  by  wagons 
farther  out  than  Dog  Canon  if  practicable.  The  duty  devolves  upon 
you  of  selecting  a proper  locality.  A party  of  New  Mexicans  have  lett 
Mesilla  to  form  a settlement  upon  the  Bio  Tularosa.  A guide  is  sent 
with  you  to  direct  you  to  this  settlement,  and  it  may  be  located  m a 
vicinity  that  will  offer  advantages  for  your  depot. 

A train  of  17  wagons,  under  Wagon-master  John  Davis,  is  sent  with 
you  for  transportation.  Thirty  pack-saddles  have  been  provided  you, 
and  you  are  at  liberty  to  take  from  this  train  as  many  mules,  not  exceed- 
ing thirty-five,  as  you  may  need  for  packing  supplies  into  the  mountains. 
You  will  direct  that  the  two  herders  who  go  with  the  train  remain  with 
the  pack  animals. 

For  the  purpose  of  guarding  your  depot,  without  diminishing  your 
immediate  active  force,  Company  B,  First  Infantry,  California  Volun- 
teers, is  sent  with  you.  As  soon  as  your  depot  is  established  detacn  l 
sergeant,  2 corporals,  and  18  privates,  all  picked  men,  from  that  com- 
pany, to  guard  it.  It  is  unnecessary  to  renfind  you  of  the  importance 
of  that  duty,  and  it  is  left  to  you  to  give  such  instructions  as  will 

insure  its  faithful  performance.  a . , _ ' 

As  soon  as  the  depot  is  established  send  the  train  back  to  Mesilla 
under  charge  of  Captain  [V.]  Dresher  and  the  remainder  of  his  company. 

A party  of  20  Mexican  spies  and  guides,  under  Juan  Arroyes,  are 
engaged  to  accompany  you,  and  will  be  under  your  orders  during  the 
time  that  you  are  in  the  field. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


597 


Rations  to  December  31  are  ordered  to  be  taken  by  your  own  com- 
pany, by  Captain  Hargrave’s  company,  by  the  21  men  of  Company  B, 
First  Infantry,  California  Volunteers,  and  by  Juan  Arroyes’  party.  The 
remainder  of  Captain  Dresher’s  company  and  the  teamsters  have  rations 
to  the  end  of  this  month. 

You  will  take  100  rounds  carbine  and  50  rounds  pistol  ammunition 
for  each  cavalryman.  You  will  see  that  Captain  Hargrave’s  company 
and  the  21  men  of  B Company,  First  Infantry,  California  Volunteers, 
who  are  to  guard  the  depot,  have  100  rounds  rifle- musket  ammunition 
per  man.  One  hundred  rounds  rifle  and  25  rounds  pistol  ammunition 
per  man  have  been  placed  , in  charge  of  your  quartermaster  for  Juan 
Arroyes’  party.  For  covering  your  stores,  &c.,  in  depot  five  bell-tents 
complete  have  been  provided  you. 

Acting  Assistant  Surgeon  Fitzwilliams  will  report  to  you  for  duty ; 
he  is  furnished  with  the  necessary  medical  supplies;  also  with  two  hand 
and  a horse  litter.  An  ambulance  is  sent  with  your  train.  The  general 
wishes  this  to  be  kept  at  the  depot  to  convey  wounded  men  into  the 
post. 

You  will  note  that  the  general  directs  a journal  to  be  kept.  One 
day’s  march  out  from  Las  Cruces  I wish  you  to  make  for  me  a field  re- 
turn of  your  command.  Expressman  Kinyon  will  accompany  you  to 
San  Augustine ; send  him  back  from  there  with  the  return.  Should 
opportunity  offer  during  your  campaign  continue  your  field  returns  to 
these  headquarters,  according  to  District  Orders,  No.  23. 

There  are  rumors  here  that  a Texan  force  is  about  advancing  in  this 
direction.  Should  they  come  by  the  Rio  Grande,  you  may  look  for  a 
recall ; should  they  advance  by  the  Pecos,  you  may  fall  in  with  some 
of  their  detachments ; it  will  then  be  desirable  to  acquire  every  informa- 
tion as  to  their  numbers  and  movements. 

Failing  receipt  of  any  other  orders  in  the  interval,  you  will  return 
with  your  whole  command  to  Mesilla  by  the  31st  of  December  next. 

With  the  best  wishes  for  your  success,  I am,  captain,  very  respect- 
fully, your  obedient  servant, 

J.  R.  WEST, 

Colonel  First  Infantry , California  Volunteers , Comdg. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex .,  November  16,  1862 — 6 p.  m. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  TJ.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C.  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  authentic  copies  of 
a letter  from  Col.  Joseph  R.  West,  First  California  Volunteers,  com- 
manding at  Mesilla,  and  of  a letter  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rigg,  of  the 
same  regiment,  and  a memorandum  from  Colonel  West,  showing  that 
rumors  are  rife,  and  of  a circumstantial  character,  that  another  demon- 
stration is  to  be  made  against  this  country  by  a rebel  force  of  6,000 
men,  under  Brigadier-General  Baylor,  Confederate  States  Army. 

Until  I learn  more  of  this  matter  I deem  it  prudent  to  suspend  the 
order  for  the  movement  to  Colorado  of  the  handful  of  volunteers  be- 
longing to  that  Territory  still  remaining  in  this  department.  If  it 
should  prove  true  that  this  force  is  coming  I beg  to  have  authority  to 
call  for  all  the  troops  in  Colorado  Territory  to  help  repel  it.  The  com- 
manders in  that  Territory  should,  in  my  opinion,  be  instructed  by  tele- 


598 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


graph  to  be  ready  to  march  at  a moment’s  notice  to  our  relief  if  called 
upon;  to  send  to  me  at  once  returns  of  their  force  and  their  means  of 
transportation.  This  is  a precaution  which  I beg  you  will  take  on  the 
receipt  of  this  letter.  Meantime  I beg  you  will  rest  assured  that  whether 
we  have  help  or  not  we  will  give  the  enemy  as  warm  a reception  as  we 
can. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ JAMBS  H.  CAELETON, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  District  of  Arizona, 

Mesilla , November  13,  1862. 

Capt.  Benj.  G.  Cutler, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  JSanta  Fe : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  by  special  messen- 
ger copies  of  correspondence  and  memorandum  received  from  Colonel 
Bigg,  reporting  that  a large  Texan  force  was  organizing  at  San  Anto- 
nia, with  the  avowed  object  of  making  a campaign  against  New  Mexico. 

I do  not  deem  the  danger  of  the  advance  of  this  force  sufficiently 
imminent  to  induce  me  under  the  positive  orders  that  I have  received 
to  withhold  the  expeditions  now  about  to  take  the  field  under  Captains 
McCleave  and  Pishon.  I am  calcula  ting,  however,  that  I shall  be  notified 
of  the  designs  of  the  general  commanding  in  eight  days  from  this, 
when,  if  so  ordered,  they  can  be  recalled. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  R.  WEST, 

Colonel  First  Infantry , California  Volunteers , Comdg. 

[Sub-inclosures.] 

Hart’s  Mill.,  Tex,  November  11, 1862. 

Col.  Joseph  R.  West, 

Commanding  District  of  Arizona , Mesilla  : 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  for  your  information  memo- 
randum of  statement  made  to  me  by  Mr.  Difiendorfer,  of  El  Paso,  Mex. 
Mr.  Difiendorfer  has  just  returned  from  Chihuahua,  Mex.,  where  he 
had  been  for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  goods.  He  places  great  con- 
fidence in  the  truth  of  the  information  he  reports ; so  much  so  that  he 
made  but  few  purchases.  Several  letters  have  been  received  here  by 
other  parties,  all  corroborating  the  above.  The  men  (6,000)  had  been 
raised  and  were  only  waiting  the  necessary  transportation. 

The  agent  writes  that  mules  were  very  scarce  and  were  worth  from 
$200  to  $400  each.  If  this  is  true  there  is  no  doubt  but  an  advance 
will  be  sent  up  this  way  before  the  main  force  would  leave.  I have  no 
doubt  but  that  Lieutenant  French,  First  Cavalry,  California,  is  detained 
at  San  Antonio,  and  his  being  so  is  evidence  that  a movement  of  some 
kind  is  going  on. 

The  party  of  secessionists  in  El  Paso  are  in  high  glee,  being  much 
elated  by  the  news ; their  party  has  increased  to  about  80  from  different 
directions.  Dr.  Difiendorfer  will  leave  for  Mesilla  to-morrow  with  Cap- 
tain Casey.  He  can  give  you  all  the  particulars,  and  in  all  probability 
will  have  with  him  a copy  of  one  of  the  letters. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWIH  A.  RIGG, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  First  Infantry,  California  Volunteers. 


Chai\  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — iTNION. 


599 


MEMORANDUM. 

Brigadier-General  Baylor  arrived  in  San  Antonio  from  Richmond 
some  time  in  August,  bringing  full  authority  to  raise  a force  of  6.000 
men,  and  with  instructions  to  retake  and  hold  New  Mexico  at  all  haz- 
ards. The  expedition  is  organizing  in  San  Antonio  now.  0.  II.  Mer- 
ritt, of  El  Paso,  is  quartermaster  to  the  expedition ; Judge  Crosby,  also 
of  El  Paso,  is  assistant  adjutant-general. 

An  agent  is  now  (September  8)  in  Matamoras  purchasing  the  neces- 
sary transportation  and  supplies.  The  purchases  are  made  with  French 
drafts  raised  on  some  cotton  sent  into  Mexico.  This  information  comes 
from  two  sources  (from  San  Antonio  and  Matamoras)  by  two  different 
letters,  which  agree  in  every  particular.  Nothing  is  said  in  either  as  to 
the  time  of  starting  or  the  route  to  be  taken  by  the  troops.  Both  let- 
ters are  from  reliable  men,  and  the  information  can  be  depended  upon 
in  every  particular.  One  letter  mentions  the  fact  that  Judge  Hart’s 
train  has  been  purchased  for  this  very  expedition.  The  letters  bear 
the  date  of  September  7 and  10  respectively.  One  letter  is  from  Gabriel 
Valdez  to  his  brother  in  El  Paso;  the  other  from  G.  H.  Merritt  to  Mr. 
Fellman,  of  Chihuahua. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  November  18,  1862. 

Col.  Joseph  R.  West, 

Commanding  District  of  Arizona , Mesilla : 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  by  special 
express  of  your  letter  of  the  13th  instant  in  relation  to  a report  in  cir- 
culation in  Chihuahua  and  El  Paso,  Mex.,  that  General  Baylor,  C.  S. 
Army,  has  for  some  time  been  preparing  to  invade  New  Mexico  from 
Texas  with  6,000  men.  The  report  is  sufficiently  circumstantial  for  us 
to  consider  well  what  we  should  do  in  the  way  of  timely  preparation 
for  such  an  invasion.  This  country  is  so  extended  and  so  open  to  at- 
tack along  its  eastern  frontier  and  has  so  many  avenues  of  approach 
from  the  rebel  States  of  Arkansas  and  Texas,  either  of  which  avenues 
an  enemy  can  choose  and  cover  his  real  designs  by  diversions  upon  the 
others,  and,  besides,  our  force  all  told  is  so  small  in  comparison  with 
the  reported  strength  of  the  enemy,  that  to  mature  a perfect  plan  to 
repel  the  threatened  attack  will  call  for  no  little  reflection  upon  all  the 
elements  here  which  must  enter  into  the  calculation  before  we  can  ar- 
rive at  definite  conclusions  upon  the  subject.  What  you  are  to  do  in 
case  any  part  of  the  enemy’s  force  comes  into  the  country  by  the  route 
pursued  by  General  Sibley  in  his  late  incursion  seems  to  be  quite  plain. 
The  force  coming  by  that  route  will  have  a march  of  over  600  miles  be- 
fore it  can  enter  the  valley  of  the  Rio  Grande,  and  for  this  distance  will 
have  to  transport  all  the  subsistence  stores  which  it  will  consume.  He 
who  commands  this  force  must  count  on  replenishing  his  magazines 
after  his  arrival.  Therefore  so  far  as  your  command  is  concerned  and 
what  you  are  now  to  do  seems  a problem  easy  of  solution.  At  all  events 
the  following  are  the  essential  points  on  which  you  will  promptly  act,  pre- 
liminary to  what  you  will  be  required  to  do  as  time  may  develop  the  mat- 
ter still  further : 

You  will  at  once  secure  all  the  corn  and  grain  which  you  can  pos- 
sibly buy  from  the  people  at  San  Elizario,  Socorro,  Isleta,  Franklin, 


600 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  rflSS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 


La  Mesa,  La  Mestlla,  Las  Cruces,  and  DoS  a Ana,  commencing  at 
the  points  lowest  down  the  Rio  Grande  and  so  on  up,  and  have 
it  all  carefully  stored  and  guarded  at  Mesilla.  If  the  people  will  not 
sell  it  to  you  it  must  be  seized  and  receipts  be  given  for  it.  Under  no 
circumstances  will  it  be  left  to  feed  the  enemy.  Offer  and  pay  a fair, 
even  a liberal,  price  for  it,  and  avoid  any  appearance  of  coercion  until  all 
other  means  fail.  When  once  all  this  breadstuff  and  forage  is  under 
your  hand  it  can  easily  be  transported  to  Fort  Craig  or  destroyed. 
The  people  living  in  El  Paso  County,  Texas,  as  well  as  those  living  in 
the  Mesilla  Valley,  should  be  caused  to  believe  that  when  the  Texans 
come  it  will  be  again  to  fatten  upon  them  without  pay ; that  rather 
than  submit  to  this  it  will  be  better  for  them  to  move  their  families  for 
the  time  being  into  El  Paso,  on  the  Mexican  side  of  the  river,  or 
above  the  Jornada  del  Muerto.  So  far  as  we  are  concerned  it  would 
be  better  that  they  move  to  El  Paso,  so  as  to  help  exhaust  the  provis- 
ions on  that  side  of  the  river.  They  should  then  be  advised  to  cache 
on  our  side  of  the  Rio  Grande  breadstuff's  enough  for  the  really  able- 
bodied  men  to  live  upon,  and  for  these  latter  to  stay  behind  and  wage 
a partisan  warfare  upon  the  invader  from  the  moment  he  enters  the 
valley.  This  provides  for  what  you  are  to  do  so  far  as  the  Mexican 
population  are  concerned.  Of  course  until  the  enemy  is  near  beyond 
a doubt  nothing  of  this  moving  need  take  place;  but  the  minds  of  the 
people  can  be  prepared  and  their  resolution  determined.  All  good 
Union  men  among  the  Americans  will  rally  around  you.  All  doubtful 
Americans  and  foreigners,  the  moment  these  rumors  are  confirmed, 
are  to  be  seized  and  sent,  strongly  guarded,  to  Fort  Craig.  There,  with 
a spade,  at  least  they  can  help  defend  the  flag  which  has  hitherto  pro- 
tected them  and  which  they  would  now  desert.  The  houses  and  stores 
owned  by  secessionists  who  ran  off  to  Texas  they  will  expect  to  repos- 
sess when  they  come  back  These,  commencing  at  San  Elizario  and 
coming  up,  including  those  at  Fort  Bliss  (burn  off  the  roofs),  Franklin, 
Hart’s  Mill  and  dwellings,  and  all  of  those  belonging  to  this  class  of 
men  in  Mesilla  and  Las  Cruces,  will  be  laid  in  ashes.  Of  course  the 
destruction  of  all  the  buildings  herein  enumerated  will  be  the  last  thing 
done  when  you  know  the  enemy  is  coming  and  before  you  feel  com- 
pelled to  retire.  You  will  also  destroy  Bull’s  Mill,  at  Mesilla,  and  Grand- 
jean’s  Mill,  at  Las  Cruces,  in  case  you  are  compelled  to  fall  back.  Thus 
you  must  not  only  take  the  breadstuff's,  but  you  must  destroy  as  far  as 
possible  all  means  of  making  bread  by  the  rebels.  The  Mexican  popu- 
lation who  prefer  to  remain  behind  can  grind  their  corn  on  metals  as 
of  old;  so  the  destruction  of  these  mills  will  be  no  serious  blow  to  them. 
You  know  that  the  destruction  of  all  these  mills  and  all  the  fine  quarters 
I have  named  will  embarrass  Baylor  and  his  forces  to  a very  great 
degree.  I am  aware  of  just  how  sharp  you  will  look  out  and  how  hard 
and  effectually  you  will  work  to  cripple  him  in  other  ways  than  these 
which  I have  enumerated.  As  a further  injury,  when  you  are  sure  he 
is  near  at  hand  buy  up  or  take  on  receipts  all  cattle  and  horses  and 
mules  which  you  can  get  and  have  them  driven  northward  well  out  of 
the  way.  The  ferry-boats  upon  the  river  will  all,  large  and  small,  be 
destroyed,  as  well  as  all  lumber  of  which  others  can  be  made.  You 
will  remind  the  Mexicans  of  how  they  were  robbed  before,  and  animate 
them,  as  you  can  do,  with  a settled  determination  to  attack  the  enemy 
from  every  cover;  to  shoot  down  his  teams;  to  stampede  his  stock  when 
grazing;  to  destroy  the  bridges  over  the  acequias;  to  hover  by  night 
around  his  camps;  to  set  fire  to  the  grass  and  all  kinds  of  fodder  which 
his  animals  might  otherwise  get;  to  shoot  down  his  men  by  night  and 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


601 


then  before  day  to  scatter  singly  in  all  directions,  and  then  to  repeat  this 
over  and  over  and  over  again  until  he  feels  the  just  vengeance  of  a people 
who  never  did  him  harm,  but  whom  before  he  wantonly  and  ruthlessly 
insulted,  oppressed,  and  robbed.  Inspire  them  with  this,  and  let  me 
know  the  number  of  arms  you  can  safely  place  in  their  hands,  and  I will 
have  them  near  by,  so  that  you  can  distribute  them  at  the  last  moment. 
So  far  as  your  own  force  is  concerned,  you  will  remain  below  the  Jornado 
as  long  as  you  can  injure  the  enemy  without  running  the  risk  of  being 
cut  off  from  Fort  Oraig,  to  which  point  you  will  retire  as  a last  resort, 
leaving  nothing  behind  that  could  be  of  service  to  him.  I have  writ- 
ten Colonel  Bowie  a letter,  which  accompanies  this,  and  which  you  will 
send  to  him  by  express,  to  come  forward  with  three  more  companies 
from  Fort  Yuma.  If  you  are  driven  back  on  Craig  before  he  leaves 
Tucson  keep  him  advised  of  what  you  are  compelled  to  do.  He  can 
defend  Fort  Bowie  and  Tucson  with  six  companies  of  fresh  troops 
against  any  small  travel-worn  force  which  the  enemy  would  be  likely  to 
detach  in  that  direction  for  the  conquest  of  Western  Arizona.  For  the 
present  I do  not  think  it  to  be  expedient  to  recall  Pishon  and  McCleave 
from  their  operations  against  the  Mescalero  Indians.  We  cannot  afford 
to  be  diverted  from  a single  purpose  looking  to  the  protection  of  the 
inhabitants  of  this  country  on  a rumor.  It  has  cost  a great  deal  of 
money  to  set  on  foot  this  campaign  against  the  Mescal eros,  and  until  I 
am  absolutely  compelled  by  force  to  order  the  troops  to  come  back  they 
will  fulfill  their  instructions.  But  to  provide  against  possible  contin- 
gences,  in  case  Baylor’s  forces  enter  the  valley  of  the  Rio  Grande  un- 
expectedly while  these  troops  are  in  the  field,  send  word  to  them  to 
march  to  Fort  Stanton,  and  if  pursued  to  fight  the  enemy  at  all  van- 
tage points  and  fall  back  no  faster  than  driven  toward  Fort  Oraig. 
The  recent  attack  by  the  Federal  forces  on  Galveston  may  serve  to 
keep  all  the  Texan  troops  at  home.  But  should  they  come  by  Sibley’s 
route,  as  herein  indicated,  your  duty  in  general  terms  is  marked  out, 
and  I know  you  will  do  it  well.  If  I had  to  choose  a man  for  the  place 
you  are  now  on  I tell  you  frankly  I should  choose  yourself.  Instill 
into  the  minds  of  all  your  subordinates  but  half  of  your  address,  your 
energy,  your  forecast,  your  resolution,  and  Baylor  and  his  people  will 
have  reason  to  remember  the  handful  of  Californians  he  may  find  below 
the  Jornada. 

I am.  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Washington,  November  20, 1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler, 

Commanding , c fee.,  New  Orleans : 

General:  Your  letter  of  November  6,  transmitting  copies  of  your 
correspondence  with  Brigadier-General  Weitzel,  is  received.*  Your 
order  No.  63,  of  August  22,  with  the  accompanying  letter  t was  sub- 
mitted to  the  Secretary  of  War  for  his  instructions,  and  he  replied  that 
no  instructions  were  necessary,  as  the  whole  matter  was  left  to  the  judg- 
ment and  discretion  of  the  department  commander. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


See  reports,  p.  162. 


tSee  Butler  to  Halleck,  August  27,  p.  555. 


602  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA,,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

N o.  99.  ) New  Orleans , November  21,  1862. 

A commission,  to  consist  of  Col.  T.  W.  Cahill,  commanding  United 
States  forces  in  New  Orleans  and  Algiers;  Col.  H.  C.  Deming,  acting 
mayor  of  New  Orleans,  and  E.  H.  Dnrell,  chairman  bureau  of  finance  of 
New  Orleans,  is  hereby  appointed  to  determine  the  amount  due  as  jail 
expenses  from  the  United  States  on  account  of  negroes  already  released 
from  the  police  jail,  to  be  employed  by  the  Government. 

Hereafter  no  negro  slave  will  be  confined  in  that  jail  unless  such 
expenses  are  prepaid,  the  slave  to  be  released  when  the  money  is  ex- 
hausted. 

It  is  also  ordered  that  a list  of  the  reputed  owners  of  slaves  now  in 
the  police  jail  be  published,  and  that  all  slaves  whose  jail  fees  are  not 
paid  within  ten  days  after  such  publication  be  discharged.  This  is  the 
course  taken  in  ali  countries  with  debtors  confined  by  creditors,  and 
slaves  have  not  such  commercial  value  in  Hew  Orleans  as  to  justify 
their  being  held  and  fed  by  the  city,  relying  upon  any  supposed  lien 
upon  the  slave. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler: 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  101.  ( New  Orleans , November  25, 1862. 

The  provisions  of  General  Orders,  Ho.  91,  current  series,  from  these 
headquarters,  are  hereby  extended  to  embrace  all  the  State  of  Louisi- 
ana east  of  the  Mississippi  River,  except  the  parishes  of  Orleans, 
Plaquemines,  and  Saint  Bernard. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General  and  Chief  of  Staff , 


[November  29,  1862.— For  Butler  to  Secretary  of  State,  transmitting 
correspondence  with  Admiral  Reynaud  in  reference  to  French  subjects 
imprisoned,  and  Wolcott  to  Butler,  December  12, 1862,  on  same  subject, 
see  Series  II.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , November  29,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commanding  in  Chief: 

General  : The  enemy  has  concentrated  a large  force,  not  less  prob- 
ably than  10,000  men— some  excellent  authorities  stating  the  numbers 
as  high  as  15,000— at  Port  Hudson.  The  position  is  naturally  a strong 
one,  stronger  even,  it  is  believed,  than  Vicksburg.  The  design  of  the 
enemy  is  to  fight  the  great  battle  for  the  possession  of  the  Mississippi 
at  that  point.  For  the  want  of  a sufficient  land  force — the  Navy  says 
they  must  have  10,000  at  least — I have  been  compelled  to  postpone  o* 
projected  attack  upon  the  position.  It  might  have  been  taken  by  five 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


603 


Chap.  XXVII.  | 

regiments  four  weeks  since  had  I had  troops  sufficient  to  hold  it.  As 
the  case  stands  now  it  will  be  easy  with  a force  as  large  as  that  ot  the 
enemy  to  compel  him  to  give  battle  elsewhere;  if  m no  other  way,  cer- 
tainly by  drowning  him  out  by  destroying  the  levee  above  him. 

Brigadier-General  Sherman  is  now  engaged  in  exploring  the  country 
above  here  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river,  with  a view  to  movements 
which  may  take  place  hereafter.  He  has  reached  a point  within  6 miles 
of  Baton  Bouge,  meeting  no  force  of  the  enemy. 

It  is  believed  that  before  the  middle  of  January  we  shall  be  compelled 
to  withdraw  General  Weitzel’s  force  to  the  hither  side  of  the  Bayou  Da 
Fourche,  as  by  that  time  the  Lower  Teche  country  and  the  country  Irom 
La  Fourche  to  Brashear  City  will  be  flooded  from  the  Bed  Biyer  neigh- 
borhood, the  levees  being  much  out  of  repair  and  no  means  are  m our 
power  to  ward  off  the  impending  danger ; the  levees  on  the  right  bank 
far  above  being  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy  and  totally  neglected  by 
them,  and  the  conformation  of  the  country  such  that  the  overflow  will 

extend  hundreds  of  miles.  „ , , , , , 

This  will  be  a serious  blow  to  the  people  of  that  country,  already 
great  sufferers  from  the  effects  of  the  war,  and  most  of  whom  are  ready 
and  most  heartily  anxious  to  return  to  their  allegiance. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servan^  ^ 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

December  4, 1862. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : You  will  remember  that  the  banks  of  this  city  sent  away  about 
four  millions  of  their  specie  upon  the  advent  of  our  troops  in  the  city. 
They  have  made  application  to  the  Confederate  authorities  to  bring  it 

back,  but  have  been  refused.  . . , ~ 

The  banks  now  desire  that  I would  permit  their  specie  m the  Con- 
federacy to  be  put  upon  a war  vessel  of  some  foreign  power  and  sent 
either  to  France  or  England,  to  be  kept  there  safely  till  after  the  ter- 
mination of  the  war,  the  money  to  be  under  the  care  of  two  agents,  one 
appointed  by  the  banks  and  the  other  by  the  Confederate  Government; 
all  this  to  be  done  of  course  only  if  the  Bichmond  people  consent,  lo 
effect  this  arrangement  I informed  the  agent  of  the  banks  I could 
consent  to  apply  to  the  Department,  because  of  the  great  need  that  the 
Confederates  have  for  gold  in  Europe.  The  agent  of  the  banks  might 
be  corrupted  by  the  Confederate  agent,  and  the  money,  when  there,  ap- 


plied to  Confederate  uses. 

But  if  the  representative  of  the  foreign  government  near  W askmgton 
upon  whose  vessel  the  coin  might  be  placed  would  pledge  his  govern- 
ment that  the  money  should  be  kept  intact,  unpledged,  and  undrawn 
upon  during  the  war,  to  be  returned  to  the  banks  in  ipsissimo  specie 
after  peace,  I thought  the  Department  might  entertain  the  proposition. 

I have  in  pursuance  of  this  idea  been  requested  to  put  this  matter 
before  the  War  Department.  This  I have  done,  awaiting  instructions. 

I am,  most  truly,  your  obedient  servant  BUTLER. 


Major-  General , Commanding. 


604 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex .,  December  5,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army , Washington,  D.  C.: 

General  : Inclosed  herewith  please  find — 

I.  Copy  of  a letter  to  General  Wright,  asking  that  he  order  the  re- 
mainder of  Bowie’s  regiment  California  Volunteers  to  the  Rio  Grande. 

II.  Copy  of  a letter  to  Colonel  Bowie,  California  Volunteers,  on  the 
same  subject. 

III.  Copy  of  a letter  from  Brigadier-General  West  in  relation  to 
rumors  of  an  advance  of  a rebel  force  from  Texas. 

IV.  Copy  of  a letter  from  a gentleman  named  Caniffe  to  a gentleman 
named  Tully  on  the  same  subject. 

V.  Copy  of  a letter  from  Capt.  Edward  B.  Willis  to  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral West  on  this  same  business. 

I again  urge  the  necessity  of  placing  the  Colorado  Volunteers  under 
the  orders  of  the  commander  of  this  department. 

Respectfully,  &c., 


JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


[Indorsement.] 

General  Carleton  will  in  case  of  actual  danger  make  requisitions  on 
the  commanding  general  of  the  Department  of  Missouri  for  re-enforce- 
ments  from  Colorado  Territory,  giving  immediate  notice  to  the  Adju- 
tant-General of  the  Army  that  such  requisitions  have  been  made. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in- Chief. 


[In closure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  November  18,  1862. 

General  George  Wright, 

Comdg.  the  Department  of  the  Pacific,  San  Francisco,  Cal. : 

General:  I have  the  honor  herewith  to  inclose  a duplicate  original 
of  a letter  sent  by  express,  via  Mesilla  and  Tucson,  to  Colonel  Bowie,  re- 
questing him  to  march  without  delay  with  three  companies  of  the  present 
garrison  of  Fort  Yuma  to  the  Rio  Grande. 

I consider  it  important  that  you  give  me  all  of  Bowie’s  regiment  on 
the  Rio  Grande ; that  other  troops  occupy  Tucson  and  Fort  Bowie  in  the 
Apache  Pass,  and  that  Fort  Yuma  be  garrisoned  by  at  least  six  com- 
panies. 

If  you  can  send  three  companies  of  the  Second  Cavalry  under  such  a 
man  as  Colonel  Evans  to  Tucson  it  would  give  me  all  of  the  First  here, 
and  I cannot  get  along  with  less  of  this  description  of  troops.  It  seems 
to  be  a settled  purpose  of  the  rebels  to  occupy  this  country  and  Arizona. 

If  you  will  help  me  with  another  regiment  of  infantry,  posted  as  herein 
indicated,  and  three  companies  of  cavalry,  I believe  he  cannot  succeed. 
I shall  try  to  get  some  troops  from  Colorado  Territory  to  make  this  part 
of  New  Mexico  as  warm  as  possible  for  him  in  case  he  comes  here. 

What  you  do,  general,  should  be  done  at  once.  You  are  aware  that 
there  are  many  stores  accumulated  at  Fort  Yuma  and  at  Tucson,  so  that 
these  movements  will  not  be  attended  with  much  additional  expense. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  605 

* 

The  means  of  transportation  now  at  Tucson  and  which  I can  send  there 
will  be  sufficient  for  all  movements  this  side  of  Fort  Yuma. 

I will  send  a duplicate  of  this  letter  by  express  over  the  southern 
route. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  CAELETON, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


Note. — Please  notify  me  by  telegraph  via  Denver  City  of  what  you 

decide  on  doing. 

J.  H.  C. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  FS,  N.  Mex .,  November  18,  1862. 

Col.  George  W.  Bowie, 

Commanding  at  Fort  Yuma , Cal. : 

Colonel:  I have  recently  received  such  circumstantial  rumors  that 
6,000  Confederate  troops  are  about  to  make  another  demonstration  against 
this  Territory  as  to  justify  me  in  calling  upon  you  to  come  forward  without 
delay  to  the  Eio  Grande  with  at  least  three  of  the  five  companies  now  form- 
ing the  garrison  at  Fort  Yuma;  that  you  request  by  express  the  com- 
mander of  the  Department  of  the  Pacific  to  send  Forman’s  regiment  to 
Fort  Yuma,  so  that  on  its  arrival  these  two  last  companies  of  your  regi- 
ment left  by  you  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dobbins  can  come  on  without 
delay  to  join  you,  and  I beg  of  you  to  request  of  General  Wright  that  he 
will  order  four  of  Forman’s  companies  forward  to  Tucson  ; that  three  of 
these  may  hold  that  point  and  one  occupy  Fort  Bowie.  This  will  relieve 
the  whole  of  the  Fifth  Infantry,  California  Volunteers,  by  the  4th,  and 
give  you  your  whole  regiment  on  the  Eio  Grande.  There  are  provisions 
and  hospital  stores  at  Tucson,  and  provisions,  hospital  stores,  and  ammu- 
nition here,  so  that  you  need  be  embarrassed  with  only  subsistence  to  last 
you  to  Tucson,  where  you  will  be  able  to  get  a supply  to  last  you  to  the 
Eio  Grande.  Bring  of  ammunition  at  least  100  rounds  per  man.  I shall 
count  on  your  leaving  Fort  Yuma  for  Tucson  immediately  on  receipt  of 
this.  You  can  use  the  transportation  now  plying  between  Tucson  and 
Fort  Yuma.  If  this  transportation  does  not  happen  to  be  at  Fort  Yuma 
when  this  letter  comes  to  hand  use  your  post  teams,  and  send  them  back 
when  the  others  are  met. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  CAELETON, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

[Inolosure  No.  3.] 

Headquarters  District  of  Arizona, 

Mesilla , November  30,  1862. 

Capt.  Benj.  C.  Cutler, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Santa  Fe: 

Captain:  Copies  of  correspondence  herewith  inclosed  will  apprise 
the  general  commanding  that  I have  sent  Brad.  Daily  and  Captain 
Parvin  to  watch  the  enemy  about  Horsehead  Crossing.  You  will  see 
by  another  inclosure  that  there  is  another  story  about  Skillman,  and 
this  is,  I think,  the  true  one.  Eumors  are  rife  and  the  people  much 


606 


W.  FLA.,  S:  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXm 

alarmed.  It  is  no  easy  matter  to  determine  the  facts  and  I may  be 
misled  in  my  conclusion,  but  I adhere  to  my  opinion  that  a small  force 
will  be  thrown  below  me  on  the  Eio  Grande  to  open  communication  for 
supplies  with  Chihuahua  and  to  induce  me  to  stay  and  watch  them 
while  the  main  body  moves  up  the  Pecos.  In  case  I hear  of  the  latter 
design  being  carried  out  I shall  act  under  the  general’s  instructions 
of  the  18th  instant,  unless  he  should  in  the  mean  time  direct  otherwise ; 
that  is,  I shall  commence  at  San  Elizario,  leave  nothing  that  can  be  of 
service  to  the  enemy,  and  fall  back  on  Fort  Craig. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  WEST, 

Colonel  First  Infantry  California  Volunteers , Comdg . 


[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

El  Paso,  Mex.,  November  26, 1862. 

P.  E.  Tully,  Esq. : 

Dear  Tully  : Bad  news ; troublesome  times  again  ahead.  Skillman 
dropped  from  the  clouds  night  before  last,  and  his  crowd  were  consid- 
erably excited  all  day  yesterday.  I can  only  find  out  that  Baylor  is 
promoted  to  major-general  and  Scurry  general.  There  are  two  other 
generals,  but  I don’t  remember  the  names.  Madison  is  colonel,  Merritt 
quartermaster,  &c.  The  authorities  made  no  effort,  as  I know  of,  to 
stop  Skillman.  He  was  met  this  morning  tight  as  the  devil,  about  9 
miles,  going  below,  and  of  course  sleeps  to-night  in  Guadalupe.  The 
main  Texas  force  is  at  or  about  the  Moros,*  though  he  expects  to  meet 
an  advance  at  Horsehead.  I don’t  know  what  to  do,  whether  to  go  to 
Chihuahua  or  get  out  by  Tucson  to  California. 

Yours,  truly,  _ 

’ H.  J.  CAXIFFE. 


X.  B. — Is  there  anything  to  meet  the  Texans  up  your 
is  none  down  here. 


There 


[Inclosure  No.  5.] 

Hart’s  Mill,  Tex.,  November  26,  1862. 

Lieut.  W.  L.  Bynerson, 

First  Infantry  California  Volunteers , A.  A.  6r.,  Mesilla : 

Lieutenant  : The  night  before  last  some  men  from  San  Antonio 
arrived  at  El  Paso,  named  Skillman,  John  Stevenson,  and  the  other 
unknown.  I was  informed  of  it  yesterday.  They  were  kept  carefully 
concealed.  Mr.  Mills  went  immediately  to  call  upon  Stevenson  to  find 
out  what  he  could  with  regard  to  the  matter,  but  could  not  gain  admit- 
tance, although  he  frequently  visits  there,  but  saw  enough  to  know  that 
the  principal  secessionists  of  that  place  were  in  conclave  there,  and 
thinks  these  men  were  at  that  time  in  the  house.  Skillman  is  a noted 
desperado,  and  the  man  of  all  others  that  would  be  chosen  as  a spy. 
He  knows  every  inch  of  this  country  well  ; he  is  also  a fugitive  from  jus- 
tice in  Mexico  for  murder.  Brad.  Daily  knows  him  well,  and  was  formerly 
a very  intimate  friend  of  his.  Mr.  Uranga  sent  last  night  to  try  to  ar- 
rest him,  but  the  birds  had  all  flown.  Dr.  Samaniego  tells  me  this  morn- 
ing that  Skillman  has  a company  of  Texans  at  Presidio  del  Xorte  $ that 


Fort  Clark. 


Chap.  XXYII.] 


607 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

* 

he  has  gone  there  to  return  with  them  in  six  days,  when  those  across  the 
river  will  join  him  to  make  a dash  at  this  place.  The  doctor  entertains 
no  doubt  of  the  truth  of  this ; he  says  they  do  not  expect  to  hold  the 
place,  but  to  plunder  and  retire  immediately.  It  is  in  character  with 
the  man.  He  once  with  10  men  held  the  plaza  of  El  Paso  for  two  hours. 

There  is  much  excitement  in  El  Paso  with  regard  to  these  matters. 
The  authorities  are  purchasing  all  the  arms  that  they  can.  They  are 
very  much  afraid  of  the  Texans.  Mr.  Zubrian  offers  to  deliver  1,000 
fenagas  of  corn  within  fifteen  or  twenty  days  after  being  notified,  at  3 J 
cents  per  pound  (free  of  all  Mexican  dues),  in  the  town  of  El  Paso,  and 
within  twenty  days  thereafter  1,000  or  2,000  fenagas  more,  payable  in 
coin.  This  is  regarded  by  business  men  here  a low  offer.  They  say 
grain  is  rising  fast,  and  the  purchase  of  that  amount  will  also  tend  to 
raise  the  price.  Mr.  Zubrian  requests  to  be  notified  at  once  if  his  offer 
cannot  be  accepted.  I inclose  a letter  from  Dr.  Diffendorfer. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  B.  WILLIS, 
Captain , First  Infantry,  California  Volunteers . 


General  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  105.  1 New  Orleans , December  9,  1862. 

Under  General  Orders,  No.  55,  current  series,  from  these  headquar- 
ters, an  assessment  was  made  upon  certain  parties  who  had  aided  the 
rebellion  “to  be  appropriated  to  the  starving  poor  of  New  Orleans.” 

The  calls  upon  the  fund  raised  under  that  order  have  been  frequent 
and  urgent  and  it  is  now  exhausted.  But  the  poor  of  this  city  have 
the  same  or  increased  necessities  for  relief  as  then  and  their  calls  must 
be  heard,  and  it  is  both  fit  and  proper  that  the  jmrties  responsible  for 
the  present  state  of  affairs  should  have  the  burden  of  their  support. 

Therefore  the  parties  named  in  Schedules  A and  B of  General  Or- 
ders, No.  55,  as  hereunto  annexed,*  are  assessed  in  like  sums  and  for  the 
same  purpose,  and  will  make  payment  to  D.  O.  G.  Field,  financial  clerk, 
at  his  office  at  these  headquarters,  on  or  before  Monday,  December  15, 
1862. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler : 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Emory’s  Division,  Banks’  Expedition, 

Steamer  Baltic , off  Ship  Island , December  14,  1862. 
Lieut.  Ool.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Banks’  Expedition  : 

Sir  : The  mail  steamer  that  you  supposed  ran  here  has  ceased  to  do 
so;  it  has  not  run  for  a week,  and  the  ships  that  are  coming  in  here  are 
so  crowded  that  I cannot  get  a horse  on  board  of  them.  It  is  there- 
fore impossible  for  me  to  get  away  from  here  unless  you  send  one  ves- 
sel from  New  Orleans.  Besides  the  load  of  the  Baltic  and  Atlantic, 
2,000  men  and  a large  amount  of  commissary  stores,  I believe  the 
Bficsson  draws  too  much  water  to  go  into  New  Orleans.  I have 
therefore  to  request  that  the  general  commanding  will  cause  the  fol- 


See  pp.  540-542. 


608 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH 


lo wing-named  ships  to  be  unloaded  and  sent  back  with  all  possible 
dispatch:  S.  R.  Spaulding,  Matanzas,  United  States,  Key  West;  and 
should  my  conjecture  about  the  Ericsson  prove  correct,  of  which  I have 
no  doubt,"  I beg  that  the  Arago  or  New  Brunswick  may  also  be  sent. 

I shall  get  the  men  ashore  from  the  Baltic  and  Atlantic  by  12  m.  to- 
day. The  commissary  stores  I do  not  propose  to  touch.  To  attempt 
to  land  them  with  the  means  we  have  at  hand  would  take  a great  deal 
of  time,  besides  exposing  the  stores  to  the  weather  on  the  shore.  I 
think  the  best  way  to  dispose  of  them  would  be  to  send  the  lighters 
directly  alongside  the  ship.  If,  however,  this  plan  is  not  approved  in 
regard  to  the  stores  1 beg  to  be  informed.  We  can  take  them  ashore 
in  small  boats  in  about  three  working  days. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  EMORY, 
Brigadier- General. 

P.  s. — i shall  see  Colonel  Abert  in  reference  to  these  stores.  He 
may  have  orders  in  regard  to  them.  If  so,  I shall  of  course  be  gov- 
erned by  them. 


Hdqrs.  One  hundred  and  fifty-sixth  Regt.  N.  Y.  Vols., 

Key  West , Fla.,  December  15,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks. 

General  : The  steamer  M.  Sanford,  having  on  board  the  One  hun- 
dred and  fifty-sixth  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers,  with  its  entire 
equipments,  stores,  and  supplies,  including  sixty  days7  rations,  sailed 
from  the  port  of  New  York  at  10  o’clock  in  the  evening  of  December 
3 instant,  under  sealed  orders.  After  twenty-four  hours’  sailing  the 
orders  were  duly  opened  in  my  presence  by  Captain  Sanford,  command- 
ing the  ship,  pursuant  to  directions  furnished  him  from  the  headquar- 
ters of  the  expedition.  The  voyage  was  continued  down  the  coast  of 
the  United  States  until  the  morning  of  the  10th  instant  at  about  twenty 
minutes  after  6 o’clock,  when  the  vessel  was  stranded  upon  the  Carys- 
fort  Reef,  about  1J  miles  from  the  light,  and  bearing  about  south  by 
west  therefrom,  heading  south-southwest.  Captain  Sanford  immediately 
ordered  the  sail  taken  in,  the  engine  reversed,  and,  with  a view  of  back- 
ing her  off,  ordered  the  ship  lightened  by  throwing  the  cargo  overboard. 
I went  immediately  below  where  the  men  were  principally  quartered, 
found  the  ship  fast  filling,  and  got  the  men  on  deck,  and  quickly  as 
possible  stopped  the  men  from  casting  overboard  the  freight,  it  being 
evident  the  ship  had  broken  and  could  not  be  hauled  off.  Several 
steamers  were  in  sight  bearing  southward  and  nearly  abreast  of  us,  but 
at  so  great  a distance  out  that  our  signals  failed  to  attract  their  notice. 
The  gunboat  Gemsbok,  Captain  Cavendy,  however,  at  anchor  with  two 
other  vessels  in  Turtle  Harbor,  saw  our  signal,  and  the  Gemsbok  got  up 
sail  and  finally  came  around  and  anchored  as  near  the  reef  as  possible, 
and  rendered  us  most  valuable  assistance  in  disembarking  the  regi- 
ment and  so  much  of  the  property  on  board  as  could  be  removed. 
Other  steamers  arrived  during  the  day  and  gave  us  all  the  aid  in  their 
power. 

I sent  one  company  on  board  the  Curlew  to  Key  West,  and  Colonel 
Benedict,  who  came  on  board  toward  evening  from  the  City  of  Bath, 
kindly  took  on  board  the  last-named  steamer  our  sick  and  lame  and 
carried  them  to  Key  West. 


Chap.  XXYII  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


609 


The  steamer  Blackstone,  Captain  Berry,  bound  North,  came  to  and 
lay  by  us  until  we  had  transferred  all  the  troops  on  board  that  vessel 
and  the  Gemsbok.  At  dark  in  the  evening  of  the  day  we  stranded  I 
had  sent  off  from  the  wreck  all  but  about  200  of  the  men,  when  the  two 
lighters  we  had  employed  from  the  shore  hauled  off  and  we  remained 
on  board  until  morning,  when  the  work  was  renewed,  and  by  12  o’clock 
of  the  11th  instant  we  were  on  board  of  the  vessel  before  named,  with 
so  much  of  the  stores  as  we  were  able  to  remove,  and  got  under  way 
for  Key  West,  the  Blackstone  returning  with  the  Gemsbok  for  that 
purpose.  The  wreck  had  by  this  time  settled  to  the  depth  of  her  guards 
and  lay  upon  the  bottom. 

The  stranding  of  this  vessel  was  so  palpably  the  result  of  the  most 
criminal  negligence,  if  not  design,  that  I immediately  arrested  the  sail- 
ing-master, Capt.  A.  W.  Richardson,  who  was  in  charge  at  the  time, 
and  sent  him  on  board  the  Blackstone,  and  have  handed  him  over  to 
the  authorities  here  for  examination.  Fortunately  no  man  was  lost, 
nor  have  I learned  that  the  slightest  accident  occurred  in  consequence 
of  the  wreck  to  any  member  of  the  regiment.  We  arrived  and  landed 
at  Key  West  on  the  morning  of  the  12th  instant  and  are  without  the 
means  of  transportation.  Colonel  Morgan,  commanding  this  post,  and 
Lieutenant  Gibbs,  post  quartermaster,  have  rendered  us  every  assist- 
ance in  securing  quarters,  rations,  &c.,  for  the  regiment.  I find  many 
of  our  equipments  are  lost  and  some  clothing.  Much  of  this  will  be 
supplied  here  to-day,  but  Colonel  Morgan  doubts  if  he  will  spare  guns 
enough.  We  have  127  men  without  guns  or  bayonets.  Our  tent  poles 
and  pins  are  all  lost,  having  been  thrown  overboard  when  the  steamer 
first  struck.  I trust  we  may  be  supplied  at  the  place  of  our  destination. 
We  have  the  A tent. 

I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

ERASTUS  COOKE, 

Colonel  Comdg.  One  hundred  and  fifty-sixth  New  York  Vols. 


Special  Orders,  i Headquarters  Banks’  Expedition, 

No.  29.  j New  Orleans , December  15,  1862. 

All  the  troops  of  the  expedition  now  here,  except  those  affected  with 
disease,  which,  in  the  medical  director’s  opinion,  requires  their  immedi- 
ate disembarkation  and  isolation,  will  at  once  proceed  up  the  river, 
under  the  command  of  Brigadier- General  Grover,  and  land  at  Baton 
Rouge.  Maj.  D.  C.  Houston,  chief  engineer,  and  First  Lieut.  R.  M. 
Hill,  chief  of  ordnance,  will  accompany  them,  and  will  report  to  Gen- 
eral Grover  for  temporary  duty. 

Every  exertion  will  be  used  to  get  under  way  this  evening. 

Major-General  Augur  is  specially  charged  with  the  execution  of  so 
much  of  this  order  as  relates  to  starting  the  expedition.  The  landing 
will  be  covered  and  protected  by  the  gunboats,  and  General  Grover 
will  communicate  and  co-operate  with  the  commander  of  the  naval 
forces  in  his  operations. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

RIGH’D  B.  IRWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


39  r r — vol  xv 


610  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  106.  f New  Orleans , December  15,  1862. 


Soldiers  of  the  Army  of  the  Gulf  : 

Believed  from  further  duties  iu  this  department  by  direction  of  the 
President,  under  date  of  November  9,  1862,  I take  leave  of  you  by.  this 
hnal  order,  it  being  impossible  to  visit  your  scattered  outposts,  covering 
hundreds  of  miles  of  the  frontier  of  a larger  territory  than  some  of  the 
kingdoms  of  Europe. 

I greet  you,  my  brave  comrades,  and  say  farewell! 

This  word,  endeared  as  you  are  by  a community  of  privations,  hard- 
ships, dangers,  victories,  successes,  military  and  civil,  is  the  only  sorrow- 
ful thought  I have.  You  have  deserved  well  of  your  country.  With- 
out a murmur  you  sustained  an  encampment  on  a sand  bar  so  desolate 
that  banishment  to  it,  with  every  care  and  comfort  possible,  has  been 
the  most  dreaded  punishment  inflicted  upon  your  bitterest  and  most 
insulting  enemies. 

You  had  so  little  transportation  that  but  a handful  could  advance  to 
compel  submission  by  the  Queen  City  of  the  rebellion,  whilst  others 
waded  breast-deep  in  the  marshes  which  surround  Saint  Philip  and 
forced  the  surrender  of  a fort  deemed  impregnable  to  land  attack  by 
the  most  skillful  engineers  of  your  country  and  her  enemy. 

At  your  occupation  order,  law,  quiet,  and  peace  sprang  to  this  city, 
filled  with  the  bravos  of  all  nations,  where  for  a score  of  years,  during 
the  profoundest  peace,  human  life  was  scarcely  safe  at  noonday. 

By  your  discipline  you  illustrated  the  best  traits  of  the  American  sol- 
dier and  enchained  the  admiration  of  those  that  came  to  scoff. 

Landing  with  a military  chest  containing  but  $75,  from  the  hoards  of 
a rebel  government  you  have  given  to  your  country’s  Treasury  nearly  a 
half  million  of  dollars,  and  so  supplied  yourselves  with  the  needs  of  your 
service  that  your  expedition  has  cost  your  Government  less  by  four- 
fifths  than  any  other. 

You  have  fed  the  starving  poor,  the  wives  and  children  of  your  ene- 
mies, so  converting  enemies  into  friends  that  they  have  sent  their  Bep- 
resentatives  to  your  Congress  by  a vote  greater  than  your  entire  num- 
bers from  districts  in  which  when  you  entered  you  were  tauntingly 
told  that  there  was  “no  one  to  raise  your  flag.” 

By  your  practical  philanthropy  you  have  now  the  coufidence  of  the 
“oppressed  race”  and  the  slave.  Hailing  you  as  deliverers,  they  are 
ready  to  aid  you  as  willing  servants,  faithful  laborers,  or,  using  the 
tactics  taught  them  by  your  enemies,  to  fight  with  you  in  the  field. 

By  steady  attention  to  the  laws  of  health  you  have  staid  the  pesti- 
lence, and,  humble  instruments  in  the  hands  of  God,  you  have  demon- 
strated the  necessity  that  His  creatures  should  obey  His  laws,  and  reap- 
ing His  blessing  in  this  most  unhealthy  climate  you  have  preserved 
your  ranks  fuller  than  those  of  any  other  battalions  of  the  same  length 
of  service. 

You  have  met  double  numbers  of  the  enemy  and  defeated  him  in 
the  open  field ; but  I need  not  further  enlarge  upon  this  topic.  You  were 
sent  to  do  that. 

I commend  you  to  your  commander.  You  are  worthy  his  love. 

Farewell,  my  comrades!  Again,  farewell! 

7 ' BENJ.  E.  BUTLEB, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


611 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , December  16,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler: 

General  : The  Secretary  of  War  has  received  your  letter  of  the  4th 
instant,  submitting  the  proposition  of  the  banks  of  New  Orleans  to  send 
their  specie,  at  present  within  the  lines  of  the  Southern  Confederacy, 
on  board  of  some  war  vessel,  to  England  or  France,  to  be  kept  there 
safely  and  returned  at  the  termination  of  the  war,  and  asking  instruc- 
tions as  to  the  course  to  be  pursued  in  the  matter. 

In  reply  I am  instructed  to  inform  you  that  the  Department,  after 
due  consideration  of  the  arrangement  proposed  by  the  banks  of  New 
Orleans,  feels  compelled  to  withhold  its  sanction  therefrom. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  P.  WOLCOTT, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  107.  / New  Orleans , December  17,  1862. 

I.  In  compliance  with  General  Orders,  No.  184,  of  the  9th  ultimo, 
from  the  War  Department,  Adjutant- General’s  Office,  the  undersigned 
hereby  assumes  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  including  the 
State  of  Texas. 

II.  The  following-named  officers  are  announced  as  constituting  the 
staff  of  the  major-general  commanding,  and  will  be  obeyed  and  re- 
spected accordingly : 

Lieut.  Col.  Bichard  B.  Irwin,  assistant  adjutant-general. 

Lieut.  Col.  William  S.  Abert,  assistant  inspector-general. 

Maj.  G.  Norman  Lieber,  judge-advocate. 

Col.  John  S.  Clark,  aide-de-camp. 

Capt.  Frederick  d’Hauteville,  aide-de-camp. 

Capt.  Bobert  T.  Dunham,  aide-de-camp. 

First  Lieut.  Charles  A.  Hartwell,  aide-de-camp. 

Second  Lieut.  Samuel  M.  Whitside,  aide-de-camp. 

Capt.  W.  Sturgis  Hooper,  acting  aide-de-camp. 

First  Lieut.  Charles  S.  Sargent,  acting  aide-de-camp. 

Col.  Samuel  B.  Holabird,  chief  quartermaster. 

Capt.  J.  W.  McClure,  assistant  quartermaster. 

Col.  Edward  G.  Beckwith,  chief  commissary. 

Surg.  Bichard  H.  Alexander,  medical  director. 

Maj.  David  C.  Houston,  chief  engineer. 

Capt.  Henry  L.  Abbot,  chief  of  topographical  engineers. 

First  Lieut.  Bichard  M.  Hill,  chief  of  ordnance. 

Capt.  Bichard  Arnold,  chief  of  artillery. 

Capt.  William  W.  Bowley,  chief  signal  officer. 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major-  General. 


General  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  111.  1 New  Orleans , December  17,  1862. 

All  sales  of  property  on  account  of  the  United  States  will  be  and 
are  hereby  suspended  until  further  orders. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

BICH’D  B.  IB  WIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


612 


W.  FLA. 7 S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Department  of  State, 

Washington , December  18, 1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : It  appearing  from  a report  of  Major-General  Butler,  which  does 
not  seem  sufficiently  controverted  by  the  commander  of  the  Spanish 
naval  forces  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  that  the  commander  of  Her  Cath- 
olic Majesty’s  ship  of  war  Blasco  de  Garay  has  claimed  and  assumed  a 
right  in  the  port  of  New  Orleans  to  receive  on  board  and  carry  from 
that  city,  which  is  in  the  military  occupation  of  the  United  States, 
several  persons,  not  only  Spaniards  but  citizens  of  the  United  States, 
in  the  character  of  exiles  seeking  asylum,  and  to  be  exempt  from  any 
obligation  to  make  explanation  of  the  names  and  number  of  such  per- 
sons to  the  United  States  commander  at  that  place,  the  President 
desires  that  the  commander  ot  the  United  States  forces  at  New  Orleans 
be  instructed  to  issue  and  publish  an  order  that  hereafter  no  persons 
not  in  the  civil,  military,  or  naval  service  of  a foreign  government 
shall,  without  the  written  leave  of  the  commander  of  the  military  forces 
at  New  Orleans,  depart  from  that  city  on  board  of  any  foreign  ship  of 
war,  and  that  no  foreign  vessel  of  war  shall  receive  on  board  and  carry 
from  such  city  any  such  persons,  who  shall  not  have  written  leave  to 
depart,  on  board  of  such  vessel. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ WILLIAM  H.  SEWARD. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , December  18,  1862. 

Hon.  W.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State : 

Sir  : The  Secretary  of  War  has  received  your  communication  of  this 
date,  signifying  the  desire  of  the  President  that,  for  the  reasons  therein 
set  forth — 

The  commander  of  the  United  States  forces  at  New  Orleans  he  instructed  to  issue 
and  publish  an  order  that  hereafter  no  persons  not  in  the  civil,  military,  or  naval 
service  of  a foreign  government  shall,  without  the  written  leave  of  the  commander 
of  the  military  forces  at  New  Orleans,  depart  from  that  city  on  board  of  any  foreign 
ship  of  war,  and  that  no  foreign  vessel  of  war  shall  receive  on  board  and  carry  from 
such  city  any  such  persons,  who  shall  not  have  written  leave  to  depart,  on  board  ot 
such  vessel. 

Under  the  direction  of  the  Secretary  I have  now  the  honor  to  inform 
you  that  the  general  commanding  the  Department  of  the  Gulf  has  been 
required  by  instructions  this  day  prepared,  and  which,  with  a copy  ot 
your  communication,  will  be  sent  by  the  first  mail  to  New  Orleans,  to 
issue  and  publish  an  order  which  shall  give  full  effect  to  the  desire  ot 
the  President  as  the  same  is  expressed  by  your  letter. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  s^Vpnt^v0LC0TT 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City,  December  18,  1862. 

General  Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.  : 

Sir  : The  Secretary  of  War  directs  me  to  inform  you  that  he  has  this 


Chap.  XXVH.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


613 


day  received  from  the  Secretary  of  State  a communication,  dated  on  the 
current  instant  (of  which  a copy  is  herewith  inclosed*),  signifying  the 
desire  of  the  President  that  for  the  reasons  therein  set  forth — 

The  commander  of  the  United  States  forces  at  New  Orleans  be  instructed  to  issue 
and  publish  an  order  that  hereafter  no  person  not  in  the  civil,  military,  or  naval  serv- 
ice of  a foreign  government  shall,  without  the  written  leave  of  the  commander  of  the 
military  forces  at  New  Orleans,  depart  from  that  city  on  board  of  any  foreign  ship 
of  war,  and  that  no  foreign  vessel  of  war  shall  receive  on  board  and  carry  from  such 
city  any  such  persons,  who  shall  not  have  written  leave  to  depart,  on  board  of  such 
vessel. 

Under  the  like  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War  you  are  now  hereby 
instructed  to  issue  and  publish  an  order  which  shall  give  effect  to  the 
desire  of  the  President  as  the  same  is  expressed  in  the  letter  of  the  Sec- 
retary of  State. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.  P.  WOLCOTT, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , December  18,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

General  : Sailing  from  New  York  Thursday,  the  4th  of  December, 
I reached  this  port  on  Sunday  evening,  the  14th  December,  after  a 
passage  of  ten  days. 

The  weather  was  delightful,  every  day  and  night  alike  beautiful. 
Not  a soul  here  anticipated  our  arrival,  and  scarcely  a man  on  board 
ship  suspected  our  destination  until  we  were  steaming  up  the  Missis- 
sippi. 

f thousand  troops  have  arrived  here,  and  I find  at  this  point 

about  10,000  men,  with  eight  batteries  of  artillery,  making  an  effective 
total  of f thousand  men. 

With  exception  of  General  Emory’s  command,  the  health  and  spirits 
of  my  own  troops  are  excellent.  Some  cases  of  small  pox  and  measles 
appeared  among  the  troops  from  Fortress  Monroe.  But  few  deaths  have 
occurred  and  no  serious  inconvenience  has  arisen,  except  so  far  as  it 
reduces  the  effective  force  of  that  command.  They  brought  these  dis- 
eases with  them  to  Fortress  Monroe  from  Newport  News. 

All  of  the  transports  were  able  to  sail  directly,  except  the  Baltic, 
the  Atlantic,  and  the  Ericsson,  of  General  Emory’s  fleet.  Troops  and 
stores  of  these  vessels  will  be  transshipped  at  Ship  Island  for  this  port. 

The  first  rebel  position  on  the  Lower  Mississippi  is  Baton  Rouge, 
where  there  are  reported  to  be  from  500  to  1,000  troops.  Eighteen 
miles  above  Baton  Rouge,  at  Port  Hudson,  is  the  second  position, 
strongly  fortified,  and  held  by  a force  of  10,000  or  15,000. 

Arriving  at  New  Orleans  on  Sunday  evening,  I delivered  to  General 
Butler,  on  the  same  evening,  your  orders  relieving  him  from  the  com- 
mand of  this  department.  He  received  it  courteously,  and  has  given  me 
all  the  assistance  I could  wish  in  entering  upon  my  duties.  Without 
transshipping  troops  or  stores,  10,000  men,  with  a battery  of  artillery, 
sailed  on  Tuesday  morning  for  Baton  Rouge,  under  command  of  Gen- 
eral Grover.  I expect  to  learn  to-morrow  that  we  are  in  possession  of 


See  p.  612. 


t Blank  in  the  original. 


614 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


the.  town.  As  soon  as  the  troops  here  can  be  consolidated  with  those 
of  the  fleet  I shall  move  against  Port  Hudson,  which  commands  the 
entrance  to  the  Red  River.  Whatever  may  happen  we  shall  not  be 
idle.  Nothing  is  known  with  certainty  of  the  movements  of  our  troops 
on  the  Upper  Mississippi,  but  it  is  reported  from  rebel  sources  that 
Commodore  Porter  has  assaulted  the  rebel  works  at  Vicksburg.  I 
hope  before  the  mail  closes  to  have  news  from  Vicksburg  via  Baton 
Pouge.  Admiral  Farragut,  to  whom  I delivered  a letter  from  the 
President,  is  here  and  earnest  for  work.  He  has  given  me  every  as- 
surance of  hearty  co-operation  and  support.  His  earnestness,  enthu- 
siasm, and  frankness  delighted  me,  and  I anticipate  a most  satisfactory 
result  from  our  mutual  labors. 

Without  entering  into  any  discussion  of  the  administration  of  this 
department  I am  satisfied  that  the  President  will  be  confirmed,  upon  a 
full  report  of  the  facts,  in  the  measures  he  has  adopted.  All  the  indi- 
cations of  our  campaign  are  auspicious,  and  I hope  to  make  good  the 
most  sanguine  anticipations  in  regard  to  my  expedition. 

1 have  not  been  able  to  obtain  a report  of  the  number  of  troops  here, 
and  the  immediate  departure  of  my  own  command  for  Baton  Rouge  has 
made  it  impossible  to  obtain  a complete  statement  of  the  force  now  in 
the  department.  I hope  by  an  early  mail  to  forward  a full  report. 

Measures  have  been  taken  to  discharge  the  transports  at  the  earliest 
possible  moment,  in  accordance  with  your  instructions.  All  the  troops 
sent  to  Baton  Pouge  sailed  direct  without  transshipment.  Upon  the 
return  of  the  vessels  they  will  be  ordered  at  once  to  New  York.  In  my 
interview  with  Admiral  Farragut  I confidentially  communicated  to  him 
your  instructions  in  full.  It  seemed  to  be  necessary  and  proper,  inas- 
much as  all  our  success  must  depend  upon  the  united  action  of  the  two 
forces. 

I am  gratified  to  be  able  to  report  that  the  possible  supplies  of  forage, 
transportation,  &c.,  from  the  country  occupied  is  far  greater  than  I had 
supposed.  A captain  in  the  rebel  service  came  in  yesterday.  He  re- 
ports 23,000  men,  consisting  chiefly  of  conscripts  from  the  neighbor- 
ing States,  at  Port  Hudson,  and  a division  of  the  enemy,  said  among 
the  rebels  to  be  from  California,  to  be  marching  toward  Red  River  and 
the  Mississippi.  This  man  is  known  here,  and  is  thought  to  be  a relia- 
ble man.  He  has  given  valuable  information  of  the  topography  of  the 
country  and  the  fortifications. 

I am,  with  much  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

7 N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , December  19,  1862. 

Captain  Huggins,  U.  S.  N., 

Commanding  Pampero,  off  Pilottown : 

General  Banks  requests  that  you  will  communicate  to  the  Charles 
Osgood  and  Shetucket,  on  their  arrival,  orders  to  go  to  Galveston  and 
disembark  there;  also  that  you  will  order  the  Quincy,  on  her  arrival, 
to  stay  below  the  bar  and  report  to  these  headquarters  what  troops  she 
has  on  board  and  await  further  orders. 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


Chap.  XXVII. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


615 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

December  20,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman,  Carrollton: 

Order  to  send  the  Twenty- third  Connecticut  to  Galveston,  issued  last 
night,  is  countermanded. 

By  command — 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Assistant  Adjutant- General . 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  113.  1 .New  Orleans , December  20,  1862. 

Col.  John  S.  Clark,  aide-de-camp  to  the  commanding  general,  is  pro- 
visionally appointed  provost-marshal-general  of  the  Department  of  the 
Gulf.  All  applications  for  permission  to  trade  or  travel  within  the  mili- 
tary lines  of  the  department  will  be  made  to  this  officer.  No  permits 
will  be  given  at  present  to  travel  or  trade  beyond  the  lines. 

No  fees  will  be  charged,  received,  or  paid  for  the  issue  of  permits 
either  for  travel  or  trade,  and  no  exclusive  privileges  or  monopolies  will 
be  recognized  or  encouraged.  It  is  the  desire  of  the  commanding  gen- 
eral to  re-establish  the  privileges  of  intercourse  and  commerce  within 
the  lines  upon  the  most  liberal  basis  consistent  with  the  interests  of  the 
Government. 

Such  regulations  as  are  necessary  to  maintain  the  rights  of  the  Gov- 
ernment and  to  relieve  well-disposed  and  loyal  people  will  be  promul- 
gated in  general  orders  and  printed  upon  such  passes  as  shall  be  issued 
from  the  office  of  the  provost-marshal-general  or  his  deputies.  All 
such  regulations  established  for  the  protection  ot  the  Government  will 
be  enforced  with  relentless  military  rigor.  Any  person  who  seeks  and 
accepts  the  favor  of  the  Government  and  then  violates  the  faith  which 
he  has  pledged  will  be  adjudged  guilty  of  a flagitious  crime  and  pun- 
ished without  appeal  or  mercy. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks  : 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel)  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  114.  1 New  Orleans)  December  21,  1862. 

Information  has  been  received  at  these  headquarters  that  publica- 
tions injurious  to  the  character  of  soldiers  of  the  United  States  are  cir- 
culated in  the  streets  and  that  anonymous  and  threatening  letters  are 
sent  to  officers  connected  with  the  public  service.  Such  practices  are 
indecent,  offensive,  and  criminal,  and  must  be  suppressed. 

The  troops  of  this  department  are  instructed  to  observe  a respectful 
deportment  to  all  persons,  and  the  same  deference  will  be  exacted  from 
all  persons  in  their  favor.  Any  attempt  on  the  part  of  any  person  what- 
ever, by  offensive  personal  conduct,  to  excite  passion,  or  which  tends 
to  personal  altercation  or  controversy  and  the  disturbance  of  the  public 
peace,  will  be  punished  with  the  sharpest  severity  known  to  military  law. 

The  commanding  general  requests  that  any  violation  of  this  order 
be  reported  to  these  headquarters  or  to  the  provost-marshal-general. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel)  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


616  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Neic  Orleans , December  24,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commander -in- Chief,  &c. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  a proposition  relat- 
ing to  the  revival  of  trade  in  this  region,  which  I intend  to  make  known 
to  merchants  and  planters.  It  will  not  be  published  at  present.  It  is 
represented  to  me  that  it  will  be  well  received.  If  so,  I think  all  the 
interests  of  the  Government  are  or  may  be  secured.  It  seemed  to  me  that 
trade  east  of  the  river  should  be  cut  off  altogether.  The  destitution  of 
the  country  is  very  great,  and  I am  assured  that  the  rebel  Government 
has  been  compelled  to  consent  informally  to  the  propositions  made  to 
me  for  liberty  to  exchange  cotton  for  provisions,  &c.  For  that  reason 
I have  declined  all  proposals  from  that  quarter. 

With  great  respect,  I am,  yours,  &c., 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


[In  closures.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , December  23,  1862. 

Upon  full  consideration  of  public  affairs  in  the  Department  of  the 
Gulf,  and  in  view  of  the  many  consistent  interests  of  the  Government 
and  the  people,  I am  induced  to  offer  to  the  planters  living  west  of  the 
Mississippi  River,  without  reference  to  past  political  opinions  or  rela- 
tions, an  opportunity  to  seek  the  markets  of  the  world  for  the  sale  of 
their  products,  upon  the  following  conditions,  to  wit : That  cotton,  sugar, 
and  other  products  consigned  to  agents  or  sent  direct  to  this  port  may  be 
sold  in  New  Orleans,  or  such  other  markets  as  may  be  designated,  at 
the  highest  price;  that  one-half  of  the  net  proceeds  of  such  sale  shall  be 
paid  to  the  agents,  and  one-half  be  retained  by  the  Government  as  a 
guarantee  for  the  good  behavior  of  the  agent  or  owner,  subject  to  be 
claimed  by  them  at  the  close  of  the  war  upon  proof  of  just  claims  to 
favorable  consideration  on  the  part  of  the  Government.  Provisions 
and  clothing  to  a limited  extent  consistent  with  the  interests  and  safety 
of  the  Government  might  be  embraced  in  the  returns  of  such  sale, 
if  desired. 

The  Government  is  interested  in  the  opening  of  trade,  in  the  restora- 
tion of  the  constitutional  relations  between  the  several  States  and  the 
United  States,  and  especially  in  the  revival  of  the  ancient  prosperity  of 
this  the  second  commercial  metropolis  of  the  American  continent.  I de- 
sire it  to  be  understood  that  this  proposition  is  prompted  by  motives 
consistent  with  the  dignity  of  all  parties  interested  and  not  by  any  con- 
sideration of  public  necessity.  Cotton  is  not  king;  it  is  a servant  only. 
It  is  not  a necessity,  but  a convenience.  If  its  culture  fails  on  this  con- 
tinent other  climes  will  supply  the  public  wants,  and  substitutes  will 
be  found  if  it  ceases  to  exist.  Cotton  is  not  king.  The  alternative  of 
the  suggestion  herein  made  is  the  subjection  of  the  planters  to  the  ex- 
tortion of  speculators  in  the  sale  of  products  and  the  purchase  of  supplies 
or  the  destruction  of  their  property  by  irresponsible  parties  or  public 
enemies.  Neither  of  these  results  is  consistent  with  the  interest  or 
dignity  of  the  Government  or  the  people. 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding > 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


617 


/ 


Collector’s  Office,  District  of  Mississippi, 

Tangipahoa , December  13,  1862. 

By  virtue  of  the  authority  granted  to  me  by  the  Hon.  James  A.  Sed- 
don,  Secretary  of  War  of  the  Confederate  States,  for  the  purpose  of 
introducing  salt  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  people  of  Louisiana  within 
this  collection  district,  permission  is  hereby  granted  to  Leon  Prevost,  a 
subject,  to  export  from  this  district  100  bales  of  cotton,  under  the  fol- 
lowing terms  and  conditions,  viz  : That  the  export  duties  provided  by 
law  shall  be  paid  ; that  the  cotton  shall  be  exported  to  England,  France, 
or  Spain,  and  consular  certificates  under  consular  seal  furnished  to 
this  office  that  said  cotton  had  or  would  be  exported ; that  said  cotton 
nor  any  portion  should  be  sold,  exported,  or  used  in  any  part*  of  or  by 
any  citizen  of  the  United  States,  and  that  for  the  privilege  of  so  export- 
ing the  said  Leon  Prevost  hereby  binds  himself  and  agrees  for  each 
and  every  bale  of  cotton  so  exported  from  this  district  to  bring  to 
an  accessible  point  within  this  district  20  bags  of  salt  of  at  least  200 
pounds’  weight,  to  be  disposed  of  at  such  points,  in  such  quantities,  at 
public  auction  or  otherwise,  as  the  collector  of  this  district  may  direct, 
said  salt  to  be  delivered  within  sixty  days  from  the  date  of  export  of 
said  cotton ; and  to  secure  the  faithful  performance  of  this  agreement 
the  said  Leon  Prevost  has  deposited  in  this  office  the  sum  of  $5,000,  or 
$50  a bale,  which  if  the  agreement  is  faithfully  performed  shall  be  re- 
turned to  him,  and  if  not  shall  be  forfeited. 

This  agreement  signed  in  duplicate  this  day. 

E.  F.  H.  HATCH, 

Collector . 

L.  PBEVOST. 

Executive  Office,  Jackson , Miss. 

I,  George  Leary,  a subject  of  the  Queen  of  England,  hereby  agree 
and  bind  myself  to  deliver  at  Ponchatoula,  in  the  State  of  Louisiana, 
to  agents  to  be  appointed  by  the  Governor  of  the  State  of  Mississippi, 
20,000  sacks  of  Liverpool  salt,  of  good  qualities,  averaging  200  pounds 
to  the  sack,  in  consideration  that  the  said  agents  shall  deliver  to  me 
or  my  agents  at  Ponchatoula  cotton  of  middling  quality  in  exchange, 
at  the  rate  of  400  pounds  of  cotton  for  20  sacks  of  salt,  the  salt  in  all 
cases  to  be  first  delivered  before  the  delivery  of  the  corresponding 
amount  of  cotton ; and  I bind  myself  that  the  cotton  so  delivered  shall 
be  shipped  on  foreign  account  to  England,  France,  or  Spain,  and  shall 
not  be  sold  to  the  Government  of  the  United  States  or  the  citizens 
thereof  or  to  be  consumed  or  manufactured  therein ; and  before  the 
shipment  of  the  cotton  aforesaid  I will  procure  of  the  proper  consul  at 
New  Orleans,  under  the  consular  seal,  that  the  cotton  so  received  at 
Ponchatoula  is  to  be  shipped  on  foreign  account  to  England,  France, 
or  Spain,  and  exhibit  the  said  declaration  to  the  collector  of  the  Con- 
federate States  at  Ponchatoula,  the  Governor  agreeing  on  his  part  to 
procure  the  proper  license  to  ship  said  cotton  from  the  proper  authori- 
ties of  the  Confederate  States. 

Signed  in  Jackson  this  6th  day  of  December,  A.  D.  1862. 

GEOEGE  LEAEY, 

Per  H.  LEAEY, 

Agent  and  Attorney-in-fact. 

JOHN  J.  PETTUS, 

Governor  of  Mississippi. 


618 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chai*.  XXVII, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

December  24,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

General  : No  important  change  has  occurred  since  my  last  dispatch. 
Some  changes  have  been  made  in  the  disposition  of  the  troops.  The 
black  regiments  have  been  ordered  to  garrison  the  forts  in  connection 
with  white  companies,  as  also  at  Ship  Island.  It  was  deemed  advisa- 
ble to  strengthen  somewhat  the  garrisons,  thus  enabling  me  to  concen- 
trate more  completely  the  available  forces  for  ulterior  movements.  The 
blacks  are  also  in  better  positron  for  themselves  and  the  Government. 
General  Emory  arrived  on  the  22d.  His  command  is  at  Carrollton,  but 
will  move  up  the  river  immediately.  General  Grover’s  reports  are  for- 
warded with  this  mail.  Nothing  important  has  occurred  there  during 
the  week.  The  troops  are  organizing  and  drilling  with  success  and  are 
in  the  best  spirits.  There  has  been  considerable  difficulty  in  obtaining 
exact  information  of  the  condition  and  localities  of  the  forces  here  and 
in  consolidating  the  new  and  the  old  regiments.  This  has  been  accom- 
plished in  a satisfactory  manner.  The  schedule  of  division  and  brigade 
organizations  will  be  forwarded. 

The  labor  of  receiving  and  receipting  for  the  stores  and  supplies  and 
of  private  property  held  by  the  Government  has  been  very  great.  The 
condition  of  affairs  here  made  it  necessary  that  a minute  examination 
and  record  should  be  made  of  all  property  receipted  for,  in  order  that 
my  officers  should  be  able  to  start  with  full  understanding  of  their  re- 
sponsibilities and  duties.  Many  things  of  great  importance  not  imme- 
diately connected  with  military  operations  have  occupied  my  attention 
since  my  arrival.  General  Butler  has  afforded  me  all  the  assistance  I 
could  ask. 

Applications  have  been  made  for  permission  to  transport  500  laborers 
to  Yera  Cruz.  I have  not  thought  it  consistent  with  the  interests  of 
the  Government,  and  have  declined  to  give  permission.  Application 
has  been  made  also  to  purchase  and  transport  mules  to  Mexico  for  the 
use  of  the  French  Government.  Admiral  Reynaud,  commodore  of  the 
French  fleet,  among  others,  has  asked  the  consent  of  the  Government 
for  this  purpose.  I decline  all  these  propositions  on  the  ground  that 
they  are  needed  here.  If  other  views  are  entertained  at  Washington 
I hope  to  receive  instructions. 

We  have  no  news  from  Vicksburg  yet.  Port  Hudson  remains  as  at 
my  last  dispatch.  We  hope  to  move  up  the  river  at  the  close  of  this 
week.  There  are  about  5,000  men  at  Mobile.  Reports  are  in  circula- 
tion as  to  the  iron  vessels  said  to  be  in  preparation  at  Selma.  It  is 
ascertained  with  considerable  certainty  that  the  railroad  between 
Jackson  and  Selma  is  not  completed.  It  has  been  reported  otherwise. 
There  is  great  destitution  among  the  people  and  troops.  A deserter 
from  Mobile  as  late  as  Friday  last  says,  “If  no  relief  is  furnished  them 
soon  the  people  will  call  for  the  assistance  of  our  Government.”  From 
the  same  source  we  get  information  of  the  concentration  of  all  their 
strength  at  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson. 

Great  apprehension  has  been  felt  here  among  the  planters  and  others 
on  account  of  threatened  movements  by  the  slaves  at  Christmas  and 
New  Year.  The  French  admiral  and  the  French  consul  have  called 
my  attention  to  this  subject.  It  seemed  proper  on  general  grounds  that 
the  President’s  proclamation  of  September  22  should  be  promulgated 
here,  and  the  exigencies  of  the  hour  made  it  more  necessary.  I have 
therefore  given  it  official  publication,  with  explanations  and'  instruc- 


Ciiap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  619 

tions  to  the  troops  as  the  occasion  seemed  to  call  for.  A copy  is  in- 
closed. 

An  attack  was  made  two  days  since  upon  a trading  vessel  by  gueril- 
las a few  miles  below  Baton  Rouge.  One  man  was  killed  ; 1 severely 
and  3 slightly  wounded.  Nothing  was  known  of  the  movements  of 
this  vessel  until  the  affair  was  over,  and  she  had  no  authority  to  enter 
upon  this  trade  on  the  river.  I believe  it  to  be  an  affair  of  speculators. 

Reports  published  here  as  to  attacks  on  Port  Hudson  are  without 
any  foundation. 

We  suffer  very  greatly  from  the  want  of  cavalry.  I have  directed 
some  companies  to  be  extemporized  from  the  infantry,  and  hope  that 
the  Rhode  Island  Cavalry  (two  squadrons)  which  arrived  at  New  York 
before  I left  may  soon  be  here.  The  Forty-second  Massachusetts  Vol- 
unteers has  been  sent  to  Galveston  Island. 

The  naval  authorities  render  the  heartiest  co-operation,  and  I am 
greatly  gratified  by  the  course  of  Admiral  Farragut  and  his  associates. 

We  have  much  to  do,  but  shall  lose  no  time. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  most  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , December  24,  1862. 

To  the  People  of  Louisiana  : 

In  order  to  correct  public  misapprehension  and  misrepresentation, 
for  the  instruction  of  the  troops  of  this  department  and  the  information 
of  all  parties  in  interest,  official  publication  is  herewith  made  of  the 
proclamation  by  the  President  of  the  United  States  relating  to  the  sub- 
ject of  emancipation.  In  the  examination  of  the  document  it  will  be 
observed : 

I.  That  it  is  the  declaration  of  a purpose  only — the  full  execution  of 
which  is  contingent  upon  an  official  designation  by  the  President  to  be 
made  on  the  1st  day  of  January  next  of  the  States  and  parts  of  States, 
if  any,  which  are  to  be  affected  by  its  provisions. 

II.  That  the  fact  that  any  State  is  represented  in  good  faith  in  the 
Congress  of  the  United  States  is  conclusive  evidence,  in  the  absence  of 
strong  countervailing  testimony,  that  such  Stale  and  the  people  there- 
of are  not  in  rebellion  against  the  United  States. 

III.  That  the  State  of  Louisiana  has  not  yet  been  designated  by  the 
President  as  in  rebellion  nor  any  part  thereof,  and  that  it  has  complied 
with  all  the  conditions  of  the  proclamation  respecting  representation. 

IV.  That  pecuniary  aid  to  States  not  in  rebellion  which  may  here- 
after provide  for  immediate  or  gradual  emancipation,  the  colonization 
of  persons  of  African  descent  elsewhere,  and  the  compensation  of  all 
citizens  who  have  remained  loyal  for  all  losses  by  acts  of  the  United 
States,  including  slaves,  are  among  the  chief  recommendations  of  this 
important  paper. 

It  is  manifest  that  the  changes  suggested  therein  and  which  may 
hereafter  be  established  do  not  take  effect  within  this  State  on  the  1st 
of  January  proximo  nor  at  any  precise  period  which  can  now  be  desig- 
nated, and  I call  upon  all  persons,  of  whatever  estate,  condition,  or 
degree— soldiers,  citizens,  or  slaves — to  observe  this  material  and  impor- 
tant fact,  and  to  govern  themselves  accordingly.  All  unusual  public 


620 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVii. 


demonstration,  of  whatever  character,  will  be  for  the  present  suspended* 
Provost-marshals,  officers,  and  soldiers  are  enjoined  to  prevent  any  dis- 
turbance of  the  public  peace.  The  slaves  are  advised  to  remain  upon 
their  plantations  until  their  privileges  shall  have  been  definitely  estab- 
lished. They  may  rest  assured  that  whatever  benefit  the  Government 
intends  will  be  secured  to  them,  but  no  man  can  be  allowed  in  the 
present  condition  of  affairs  to  take  the  law  into  his  own  hands.  If  they 
seek  the  protection  of  the  Government  they  should  wait  its  pleasure. 
Officers  invested  with  command  will  be  vigilant  in  the  discharge  of 
their  duties.  Leave  of  absence  from  camp  will  not  be  permitted  ex- 
cept in  cases  of  great  emergency.  Soldiers  enrolled  in  the  regiments  of 
Native  Guards  will  not  be  allowed  for  the  present  to  visit  the  localities 
of  their  enlistment  nor  will  visitors  be  received  unnecessarily  in  their 
camps.  These  regulations,  enforced  with  all  troops  of  the  United  States 
in  the  localities  where  they  are  enlisted,  are  now  imperatively  neces- 
sary. These  troops  will  be  confined  to  the  duty  specified  in  general 
orders,  and  will  not  be  charged  with  special  authority  in  making 
searches,  seizures,  or  arrests.  It  is  my  purpose  to  execute  faithfully 
all  the  orders  of  the  Government,  and  I assume  the  responsibility  of 
these  instructions  as  consistent  therewith  and  require  prompt  and 
faithful  execution  thereof. 

Public  attention  is  called  to  the  act  of  Congress  cited  in  the  procla- 
mation which  forbids  the  return  of  fugitives  by  officers  of  the  Army. 
No  encouragement  will  be  given  to  laborers  to  desert  their  employers, 
but  no  authority  exists  to  compel  them  to  return.  It  is  suggested  to 
planters  that  some  plan  be  adopted  by  which  an  equitable  proportion 
of  the  proceeds  of  the  crops  of  the  coming  year,  to  be  hereafter  deter- 
mined upon  the  judgment  of  honorable  men  justly  representing  the 
different  interests  involved,  be  set  apart  and  reserved  for  the  support 
and  compensation  of  labor. 

The  war  is  not  waged  by  the  Government  for  the  overthrow  of  slavery. 
The  President  has  declared,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  is  to  restore  the 
“ constitutional  relations  between  the  United  States  and  each  of  the 
States”  in  which  that  relation  is  or  may  be  suspended.  The  resolutions 
passed  by  Congress  before  the  war,  with  almost  unanimous  consent, 
recognized  the  rights  of  States  in  this  regard.  Vermont  has  recently 
repealed  the  statutes  supposed  to  be  inconsistent  therewith ; Massa- 
chusetts had  done  so  before.  Slavery  existed  by  consent  and  consti- 
tutional guaranty ; violence  and  war  will  inevitably  bring  it  to  an  end. 
It  is  impossible  that  any  military  man,  in  the  event  of  continued  war, 
should  counsel  the  preservation  of  slave  property  in  the  rebel  States. 
If  it  is  to  be  preserved  war  must  cease  and  the  former  constitutional 
relations  be  again  established.  The  first  gun  at  Sumter  proclaimed 
emancipation.  The  continuance  of  the  contest  there  commenced  will 
consummate  that  end,  and  the  history  of  the  age  will  leave  no  other 
permanent  trace  of  the  rebellion.  Its  leaders  will  have  accomplished 
what  other  men  could  not  have  done.  The  boldest  Abolitionist  is  a 
cipher  when  compared  with  the  leaders  of  the  rebellion.  What  mystery 
pervades  the  works  of  Providence ! We  submit  to  its  decrees,  but  stand 
confounded  at  the  awful  manifestation  of  its  wisdom  and  power.  The 
great  problem  of  the  age,  apparently  environed  with  labyrinthic  compli- 
cations, is  likely  to  be  suddenly  lifted  out  of  human  hands.  We  may 
control  the  incidents  of  the  contest,  but  we  cannot  circumvent  or  defeat 
the  end.  It  will  be  left  us  only  to  assuage  the  horrors  of  internecine 
conflict  and  to  procrastinate  the  processes  of  transition.  Local  and 
national  interests  are  therefore  alike  dependent  upon  the  suppression 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


621 


of  the  rebellion.  No  pecuniary  sacrifice  can  be  too  great  an  equivalent 
for  peace.  But  it  should  be  permanent  peace  and  embrace  all  subjects 
of  discontent.  It  is  written  on  the  blue  arch  above  us ; the  distant 
voices  of  the  future,  the  waves  that  beat  our  coast,  the  skeletons  that 
sit  at  our  tables  and  fill  the  vacant  places  of  desolate  and  mourning 
firesides,  all  cry  out  that  this  war  must  not  be  repeated  hereafter. 

Contest  in  public  as  in  social  life  strengthens  and  consolidates  broth- 
erly affection.  England,  France,  Austria,  Italy — every  land  fertile 
enough  to  make  a history  has  had  its  desolating  civil  wars.  It  is  a 
baseless  nationality  that  has  not  tested  its  strength  against  domestic 
enemies.  The  success  of  local  interests  narrows  the  destiny  of  a people, 
and  is  followed  by  secession,  poverty,  and  degradation.  A divided 
country  and  perpetual  war  make  possession  a delusion  and  life  a calam- 
ity. The  triumph  of  national  interests  widens  the  scope  of  human  his- 
tory, and  is  attended  with  peace,  prosperty,  and  power.  It  is  out  of 
such  contests  that  great  nations  are  born. 

What  hallowed  memories  float  around  us ! New  Orleans  is  a shrine 
as  sacred  as  Bunker  Hill ! On  the  Aroostook  and  Oregon  the  names 
of  Washington,  Jackson,  and  Taylor  are  breathed  with  as  deep  a rev- 
erence as  on  the  James  or  the  Mississippi.  Let  us  fulfill  the  conditions 
of  this  last  great  trial,  and  become  a nation,  a grand  nation,  with  sense 
enough  to  govern  ourselves  and  strength  enough  to  stand  against  the 
world  united. 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

[Annex.] 

General  Orders,  ) War  Dept.,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  139.  ) Washington , September  24,  1862. 

The  following  proclamation  by  the  President  is  published  for  the  in- 
formation and  government  of  the  Army  and  all  concerned  : 

By  the  President  of  the  United  States  of  America. 

A PROCLAMATION. 

“I,  Abraham  Lincoln,  President  of  the  United  States  of  America,  and 
Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  and  Navy  thereof,  do  hereby  pro- 
claim and  declare  that  hereafter,  as  heretofore,  the  war  will  be  prose- 
cuted for  the  object  of  practically  restoring  the  constitutional  relation 
between  the  United  States  and  each  of  the  States  and  the  people 
thereof  in  which  States  that  relation  is  or  may  be  suspended  or  dis- 
turbed. That  it  is  my  purpose,  upon  the  next  meeting  of  Congress,  to 
again  recommend  the  adoption  of  a practical  measure  tendering  pecu- 
niary aid  to  the  free  acceptance  or  rejection  of  all  slave  States,  so  called, 
the  people  whereof  may  not  then  be  in  rebellion  against  the  United 
States,  and  which  States  may  then  have  voluntarily  adopted,  or  there- 
after may  voluntarily  adopt,  immediate  or  gradual  abolishment  of 
slavery  within  their  respective  limits ; and  that  the  effort  to  colonize 
persons  of  African  descent,  with  their  consent,  upon  this  continent  or 
elsewhere,  with  the  previously  obtained  consent  of  the  governments 
existing  there,  will  be  continued. 

“That  on  the  first  day  of  January,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thou- 
sand eight  hundred  and  sixty-three,  all  persons  held  as  slaves  within 
any  State  or  designated  part  of  a State  the  people  whereof  shall  then 


622 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

be  in  rebellion  against  the  United  States  shall  be  then,  thenceforward, 
and  forever  free  ; and  the  executive  government  of  the  United  States, 
including  the  military  and  naval  authority  thereof,  will  recognize  and 
maintain  the  freedom  of  such  persons,  and  will  do  no  act  or  acts  to  re- 
press such  persons,  or  any  of  them,  in  any  efforts  they  may  make  for 
their  actual  freedom^ 

“That  the  Executive  will,  on  the  first  day  of  January  aforesaid,  by 
proclamation,  designate  the  States  and  parts  of  States,  if  any,  in 
which  the  people  thereof  respectively  shall  then  be  in  rebellion  against 
the  United  States  ; and  the  fact  that  any  State,  or  the  people  thereof, 
shall  on  that  day  be  in  good  faith  represented  in  the  Congress  ot  the 
United  States  by  members  chosen  thereto  at  elections  wherein  a ma- 
jority of  the  qualified  voters  of  such  State  shall  have  participated  shall, 
in  the  absence  of  strong  countervailing  testimony,  be  deemed  conclusive 
evidence  that  such  State  and  the  people  thereof  are  not  then  in  rebell- 
ion against  the  United  States. 

“That  attention  is  hereby  called  to  an  act  of  Congress  entitled  ‘An 
act  to  make  an  additional  article  of  war/  approved  March  13,  1862, 
and  which  act  is  in  the  words  and  figure  following : 

Be  it  enacted  In / the  Senate  and  Souse  of  Representatives  of  the  United  States  of  America 
in  Congress  assembled,  That  hereafter  the  following  shall  he  promulgated  as  an  addi- 
tional article  of  war  for  the  government  of  the  Army  of  the  United  States  and  shall 
he  obeyed  and  observed  as  such : 

Art.  — . All  officers  or  persons  in  the  military  or  naval  service  ot  the  United  States 
are  prohibited  from  employing  any  of  the  forces  under  their  respective  commands 
for  the  purpose  of  returning  fugitives  from  service  or  labor  who  may  have  escaped 
from  anv  persons  to  whom  such  service  or  labor  is  claimed  to  be  due;  and  any  officer 
who  shall  be  found  guilty  by  a court-martial  of  violating  this  article  shall  be  dis- 
missed from  the  service.  _ 

Sec.  2.  And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  this  act  shall  take  effect  from  and  alter  its 

passage. 

“Also  to  the  ninth  and  tenth  sections  of  an  act  entitled  ‘An  act  to 
suppress  insurrection,  to  punish  treason  and  rebellion,  to  seize  and  con- 
fiscate property  of  rebels,  and  for  other  purposes/  approved  July  17, 
1862,  and  which  sections  are  in  the  words  and  figures  following : 

Sec.  9.  And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  all  slaves  of  persons  who  shall  hereafter  be 
engaged  in  rebellion  against  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  or  who  shall  in 
any  way  give  aid  or  comfort  thereto,  escaping  from  such  persons  and  taking  refuge 
within  the  line  of  the  Army ; and  all  slaves  captured  from  such  persons  or  deserted 
by  them,  and  coming  under  the  control  of  the  Government  of  the  United  States; 
and  all  slaves  of  such  persons  found  on  [or]  being  within  any  place  occupied  by  rebel 
forces  and  afterwards  occupied  by  the  forces  of  the  United  States  shall  be  deemed 
captives  of  war,  and  shall  be  forever  free  of  their  servitude  and  not  again  held  as 
slctvcs. 

Sec.  10.  And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  no  slave  escaping  into  any  State,  Territory,  or 
the  District  of  Columbia  from  any  other  State  shall  be  delivered  up  or  in  any  way  im- 
peded or  hindered  of  his  liberty,  except  for  crime  or  some  offense  against  the  laws,  un- 
less the  person  claiming  said  fugitive  shall  first  make  oath  that  the  person  to  whom  the 
labor  or  service  of  such  fugitive  is  alleged  to  be  due  is  his  lawful  owner,  and  has  not 
borne  arms  against  the  United  States  in  the  present  rebellion  nor  in  any  way  given 
aid  and  comfort  thereto;  and  no  person  engaged  in  the  military  or  naval  service  ot 
the  United  States  shall  under  any  pretense  whatever  assume  to  decide  on  the  validity 
of  the  claim  of  any  person  to  the  service  or  labor  of  any  other  person  or  surrender  up 
any  such  person  to  the  claimant,  on  pain  of  being  dismissed  from  the  service. 

“And  I do  hereby  enjoin  upon  and  order  all  persons  engaged  in  the 
military  and  naval  service  of  the  United  States  to  observe,  obey,  and 
enforce  within  their  respective  spheres  of  service  the  act  and  sections 

above  recited.  . . « 

“And  the  Executive  will  in  due  time  recommend  that  all  citizens  ot 
the  United  States  who  shall  have  remained  loyal  thereto  throughout 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


623 


the  rebellion  shall  (upon  the  restoration  of  the  constitutional  relation 
between  the  United  States  and  their  respective  States  and  people,  if 
that  relation  shall  have  been  suspended  or  disturbed)  be  compensated 
for  all  losses  by  acts  of  the  United  States,  including  the  loss  of  slaves. 

“ In  witness  whereof  I have  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  caused  the  seal 
of  the  United  States  to  be  affixed. 

“Done  at  the  city  of  Washington  the  twenty-second  day  of  Septem- 
ber, in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and 
[seal.]  sixty- two,  and  of  the  Independence  of  the  United  States  the 
eighty-seventh. 

“ABBAHAM  LINCOLN. 

“By  the  President: 

“William  H.  Seward, 

“ Secretary  of  State” 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant - General. 


General  Orders,  » Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  117.  ( New  Orleans , December  24,  1862. 

I.  Owing  to  the  necessities  of  the  service,  and  to  preserve  the  reputa- 
tion of  the  army,  all  horses,  mules,  wagons,  carriages,  and  other  means 
of  transportation  in  the  possession  of  officers,  soldiers,  or  employes  of 
the  Government  in  this  city  and  throughout  the  department  will  be 
delivered  to  the  chief  quartermaster  or  such  officers  of  his  department 
as  he  may  designate.  Horses,  wagons,  &c.,  which  have  been  purchased 
in  the  State  of  Louisiana  by  such  parties  must  be  reported  and  regis- 
tered at  the  office  of  the  chief  quartermaster.  A certified  copy  of  the 
bill  of  sale,  giving  the  date,  place  of  purchase,  from  whom  bought,  and 
amount  paid,  with  a description  of  the  property,  will  be  deposited  at 
the  same  time.  Officers  entitled  to  horses,  and  having  them  in  posses- 
sion, as  above  stated,  may  have  them  appraised  and  paid  for  by  getting 
proper  authority  so  to  do. 

All  commanding  officers,  provost-marshals,  quartermasters,  and  other 
military  agents  of  the  Government  are  directed  to  enforce  this  order. 
Every  violation  or  evasion  of  it  will  be  reported  to  the  chief  quarter- 
master. 

II.  The  chief  quartermaster  will  cause  all  seized  or  confiscated  houses 
not  assigned  by  his  authority  to  be  vacated  without  delay.  Begimental 
officers  will  be  provided  with  quarters  near  their  regiments. 

III.  All  general  and  staff  officers  regularly  assigned  to  duty  in  this 
city  will  be  paid  commutation  of  quarters  and  fuel,  provided  fuel  is  not 
issued  in  kind,  and  that  no  such  officer  occupy  a seized  or  confiscated 
house  or  other  building  rented  for  the  Government. 

All  houses  irregularly  seized,  occupied,  or  confiscated  will  be  dis- 
posed of  by  the  chief  quartermaster,  who  will,  as  far  as  practicable, 
deliver  them  to  responsible  persons,  to  be  held  by  them  subject  to  the 
future  disposition  of  the  Government. 

The  provost-marshal  will  give  any  assistance  necessary  to  carry  out 
this  order. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

BICH’D  B.  IB  WIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


624  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Ho.  118.  f New  Orleans , December  24, 1862. 

Applications  for  the  suspension  of  the  order  closing  certain  churches 
in  the  city  of  New  Orleans  have  been  presented  to  the  military  governor 
of  the  State  and  by  him  referred  to  the  major-general  commanding. 
An  omission  in  the  church  service,  assumed  to  have  been  made  by  di- 
rection of  the  church  government,  is  understood  to  have  been  the  basis 
of  this  order.  Where  the  head  of  the  state  is  also  the  head  of  the 
church  an  omission  like  that  referred  to  would  be  in  contravention 
of  political  authority ; but  the  Government  does  not  here  assume  that 
power,  and  the  case  presented  does  not  seem  to  require  a continued  in- 
tervention of  military  authority.  The  order  is  therefore  provisionally 
rescinded,  and  the  churches  will  be  opened  as  heretofore  on  and  after 
Christmas  Day.  This  decision  is  based  upon  the  negative  character  of 
the  offense  charged. 

The  commanding  general  desires  it  to  be  understood,  however,  that 
clergymen  are  subject  to  the  restrictions  imposed  upon  all  other  men. 
They  well  know  the  extent  of  their  privileges.  No  appeal  to  the  pas- 
sions or  prejudices  of  the  people  or  to  excite  hostility  to  the  Govern- 
ment, whether  in  the  form  of  prayer,  exhortation,  or  sermon,  nor  any 
offensive  demonstration,  whether  open  or  covert,  can  be  allowed.  As 
public  teachers,  ministers  should  give  some  guaranty  of  their  purpose 
to  the  public. 

The  commanding  general  is  indisposed  to  interfere  with  the  rights  ot 
others,  or  to  submit  to  the  interference  of  others  with  the  rights  of  the 
Government,  which  relies  upon  its  justice  and  power,  and  not  upon  the 
consent  of  its  opponents  for  the  success  of  its  measures. 

Bv  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

BICH’D  B.  IBWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  120.  ) New  Orleans , December  26,  1862. 

The  following  proclamation  is  published  to  the  troops  of  this  depart- 
ment for  the  information  and  government  of  all  concerned : 


PROCLAMATION. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans,  December  16,  1862. 

In  obedience  to  orders  from  the  President  I bave  assumed  command  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  the  Gulf,  to  which  is  added  by  his  special  order  the  State  of  Texas. 

The  duty  with  which  I am  charged  requires  me  to  assist  in  the  restoration  ol  tne 
Government  of  the  United  States.  It  is  my  desire  to  secure  to  the  people  ot  every 
class  all  the  privileges  of  possession  and  enjoyment  which  are  consistent  with  public 
safety  or  which  it  is  possible  for  a beneficent  and  just  government  to  confer. 

In  the  execution  of  the  high  trust  with  which  I am  charged  I rely  upon  the  co- 
operation and  counsel  of  all  loyal  and  well-disposed  people  and  upon  the  manliest 
interest  of  those  dependent  upon  the  pursuits  of  peace,  as  well  as  upon  the  support 
of  naval  and  land  forces.  . T av,Qn 

My  instructions  require  me  to  treat  as  enemies  those  who  are  enemies,  but  l snan 
eladlv  regard  as  friends  those  who  are  friends.  No  restrictions  will  be  placed  upon 
the  freedom  of  individuals  which  are  not  imperatively  demanded  by  considerations 
of  public  safety,  but  while  their  claims  will  be  liberally  considered  it  is  due  also  to 
them  to  state  that  all  the  rights  of  the  Government  will  be  unflinchingly  maintained. 
Respectful  consideration  and  prompt  reparation  will  be  accorded  to  all  persons  wno 
are  wronged  in  body  or  estate  by  those  under  my  command. 


Chap.  XXVTL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


625 


The  Government  does  not  profit  by  the  prolongation  of  civil  contests  or  the  private 
or  public  sufferings  which  attend  it.  Its  fruits  are  not  equally  distributed.  In  the 
disloyal  States  desolation  has  empire  on  the  sea  and  on  the  land.  In  the  North  the 
war  is  an  abiding  sorrow,  but  not  yet  a calamity.  Its  cities  and  towns  are  increas- 
ing in  population,  wealth,  and  power.  The  refugees  from  the  South  alone  compen- 
sate in  great  part  for  the  terrible  decimations  of  battle. 

The  people  of  this  department  who  are  disposed  to  stake  their  fortunes  and  their 
lives  upon  resistance  to  the  Government  may  wisely  reflect  upon  the  immutable  con- 
ditions which  surround  them.  The  valley  of  the  Mississippi  is  the  chosen  seat  of 
population,  product,  and  power  on  this  continent.  In  a few  years  25,000,000  people, 
unsurpassed  in  material  resources  and  capacity  for  war,  will  swarm  upon  its  fertile 
rivers.  Those  who  assume  to  set  conditions  on  their  exodus  to  the  Gulf  count  upon 
a power  not  given  to  man.  The  country  washed  by  the  waters  of  the  Ohio,  the  Mis- 
souri, and  the  Mississippi  can  never  be  permanently  severed.  If  one  generation 
basely  barters  away  its  rights  immortal  honors  will  rest  upon  another  that  reclaims 
them. 

Let  it  never  be  said,  either,  that  the  East  and  the  West  may  be  separated.  Thirty 
days’  distance  from  the  markets  of  Europe  may  satisfy  the  wants  of  Louisiana  and 
Arkansas,  but  it  will  not  answer  the  demands  of  Illinois  and  Ohio.  The  valley 
of  the  Mississippi  will  have  its  deltas  upon  the  Atlantic.  The  physical  force  of 
the  West  will  debouch  upon  its  shores  with  a power  as  resistless  as  the  torrents 
of  its  giant  rivers.  This  country  cannot  be  permanently  divided.  Ceaseless  wars 
may  drain  its  blood  and  treasure ; domestic  tyrants  or  foreign  foes  may  grasp  the 
scepter  of  its  power,  but  its  destiny  will  remain  unchanged.  It  will  still  be  united. 
God  has  ordained  it.  What  avails  then  the  destruction  of  the  best  government 
ever  devised  by  man — the  self-adjusting,  self-correcting  Constitution  of  the  United 
States. 

People  of  the  Southwest ! Why  not  accept  the  conditions  imposed  by  the  imperious 
necessities  of  geographical  configurations  and  commercial  supremacy  and  re-establish 
your  ancient  prosperity  and  renown  ? Why  not  become  the  founders  of  States  which, 
as  the  entrepot  and  depot  of  your  own  central  and  upper  valleys,  may  stand  in  the 
affluence  of  their  resources  without  superior  and  in  the  privileges  of  the  people  with- 
out a peer  among  the  nations  of  the  earth  ? 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  121.  ( New  Orleans , December  28,  1862. 

The  major-general  commanding  has  received  information  of  a pro- 
posed repudiation  of  checks  issued  by  the  New  Orleans  City  Railroad 
Company,  which  have  been  used  for  many  months  without  restriction 
by  all  classes  of  people  as  currency.  In  the  ordinary  transactions  of 
business  these  checks  have  been  received  by  officers  and  soldiers  of  the 
army  and  by  the  laboring  and  poorer  classes  of  the  community.  They 
represent  nearly  the  entire  possession  of  the  latter  class.  It  is  impossi- 
ble that  they  can  have  been  thus  generally  circulated  without  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  parties  authorizing  their  issue,  and  every  consideration  of 
justice  and  public  interest  requires  their  redemption.  If  counterfeits 
have  been  imposed  upon  the  community  the  responsibility  of  the  sup- 
pression and  detection  of  the  offenders  must  rest  upon  the  original  par- 
ties in  interest  and  not  upon  the  community. 

No  analogy  can  be  properly  drawn  from  the  practice  of  banking  in- 
stitutions in  similar  cases.  Their  privileges  and  responsibilities  are 
established  and  limited  by  law.  These  checks  are  without  law,  and 
those  who  issue  them  must  accept  the  risks  with  the  advantages  attend- 
ing their  acts.  The  commanding  general,  in  consideration  of  all  the 
facts,  advises  their  immediate  redemption.  The  most  ample  protec- 
tion will  be  furnished  the  parties  hereafter,  either  to  prevent  their  eir« 

40  R Y Qb  &Y 


626 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  ft.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTL 


culation  as  currency,  if  desired,  or  by  inflicting  such  summary  punish- 
ment on  counterfeiters  as  will  make  the  issue  of  spurious  checks  im- 
possible. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks:  £ 

Lieutenant- Colonel.  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


December  20,  1862—6  p.  m. 


Mai.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks,  t ^ 7 

Gomdg.  Department  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans , La. : 

General  : I have  just  received  written  information  from  one  of  my 
spies  that  the  force  at  Port  Hudson  is  15,000  men.  Twenty -nine  heavy 
pieces  of  artillery  are  in  position  bearing  on  the  river.  The  position 

is  intrenched  on  the  land  side.  . 

They  have  eleven  pieces  of  field  artillery  but  no  siege  pieces  for  de- 
fense on  the  land  side. 

The  rebel  troops  subsist  on  fresh  beef  and  corn  bread  and  have 
plenty  of  it. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General,  TJ.  S.  Volunteers. 


Special  Orders,  ) 
No.  599.  ( 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , December  30,  1862. 


tR?  -a- 

III.  The  following  named  regiments  are  organized  into  brigades 
as  foilows,  and  constitute  a division,  to  be  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen. 

Cuvier  Grover : . ^ TTT.JJ.  _ . 7.  a.  ,, 

First  Brigade  to  be  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  William  Dwight. — bixtk 
New  York,  Colonel  Wilson ; Twelfth  Maine,  Colonel  Kimball ; Twenty-  j 
second  Maine,  Col.  S.  G.  Jerrard;  One  hundred  and  thirty-first  New 
York,  Colonel  Turnbull. 

Second  Brigade,  to  be  commanded  by  the  senior  colonel.— X inth  Con- 
necticut, Colonel  Cahill;  Eorty-first  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Chicker- 
ing;  Fifty-second  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Greenleaf;  Twenty-fourth 
Connecticut,  Colonel  Mansfield. 

Third  Brigade,  to  be  commanded  by  the  senior  colonel Thirty -first 
Massachusetts,  Colonel  Gooding;  Twenty-fifth  Connecticut,  Colonel 
Bissell ; Twenty-sixth  Maine,  Colonel  Hubbard ; One  hundred  and  fifty- 
ninth  New  York,  Colonel  Molineux. 

The  artillery  and  cavalry  will  be  under  the  immediate  orders  ot  tne 

division  commanders.  . 

The  other  regiments  at  Baton  Bouge  will  be  temporarily  assigned  by 
General  Grover,  for  purpose  of  administration,  discipline,  and  instruc- 
tion, to  these  brigades. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : IEWIN> 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXYII]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  627 

Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banlcs  commanding, 
for  the  month  of  December,  1862  (headquarters,  New  Orleans,  La.). 


Command. 


New  Orleans,  La.,  Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks  and  staff. . . 

Baton  Rouge,  La.,  Brig.  Gen.  C.  Grover  and  staff 

Infantry V--, 

Cavalry 

Artillery 

Total 

Carrollton,  La.,  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Slierman  and  staff. 

Infantry 

Cavalry 

Artillery 

Total 

Brig.  Gen.  G.  Weitzel  and  staff 

Infantry 

Cavalry - 

Artillery 

Total 

Pensacola,  Pla.,  Brig.  Gen.  N.  Dow  and  staff 

Infantry 

Artillery 

Total 

Defenses  of  New  Orleans,  Col.  T.  W.  Cahill 

Infantry 

* Artillery 

Total 

Independent  commands 

Grand  total 


Present  *for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Officers. 

! 

Men. 

23 

23 

23 

6 

6 

6 

486 

9,  586 

11,  393 

13,  721 

£ 

149 

169 

194 

8 

319 

366 

395 

528- 

10, 054 

11,957 

14,  339 

6 

6 

6 

293 

5,607 

6,  793 

7, 481 

2 

41 

45 

79 

10 

239 

263 

288 

311 

5,887 

7,107 

7,  854 

9 

9 

9 

63 

1,  772 

2,  216 

2,  520 

7 

228 

265 

283 

8 

225 

256 

303 

87 

2, 225 

2,  746 

3,115 

2 

2 

3 

72 

1, 138 

1,  726 

1,  885 

10 

253 

329 

361 

84 

1,391 

2,057 

j 2, 249 

80 

1,  286 

2,  005 

2, 951 

10 

327 

396 

429 

90 

1,613 

2,401 

! 3, 380 

371 

8,612 

10,  240 

| 11, 137 

1,471 

29,782 

36,508 

42,  074 

« 

Bemarkb  on  Original  Return. — The  last  return  from  this  department  was  for  the  month  of  Sep- 
tember. It  is  almost  impossible  to  account  for  the  difference  of  aggregates  without  merely  forcing 

the  figures. 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

December  31, 1802. 


Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf  commanded  by  Maj. 
Gen . Nathaniel  P.  Banks  ( headquarters , New  Orleans , La.),  December 

31,  1862. 

Grover's  Division  (not  yet  brigaded).* 

Brig.  Gen.  C.  Grover  commanding. 

52d  Massachusetts. 

6th  New  York. 

91st  New  York. 

131st  New  York. 

133d  New  York. 

159th  New  York. 

161st  New  York. 

173d  New  York. 


* So  says  original  return,  hut  for  Grover's  division,  see  Special  Orders,  No.  599,  De- 
cember 30,  p.  626. 


13th  Connecticut. 
24th  Connecticut. 
25th  Connecticut. 
2d  Louisiana. 

12th  Maine. 

22d  Maine. 

26th  Maine. 

41st  Massachusetts. 


628  w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 


Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  &c. — Continued. 

Grover’s  Division  (not  yet  brigaded) — Continued. 


174tli  New  York. 

4th  Wisconsin. 

1st  Louisiana  Cavalry,  Co.  C. 

2d  Mass.  Unattached  Cavalry,  Co.  B. 


2d  Massachusetts  Battery. 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  L. 
2d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  C. 


Sherman’s  Division  (not  yet  brigaded).* 
Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman  commanding. 


26th  Connecticut. 
14th  Maine. 

31st  Massachusetts. 
42d  Massachusetts. 

6th  Michigan. 

15th  New  Hampshire. 
16th  New  Hampshire. 
110th  New  York. 


114th  New  York. 

156th  New  York. 

160th  New  York. 

162d  New  York. 

2d  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  Co.  A. 
18th  New  York  Battery. 

1st  Vermont  Battery. 


Reserve  Brigade. 


Brig.  Gen.  G.  Weitzel  commanding. 


12th  Connecticut. 

1st  Louisiana. 

75th  New  York. 

1st  Louisiana  Cavalry,  Co’s  A and  B. 


2d  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  Co.  B. 
1st  Maine  Battery. 

6th  Massachusetts  Battery. 


Defenses  of  New  Orleans. 


9th  Connecticut. 
26th  Massachusetts. 
30th  Massachusetts. 


Col.  T.  W.  Cahill  commanding. 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Batteries  A and  F. 
5th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  G. 


28th  Connecticut. 
15th  Maine. 


District  of  Pensacola. 

Brig.  Gen.  Neal  Dow  commanding. 

I 7th  Vermont. 

I 2d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Batteries  H and  K. 
Independent  Commands. 


23d  Connecticut. 

21st  Indiana. 

1st  Louisiana  Native  Guards. 
2d  Louisiana  Native  Guards. 
3d  Louisiana  Native  Guards. 
13th  Maine, 
bth  New  Hampshire. 


128th  New  York. 

165th  New  York. 

177tli  New  York. 

8th  Vermont. 

1st  Texas  Cavalry. 

Louisiana  Artillery  (one  company). 
4th  Massachusetts  Battery. 


Headquarters,  Pensacola , January  1, 1863. 

Mai.  Geo.  N".  P.  Banks,  Gomdg.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf: 

General  : Soon  after  I came  to  tills  district  I was  informed  that  m 
the  neighboring  towns  were  many  houses  of  rebels  abandoned,  wit 
their  contents,  by  the  owners,  who  had  gone  into  Alabama. 

I caused  the  furniture  of  these  houses  to  be  brought  to  Pensacola  an 
distributed  among  the  officers  at  their  quarters  and  to  the  hospital  I 
communicated  immediately  on  the  subject  with  GenealButer  A day 
or  two  before  your  arrival  he  ordered  this  to  be  sold  at  auction  on. 
count  of  the  Government,  but  on  your  arrival  he  recalled  the  older, 


• • • ■ - 


Chap.  XXVII.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


629 


leaving  the  matter  to  your  disposal.  Unless  it  is  sold  it  will  be  left  on 
an  evacuation  of  the  place  to  any  one  who  chooses  to  take  it,  as  the 
city  is  occupied  almost  exclusively  by  poor  whites,  who  have  come  in 
from  the  surrounding  country  to  avoid  starvation  and  the  conscription. 
Very  few  of  the  Pensacola  people  remain  in  the  place. 

Verv  respectfully,  yours, 

NEAL  DOW. 


Headquarters, 
Pensacola , January  2,  1863. 

Rear- Admiral  Farraghjt, 

Commanding  Naval  Forces  in  the  Gulf : 

Dear  Admiral:  On  the  24th  ultimo  I sent  an  expedition  of  25  men, 
under  Lieutenant  Stewart,  of  the  Ninety -first  New  York  Volunteers,  to 
seize  a steamer  lying  in  the  Ohoctawhatehie  River  about  300  miles  from 
its  mouth. 

At  East  Pass  Mr.  Bruner,  of  the  blockading  schooner,  volunteered  to 
join  the  party  to  seize  a schooner  lying  near  the  steamer.  During  the 
march  of  41  miles  Mr.  Bruner  was  very  earnest  to  return,  as  citizens 
said  there  were  several  companies  of  rebel  cavalry  in  the  neighbor- 
hood, but  my  officer  refused  to  retreat.  At  23  miles  from  the  vessel 
they  were  assured  that  she  was  sunk,  and  Mr.  Bruner  insisted  upon  a 
retreat.  My  officer  said  he  would  have  a piece  of  the  steamer  if  he  had 
to  dive  for  it,  and  immediately  started  oft*  on  a gallop,  only  a guide  ac- 
companying him,  and  pushed  through  without  sleeping  and  seized  the 
steamer  at  daylight  the  next  morning.  My  officer  sent  word  back  to 
the  party  by  a citizen,  and  proceeded  immediately  to  haul  the  vessel 
into  the  middle  of  the  river  and  to  make  the  wheel-house  bullet-proof, 
as  he  expected  to  be  attacked  by  guerrillas. 

In  about  twenty-four  hours  the  party  arrived.  My  officer  took  on 
board  some  articles  from  Mr.  Bruner’s  vessel  and  proceeded  to  this  port. 
On  his  arrival  here  Mr.  Bruner  took  the  steamer  to  the  navy-yard  to 
land  his  things,  telling  my  officer  that  he  would  return  her  next  day  at 
1 p.  in.,  since  which  time  I have  not  seen  him  or  the  steamer. 

I addressed  a note  to  the  senior  naval  officer  in  command  on  this 
station,  but  he  declines  to  take  the  smallest  notice  of  it,  retaining  the 
steamer.  The  schooner  was  in  the  river,  but  Mr.  Bruner  declined  to 
take  it  along,  on  the  ground  that  there  was  not  time. 

I am  sure,  my  dear  admiral,  that  you  will  not  countenance  this  pro- 
ceeding unless  you  think  it  right  and  proper. 

I am,  very  truly,  yours, 


NEAL  DOW, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. ' 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , January  2,  1863. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , 1).  C. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  letter  of  the  18th 
ultimo,  inclosing  letter  from  Department  of  State.  In  accordance  with 
its  instructions  the  inclosed  order  has  been  published. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


630 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  (Chap.  XXVII. 


[Inclosure.] 


General  Orders, 
No.  1. 


> Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

£ New  Orleans , January  1,  1863. 

In  obedience  to  instructions  from  the  Government  of  the  United 
States  the  commaudiug  general  gives  notiee  that  from  and  after  this 
date  no  person  not  in  the  civil,  military,  or  naval  service  of  a foreign 
government  will  be  permitted  to  depart  from  the  city  of  New  Orleans 
on  board  of  any  foreign  ship  of  war  without  the  written  permission  of 
the  commander  of  the  military  forces  in  New  Orleans,  and  that  no  for- 
eign vessel  of  war  will  receive  on  board  or  carry  from  this  city  any  such 
person  who  shall  not  have  received  written  permission  to  depart  on 
board  of  such  vessel  from  the  commander  of  the  military  forces  in  this 


city 


By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : R 

Lieutenant*  Colonel^  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Provost-Marshal’s  Office, 

Baton  Rouge , La .,  January  3,  1863. 

In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  10,  of  which  the  following  is 
a copy: 


Wutat  Orders  ) Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Special  Orders,  £ Baton  Bouge,  La .,  December  31,  1862 

A board,  consisting  of  the  following-narned  commissioned  . “mfir^o’clock  am0 
the  huildino-  of  the  provost-marshal  on  Thursday,  January  1, 1863,  at  9 o ciocR  a.  ., 
for  the  purpose  of  examining  into  the  cause  of  the  fire  and  other  circumstances  connected 
whh  tCburning  of  the  State-house  at  this  place  on  the  28th  day  of  December,  1862. 

Permission  is  given  to  send  for  persons  to  give  evidence  upon  the  subject. 

The  senior  member  will  record  the  proceedings  of  the  hoard. 

Detail  for  the  Ixxmi.-Lieut.  Col.  G.  A.  Draper,  One  hundred  and  fifty-ninth  New 
York  Volunteers ; Capt.  William  J.  Denslow,  Sixth  New  York  Volunteers;  Capt.  John 
L Swift,  Forty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteers : 

By  order  of  C.  Grover,  brigadier-general  commanding^  HIBBERT>  jK-> 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


The  constituted  members  of  the  board  therein  named  convened  at 
the  place  of  designation  at  9 o’clock  a m.  January  1,  lb63,  and  com- 

rnenced  their  investigation.  ^ 

The  hoard  carefully  examined  all  those  officers  and  persons  who  had 
police  jurisdiction  of  the  State-house  and  its  pounds  with  reference  to 
the  regulations  and  system  of  admission  to  the  building.  It  found  that 
the  rules  were  exceedingly  strict  and  rigidly  enforced. 

The  main  portion  of  the  building  was  occupied  by  the  assistant  pro- 
vost-marshal, having  in  charge  political  and  military  pnsoners.  These 
were  confined  in  a large  room  on  the  first  floor,  and  iw  access  wbatever 
to  the  remainder  of  the  building  was  allowed  them.  No  enusted  men  or 
citizens  were  permitted  to  visit  the  building  without  written  consent 
from  the  provost-marshal  or  general  commanding.  Smoking  by  com 
missioned  officers  who  had  the  privilege  of  access  was  specially  P£>n 
hibited,  and  we  could  not  hear  after  thorough  inquiry  of  any  violation 

°fTheSrear1portion  of  the  building  was  used  by  the  company  which  had 

the  custody  of  the  place  and  edifice. 

A strong  guard  was  posted  at  all  points.  A cooking-stove  was  placed 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


631 


in  the  basement  of  the  tower,  situated  in  the  southeasterly  corner,  which 
was  used  for  the  preparation  of  rations  for  the  persons  in  charge. 

The  origin  of  the  fire. — To  ascertain  this  we  examined  those  who  were 
permanently  in  the  building  and  those  who  visited  it  late  Sunday  after- 
noon, December  28,  just  before  the  discovery  of  the  tire,  and  experts 
who  had  full  knowledge  of  the  causes  of  tire.  We  found  that  very  few 
persons  had  visited  the  premises  during  the  day  and  those  few  were 
exclusively  officers. 

It  was  the  testimony  of  the  officer  of  the  guard  in  charge,  as  well  as 
several  other  officers  who  went  through  the  rear  portion  of  the  building 
between  3 and  4 o’clock  p.  m.,  that  there  was  no  appearance  of  tire 
inside  as  late  as  3.30.  The  fire  was  discovered  simultaneously  by  three 
commissioned  officers,  one  of  whom  was  the  officer  of  the  guard,  who 
was  approaching  the  building  from  the  street  when  he  saw  smoke  issu- 
ing from  the  southeastern  corner  of  the  roof  near  the  tower.  He  started 
an  alarm  and  thea  made  immediate  provision  for  the  security  of  the 
prisoners.  A lieutenant,  who  had  been  upon  the  roof  between  3 and 
4 o’clock,  had  noticed  smoke  near  the  edge  of  the  roof  which  connects 
with  the  southeastern  tower,  but  supposed  that  it  came  from  the  chim- 
ney. In  descending  he  saw  no  indication  of  fire  in  the  senate  chamber, 
which  he  visited.  While  inside  he  heard  a ticking  sound  and  rattling, 
and  on  looking  up  where  he  had  previously  seen  the  smoke  he  was 
then  convinced  that  the  building  was  on  fire.  He  and  an  officer  with 
him  directed  a private  to  go  inside  and  notify  the  officer,  while  they 
went  to  their  camp  for  assistance.  Another  lieutenant,  about  the 
grounds  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same  place,  noticed  the  outbreak. 

Every  one  who  saw  the  initiation  of  the  conflagration,  without  any 
discrepancy  or  conflict  of  evidence,  established  the  same  locality  of 
commencement,  and  that  locality  in  the  wood  work  that  joins  with  the 
brick  wall  of  the  southeastern  tower.  It  was  from  that  spot  that  the 
smoke  was  first  seen,  and  the  first  outbreak  of  flames  was  in  the  ceiling 
of  the  roof  in  connection  with  it.  This  proves  that  the  cause  of  the  fire 
must  have  been  from  a defect  in  the  flue.  The  building  has,  in  the 
nature  of  things,  been  much  neglected  for  a great  length  of  time.  Its 
chimneys  must  necessarily  have  been  exceedingly  foul  for  want  of  care 
and  cleansing.  The  wall  of  the  tower,  as  near  as  we  could  judge,  was 
not  far  from  2 feet  in  thickness.  The  aperture  of  the  chimney  occu- 
pied nearly  a foot;  all  the  flues  from  the  grates  in  this  section  of  the 
building  lead  into  it.  The  direction  of  the  flues  bear  to  the  left  in 
ascending  to  clear  the  passage-ways  from  the  building  to  the  tower,  and 
the  outlet,  as  far  as  we  could  determine,  was  in  the  vicinity  of  the  spot 
where  the  fire  was  discovered.  The  rafters  supporting  the  roof  were 
inserted  into  the  wall  of  the  tower  near  the  flue,  and  the  ends  could  not 
have  been  more  than  6 inches  from  it. 

There  was  a fire  in  the  basement,  and  if  there  was  any  imperfection 
in  the  flue  ignition  would  be  a natural  consequence ; it  would  be  inevi- 
table. The  building  could  not  have  been  fired  within  the  tower,  as  the 
door  leading  from  the  senate  chamber  into  it  was  locked,  and,  when 
broken  open  after  the  beginning  of  the  fire,  no  signs  of  fire  were  dis- 
cernible. It  could  not  have  originated  from  the  roof  by  accident,  such 
as  the  dropping  of  a lighted  match  or  cigar,  because  the  roof  was  pro- 
tected by  slate  in  a thorough  manner;  and  it  could  not  have  been  the 
act  of  an  incendiary,  for  it  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  any  person  intend- 
ing to  fire  the  building  would  have  omitted  to  do  so  in  the  numerous 
secluded  rooms,  which  were  filled  with  paper  and  combustible  matter, 
where  the  work  could  have  been  accomplished  in  an  instant  and  gone 


632 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


to  the  most  exposed  position  (for  every  visitor  went  upon  the  roof  for 
the  view),  and  where  to  kindle  a fire  would  have  been  difficult  if  not 
unsuccessful. 

These  circumstances  combined  compel  us  to  state  that  the  cause  of  the 
fire  was  the  foulness  and  probable  unsound  condition  of  the  chimney. 

The  suppression  of  the  fire. — The  work  of  putting  out  the  fire  was  done  i 
by  the  United  States  forces  with  some  help  from  the  citizens  of  the 
town.  The  engines  were  principally  manned  by  the  soldiers  and  the 
labor  was  directed  by  the  commissioned  officers.  Owing  to  the  want 
of  familiarity  with  the  location  and  character  of  the  engines  and  the 
condition  of  the  hose,  &c.,  there  may  have  been  some  little  delay  in  get- 
ting  water  upon  the  flames.  Indeed  the  fire  had  got  so  far  under  way 
when  the  engines  were  brought  into  action  that  it  was  useless  to  at- 
tempt to  save  any  but  the  main  building.  All  that  energy  and  toil  and 
judgment  could  do,  it  is  clear  by  all  the  testimony,  was  done.  The 
commanding  general  and  his  staff  gave  their  personal  attention  to  the 
discipline  and  diligence  of  the  work.  Officers  of  every  rank  rendered 
aid  and  assistance.  The  management  was  under  the  superintendence  of 
a lieutenant-colonel  of  one  of  the  Hew  York  regiments,  who  had  experi- 
ence in  such  matters,  and  the  statement  of  Mr.  Oharrotte,  a resident  of 
the  city  of  Baton  Bouge  and  an  editor  of  a newspaper  in  the  place,  him- 
self a foreman  of  one  of  the  engines  used  at  the  fire,  would  seem  con- 
clusive on  this  point.  Mr.  Oharrotte  says : 

He  was  present  soon  after  the  fire  broke  out.  The  men  behaved  very  well ; saw  no 
signs  of  intoxication  or  demoralization.  Officers  and  men  seemed  to  have  but  one 
object— the  suppression  of  the  fire.  Every  available  means  were  used,  and  all  that 
could  be  done  was  done  to  accomplish  this  end.  Between  10  and  11  o’clock  the  fire 
was  under  subjection  and  the  main  building  was  considered  safe. 

The  burning  of  the  main  building. — A force  of  1 captain,  2 lieutenants, 

9 non-commissioned  officers,  and  100  men  were  detailed  to  watch  the  ^ 
saved  portion  of  the  building  after  the  fire  was  pronounced  effectually 
suppressed.  The  instructions  given  to  the  officer  was  to  take  the  build- 
ing when  the  fire  was  out  and  use  his  best  judgment  to  insure  its 
safety. 

Between  11  and  12  o’clock  this  force  took  possession.  The  com- 
mander divided  his  force  equally,  keeping  oue-half  for  sentinel  duty 
and  the  other  to  work  the  engines  in  case  of  need.  He  placed  8 men 
inside  the  building,  the  same  number  outside.  He  had  no  guard  upon 
the  roof,  and  did  not  himself  visit  the  roof  or  examine  above  the  third 
floor  of  the  building. 

A little  before  4 o’clock  the  fire  broke  out  in  the  ceiling,  and  was  un- 
der such  headway  that  it  was  impossible  to  control  it.  There  is  no 
doubt  in  the  mind  of  the  board,  and  it  is  the  opinion  of  experts,  that 
the  fire  was  communicated  by  the  rafters,  and  must  have  been  some  time 
in  operation  before  its  discovery.  It  is  also  clear  that  a guard  upon 
the  roof  would  in  all  probability  have  prevented  a recommencement  of 
the  fire  or  an  examination  of  the  locality  above  the  third  floor  would  have 
discovered  it  in  time  to  have  checked  its  progress.  Both  by  a strange 
oversight  as  well  as  a lamentable  misunderstanding  of  orders  the  most 
likely  spot  for  a recurrence  of  the  fire  was  left  entirely  unguarded.  The 
person  having  command  says  he  was  unacquainted  with  the  work  as- 
signed to  him,  having  had  no  experience  in  the  business,  but  we  fail  to 
account  for  the  want  of  attention  to  the  orders  and  suggestions  given 
him.  The  commanding  officer  was  told  by  the  assistant  adjutant-general 
that  a special  watch  over  the  roof  was  necessary,  and  that  this  was  the 


Chap.  XXVTL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


633 


place  where  a fire  would  be  likely  to  reappear.  The  officer  did  not 
know  the  position  of  Captain  Hibbert  and  did  not  regard  the  order  as 
official  or  the  suggestions  as  important.  The  lieutenant-colonel,  who 
had  previous  charge  of  the  fire,  also  told  him  that  he  had  taken  a guard 
from  the  roof  and  that  it  was  very  essential  it  should  be  replaced.  This 
statement  the  officer  in  command  does  not  recollect.  The  lieutenant 
who  had  charge  of  one  of  the  engines  in  delivering  it  over  to  the  new 
officer  informed  him  that  particular  attention  “ should  be  given  to  the 
landings,  the  facings,  and  the  roof,  and  that  much  more  good  would  be 
effected  by  work  with  the  shovel  and  the  ax  than  by  water.”  This  ad- 
vice also  is  not  remembered  as  having  been  given,  and  theretore  was 

not  heeded.  , _ _ 

We  are  inclined  to  think  that  the  failure  to  comprehend  and  act  upon 
these  necessarv  orders  was  more  a misfortune  than  a fault ; that  the 
officer  acted  in  accordance  with  his  ability  and  judgment,  which  were 
deficient.  He  had  the  engines  at  work  four  times  between  12  and  4 
o’clock,  which  shows,  if  not  discretion,  at  least  zeal.  But  we  are  forced 
to  state  that  we  consider  the  number  of  guards  in  the  building  as  in- 
sufficient, and  the  want  of  guards  upon  the  roof  and  want  of  inspection 
under  it  as  the  reason  why  the  fire  obtained  such  headway  as  to  make 
it  impossible  to  be  subdued. 

We  would  state  that  Mr.  Gharrotte  informed  us  that  the  State-house 
had  been  fired  once  before,  some  three  or  four  years  since,  from  the  same 
flue.  This  happened  on  the  evening  on  which  the  Legislature  opened 
its  session,  and  his  view  as  to  the  origin  of  the  fire  coincides  with  this 
report.  It  was  the  opinion  of  experts  that  the  roof  should  have  been 
regularly  guarded  and  frequently  visited,  and  that  by  cutting  away 
and  precautions  of  that  nature  25  men  with  knowledge  of  their  duties 
would  have  prevented  the  second  disaster. 

The  board  then  submit  as  the  result  of  their  investigations  of  the 
case  assigned  them  that  the  undoubted  origin  of  the  fire  was  a defect 
in  the  flue ; that  the  conduct  and  activity  of  those  who  assisted  in  put- 
ting out  the  fire  was  under  the  circumstances  both  efficient  and  com- 
mendable ; that  the  second  outbreak  was  caused  by  the  rafters  in  the 
roof  of  the  main  building  and  the  unburnt  portion  being  unfortunately 
in  charge  of  persons  who  were  wholly  inexperienced  in  the  duties  im- 
posed upon  them  and  wholly  ignorant  as  to  the  points  of  danger  and 
the  best  means  of  managing  affairs  of  this  kind.  The  final  destruction 
of  the  interior  of  the  building  was  complete. 

GILBERT  A.  DRAPER, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  One  hundred  and  fifty -ninth  N.  Y.  Vols. 

WM.  J.  DENSLOW, 

Captain  Sixth  Regiment  Infantry  New  York  Volunteers. 

JNO.  L.  SWIFT, 

Captain  Forty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

January  3,  1863 — 3.30  p.  m. 

Capt.  C.  Huggins, 

On  hoard  Pampero , Southwest  Pass  : 

Stop  everything  going  to  Galveston. 

Please  acknowledge. 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


634 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


Special  Orders, 
No.  3. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , January  3,  18G3. 


■jr  " 

VI  The  following-named  regiments  are  organized  into  brigades,  as 
follows,  and  will  constitute  a division,  to  be  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen. 

^ First  Brigade,  to  be  commanded  by  Brig.  Ben.  Oe°rge  L. 
Forty-seventh  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Marsh ; Eighth  New  Hampshire, 
Colonel  Fearing;  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  New  Tork,  Col.  L.  L>. 
Smith  ; One  hundred  and  fifty-sixth  New  York,  Colonel  Cooke. 

Second  Brigade,  to  be  commanded  by  the  senior  colonel.— One  hundred 
and  thirty-third  New  York,  Colonel  Currie;  One  hundred  and  seventy - 
third  New  York,  Colonel  Morton;  One  hundred  and  seventy-fourth 
New  York,  Colonel- Parmele ; Fourth  Wisconsin,  Colonel  Paine. 

Third  Brigade,  to  be  commanded  by  the  senior  colonel.—^ Thirteenth  - 

necticut  Colonel  Birge;  Sixteenth  Bew  Hampshire,  Colonel  Pike,  One 
hundred  and  sixty-second  New  York,  Colonel  Benedict ; One  hundre 
nnfl  tenth  New  York,  Colonel  Littlejohn.  , . * 

General  Emory  will  immediately  assume  command  of  that  portion  of 
his  division  which  is  now  at  Carrollton,  ahd  will  concentrate  tliewholo 
with  as  little  delay  as  practicable  at  Baton  Kouge.  The  quartermas- 
ter’s department  will  furnish  the  necessary  transportation. 

» * * * * * * 

X All  the  troops  in  the  District  of  La  Fourche,  including  the  Eighth 
Verm ont,  T wen  ty  Tirst  Indiana,  and  First,  Second,  “d  Third  Louisiana 
Native  Guards,  will  immediately  report  for  orders  to  Brig.  Gen.  God- 
frey Weitzel,  who  will  make  such  disposition  of  them  as  may  in  his 
judgment  be  best  calculated  to  carry  out  the  instructions  and  views  of 
the  commanding  general. 

• * * * 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks:  ^ R IEWIN)] 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  District  of  Arizona, 

Mesilla,  January  3, 18b<5. 

Mai.  David  Fergusson,  . 

First  Cavalry , California  Volunteers , MesiUa  . 

The  Governor  of  Chihuahua  has  been  written  to  by  the  general  com- 
mandin  J ^the  Department  of  New  Mexico,  under  date  of  October  9 1862, 
in  regard  to  a purchase  by  a Mexican  citizen  of  certain  arBcles  |ontr 
baud  of  war  from  rebels  against  the  Government  of Ike  Un  ted .State* 
As  during  your  contemplated  visit  to  the  Governor  of  Chihuahua 

matter  mf/be  referred  So  by  him,  I have  better  o?  Senera  cX 
with  for  your  information  an  official  copy  of  the  tetter  of  General  Lar 
ton  on  the  subject,  together  with  a copy  of  his  report  on  the  sa 

A lja^'hate  Seh^ofto  fnclose  copy  of  a letter  from  the  general  conn 

manding  referring  to  the  suspicion  of  fraud  in  the  < ^eng®( ^/“y ou w ill 
a certain  steam  engine  by  Elsbergand  Amberg,ot  Santa  E4  You  win 
be  good  enough  to  give  this  matter  your  attention,  with  a view  to  the 
protection  of  the  just  rights  of  the  United  States  Government. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully , ^ ^ WEST, 

Brigadier-General , Commanding. 


Chap.  XXVn.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


635 


Memorandum  of  verbal  instructions  given  to  Maj.  David  Fergusson,  First 
Cavalry , California  Volunteers , under  orders  to  visit  the  city  of  Chihua- 
hua,, Mex. 

1st.  To  make,  if  practicable,  an  arrangement  with  persons  connected 
with  San  Antonio,  Tex.,  or  residing  at  that  point,  to  communicate  in- 
telligence of  military  movements  on  the  part  of  the  Texans.  Com- 
munications, if  sent  through  Mexican  territory,  to  be  addressed  to  the 
commander  of  the  District  of  Arizona  under  cover  to  Dr.  David  K. 
Diffendorfer,  El  Paso,  Mex.  Proper  compensations  for  services  will  be 
paid. 

2d.  To  ascertain  the  resources  of  Chihuahua  and  Durango  with  refer- 
ence to  military  supplies  for  a force  moving  on  Texas  from  this  quarter, 
and  whether  avenues  and  means  of  transportation  are  available  to  that 

end. 

J.  E.  WEST, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  Arizona, 

Mesilla , January  3,  1863. 

Maj.  David  Fergusson, 

First  Cavalry , California  Volunteers , Mesilla , A.  Mex. : 

It  is  the  desire  of  the  general  commanding  the  Department  of  New 
Mexico  that  you  should  visit  the  capital  of  Chihuahua,  as  his  represent- 
ative, to  confer  with  His  Excellency  the  Governor  of  that  State,  with  a 
view  to  the  prevention  of  the  abuses  against  the  Government  of  the 
United  States  which  have  been  committed  by  certain  rebels  who  have 
taken  refuge  in  Mexican  territory. 

Since  the  reoccupation  of  this  part  of  New  Mexico  by  United  States 
troops  in  July  last  the  fact  is  notorious  that  the  town  of  El  Paso,  Mex., 
has  been  made  the  rendezvous  of  a gang  of  outlaws,  claiming  to  be  of 
the  party  now  in  rebellion  against  our  Government  who  have  been 
constant  in  their  efforts  to  prejudice  the  Mexican  population  against 
our  cause.  It  is  not  deemed  necessary  for  the  purposes  sought  to  be 
attained  by  your  mission  to  cite  specific  instances  of  the  detriment  that 
these  men  have  worked  against  the  United  States  Government.  It  is 
enough  to  state  in  general  terms  that  they  have  been  spies  upon  our 
acts,  have  sent  secret  agents  within  our  lines  to  watch  the  movements 
of  our  troops,  and  have  communicated,  through  Mexican  territory,  the 
intelligence  so  obtained  to  the  enemy. 

You  will  particularly  call  the  attention  of  the  Governor  of  Chihuahua 
to  the  fact*that  in  the  latter  part  of  November  last  one  Skillman  (with 
others  in  the  military  service  of  the  so-called  Confederate  States  to  the 
number  of  15  persons,  I am  informed)  crossed  from  Texas  into  Mexico  ; 
that  these  men  were  as  fully  armed  as  when  acting  in  the  field  against 
our  troops,  and  that  during  their  stay  in  Mexican  territory  they  main- 
tained a military  organization  ; that  this  party  remained,  I am  informed, 
at  the  village  of  Aquas  Calientes  several  days,  during  which  time  Skill- 
man  visited  El  Paso,  conferred  with  the  parties  residing  there,  and, 
without  being  in  any  manner  noticed  or  hindered  by  the  Mexican  author- 
ities, returned  unmolested  to  his  band ; that  Skillman  and  his  party 
then  visited  El  Presidio  del  Norte,  remained  there  several  days,  and 
made  an  effort  to  capture  and  convey  into  Texas  certain  American  citi- 
zens temporarily  sojourning  in  that  town. 


636 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

It  is  believed  that  it  is  only  necessary  to  call  the  attention  of  the 
Governor  of  Chihuahua  to  the  manifest  impropriety  of  permitting  such 
violations  of  international  obligations  to  insure  that  the  recurrence 
will  be  prevented.  It  is  simply  desired  to  formally  bring  to  his  notice 
the  acts  complained  of,  leaving  it  to  his  proper  respect  for  the  dignity 
of  the  Government  which  he  represents  and  to  that  due  his  own  official 
position  to  vindicate  the  honor  of  both  from  the  contempt  shown  them 
by  those  who  respect  neither  the  authority  of  their  own  Government 
nor  that  of  a power  with  whom  it  is  our  earnest  desire  to  maintain  the 
most  friendly  relations. 

You  will  please  assure  His  Excellency  of  the  efficient  co-operation  of 
United  States  military  authorities  in  this  Territory  in  any  measure  that 
he  may  deem  necessary  to  prevent  the  passage  to  Mexico  of  any  persons 
liable  to  conduct  themselves  injuriously  to  the  interests  of  his  Govern- 
ment by  acts  hostile  to  our  own,  which  must  eventually  call  for  a se- 
rious demand  for  reparation. 

1 beg  of  you  to  present  to  His  Excellency  the  assurances  of  my  warm 
personal  esteem,  and  remain,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  WEST, 

Brigadier-  General . Commanding. 


Washington,  January  4,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks,  JSfew  Orleans : 

General  : Your  two  letters  of  December  24  are  received.  The 
course  pursued  by  you  in  regard  to  trade  and  the  exportation  of  mules, 
&c.,  to  Mexico  is  fully  approved  by  the  Government.  You  will  per- 
ceive by  the  inclosed  copy  of  an  order  of  the  President  that  the  expor- 
tation of  military  munitions  of  all  kinds  is  prohibited.  This  order  has 
not  yet  been  published,  but  has  been  sent  to  commanding  officers  and 
collectors  of  certain  ports  for  their  government. 

You  will  learn  from  the  newspapers  that  at  our  last  advices  General  j 
Sherman  has  his  hands  full  at  Vicksburg.  If  possible  to  reach  him  at 
that  place  without  waiting  to  take  Port  Hudson  it  seems  advisable  to 
do  so.  But  the  condition  of  affairs  on  the  Mississippi  Eiver  will  have 
so  changed  before  this  reaches  you  that  it  is  useless  to  attempt  to  ad- 
vise -from  this  place.  The  reopening  of  that  river,  however,  must  be 
the  main  object  of  all  our  operations. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in  - Chief. 

General  Orders,  ) * War  Dept.,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office,  i 

No.  5.  j Washington , January  5,  1863. 

By  direction  of  the  President,  the  troops  in  the  Department  of  the 
Gulf  will  constitute  the  Nineteenth  Army  Corps,  to  date  from  December 
14, 1862,  and  Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks  is  assigned  to  the  command. 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


New  Orleans,  January  5, 1863—9.15  p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  G.  Weitzel,  Thibodeaux  : 

We  have  indirect  information  that  the  enemy  has  crossed  the  river 


Chap.  Xivn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  637 

at  Port  Hudson  with  one  or  two  regiments  with  a view  of  attacking 
our  forces  on  the  Piaquemine  or  the  La  Fourche. 

Please  acknowledge. 

BICH’D  B.  IBWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Headquarters  Beserye  Brigade, 

Camp  Stevens , near  Thibodeaux , La .,  January  6,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  NT.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans  : 

General:  When  the  expedition  under  my  command  which  resulted 
in  the  capture  of  this  district  was  first  contemplated  I suggested  to 
General  Butler  the  idea  of  employing  some  of  the  funds  which  were  in 
his  possession  to  construct  some  light-draught  gunboats  to  co-operate 
with  me  by  the  way  of  Berwick  Bay.  The  suggestion  was  adopted, 
and  these  boats  (four  in  number),  commanded  by  naval  officers,  only 
failed  in  consequence  of  a strong  northwester  to  hem  in  the  rebel  forces, 
and  the  capture  of  the  entire  force  of  the  latter  was  thus  prevented. 
The  rebels  crossed  Berwick  Bay  and  their  gunboat  (the  Cotton)  escaped 
into  the  Teche,  and  she  has  since  lain  securely  above  an  obstruction 
placed  in  the  Teche  below  her. 

As  our  force  was  so  small  in  the  department  at  the  time,  and  I could 
not  get  sufficient  force  to  secure  my  lines  of  communication  with  New 
Orleans,  General  Butler  would  not  order  me  to  cross  Berwick  Bay. 
There  was  nothing  to  be  gained  either  by  such  an  operation,  except  by 
covering  the  gunboats  in  removing  these  obstructions  to  secure  the 
rebel  gunboat  Cotton,  as  the  rebel  land  forces  had  a clear  and  open  line 
of  retreat  and  moved  faster  than  we  could. 

Since  my  occupation  these  four  gunboats  have  been  kept,  as  at  first 
intended,  in  Berwick  Bay,  and  have  rendered  efficient  service  in  clear- 
ing the  bay  and  the  highly  important  adjacent  waters  of  rebel  craft, 
and  have  securely  and  effectually  protected  my  left  flank. 

All  suggestions  and  opinions  I have  made  to  you  with  reference  to 
the  position  and  the  strength  of  the  forces  which  would  be  necessary 
to  hold  this  district  were  based  upon  the  supposition  that  these  gun- 
boats would  be  kept  in  the  waters  where  they  now  are.  To-day  I hear 
from  Lieut.  Comdg.  T.  McK.  Buchanan,  who  commands  the  whole 
gunboat  fleet,  that  one  of  them,  the  Estrella,  has  been  ordered  to  Gal- 
veston; that  his  own  vessel,  the  Calhoun,  will  in  about  a month  be 
compelled  to  go  to  New  Orleans  for  repairs,  which  will  require  six  weeks 
to  complete,  and  that  he  has  discretionary  orders  to  send  another  of 
these  boats  to  the  sound  and  Lake  Pontchartrain  to  replace  the  New 
London,  which  has  been  ordered  to  Galveston. 

The  admiral  has  this  power  to  order  these  vessels,  because  your  chief 
quartermaster  has  turned  them  over  to  the  Navy. 

Now  I consider  it  my  duty  to  inform  you  that  if  the  Navy,  by  means 
of  these  gunboats,  does  not  keep  undisputed  possession  of  Berwick  Bay 
and  the  adjacent  waters  the  force  here  will  have  to  be  greater  than  I 
represented  to  you.  That  theso  waters  are  of  the  highest  importance 
to  the  rebels ; that  by  gaining  possession  of  these  waters  by  means  of 
the  numerous  light-draught  boats  now  hidden  in  the  adjacent  bayous 
and  streams  they  could  make  frequent  raids,  which  no  force  of  ours  on 
laud  could  prevent;  that  they  could  run  the  blockade,  as  they  frequently 
before  we  oceupiecf  it  j that  by  boiling  these  waters  we  tbreateu 


638  w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 

continually  tlieir  line  of  communication  from  Port  Hudson  westward  to 
Opelousas  and  Texas  ; that  fearing  this,  the  rebels  are  now  fortifying 
on  the  Atchafalaya  at  a point  called  Butte- a-la-Bose ; that  if  it  should 
become  necessary  in  future  to  operate  on  the  Teche  from  this  direction 
the  crossing  of  Berwick  Bay  could  not  be  made  unless  we  controlled 
these  waters ; that  if  once  driven  out,  profiting  by  past  experience,  they 
could  fortify  their  bank,  and  not  only  annoy  our  railroad  terminus  on 
this,  but  make  it  extremely  troublesome  for  gunboats  to  re-enter. 

We  cannot  fortify  on  this  side  of  the  bay  with  a view  to  prevent  them 
from  fortifying  on  the  other  and  running  the  blockade.  It  would  take 
several  batteries  placed  at  intervals  to  do  this,  and  in  swampy  ground, 
whereas  they  have  high  ground ; and  besides  in  a short  time,  m conse- 
quence of  unrepaired  breaks  in  the  levee  on  the  west  bank  of  the  river 
between  Donaldsonville  and  Bed  Biver,  the  railroad  will  be  overflown 
between  Bayou  La  Fourche  and  Brashear  City,  and  the  onlv  ->vay  to 
communicate  with  the  forces  stationed  at  the  bay  wilLboeby  the  river 

and  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  _ ,, 

I therefore  most  respectfully  ask  "y  ou  to  lay  these  facts  before  the 
admiral  and  protest  against  Hue  removal  of  so  much  naval  force  from 
these  waters  that  it  n^gnt  hazard  our  supremacy  over  them.  I honestly 
and  frankly,  consider  it  my  duty  to  do  so. 

'PbW information  that  the  New  London  is  to  be  removed  from  Lake 
Pontchartrain  and  the  sound  compels  me  also  to  give  you  some  informa- 
tion on  the  system  of  defense  and  security  of  New  Orleans  which  I sug- 
gested  on  our  arrival  in  the  city  to  General  Butler,  and  which  has  ever  i 
since  been  followed.  It  is  as  follows,  viz:  The  land  forces  to  occupy 
the  four  forts— Forts  Jackson,  Saint  Philip,  Pike,  and  Macomb ; a small 
force  in  the  city  to  preserve  order;  a sufficient  force  behind  the  lines  at 
Carrollton  (at  Camp  Parapet),  or  within  easy  reach  by  transports  of  those  ji 
lines,  to  make  them  perfectly  secure;  the  Navy  to  retain  control  of  the 
river,  and  thus  secure  the  left  flank  of  our  lines.  They  have  kept  the 
Portsmouth  continually  on  the  left  of  our  lines.  In  addition,  the  Navy 
to  keep  control  of  Lake  Pontchartrain  and  the  sound,  and  thus  protect 
our  right  flank,  prevent  contraband  trade,  and  prevent  raids  by  the 
enemy  in  boats  or  light-draught  steamers  from  the  opposite  shore. 

The  New  London  has  been  kept  continually  on  this  duty  and  has 
effectually  performed  it.  If  she  be  now  removed  and  no  other  boat  or- 
dered to  replace  her  it  would  subject  our  whole  long  flank  to  the  dan- 
gers mentioned.  I consider  it  therefore  my  duty  to  call  the  admiral’s 
attention  through  you  to  this  fact,  which  I fear  he  has  lost  sight  of.  | 
New  Orleans  is  too  valuable  a prize  to  be  risked  in  any  way.  This 
disposition,  which  has  thus  far  held  it,  requires  a force  not  large  for  the 
service  it  performs,  has  given  us  a secure  baseband  thus  enabled  us 
always  to  employ  our  remaining  land  and  naval  forces  for  other  opera- 
tions without  fear  of  losing  our  base  and  depots. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ J ’ G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier -General,  77.  S.  Volunteers . 


Headquarters  District  of  Arizona, 

Mesilla,  January  G,  1863. 

Maj.  David  Fergusson, 

First  Cavalry , California  Volunteers , Franklin , Tex . : 

On  your  present  visit  at  Chihuahua  it  should  not  escape  your  recol- 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


639 


lection  that  the  designs  of  the  French  Emperor  upon  Mexico  are  viewed 
by  Americans  with  a suspicion  that  there  may  he  an  intention  to  co- 
operate with  the  party  now  in  rebellion  against  the  Government  of  the 
United  States.  A rumor  is  prevalent  in  several  quarters  that  French 
troops  are  about  occupying  Sonora  or  have  already  landed  at  Guaymas. 
Such  a contingency  as  a union  of  the  Texans  and  the  French  on  the 
southern  border  of  our  territory,  although  improbable,  is  sufficiently 
within  the  bounds  of  possibility  to  claim  some  share  of  your  attention. 

Be  good  enough  to  bear  this  matter  in  mind. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  R.  WEST, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , January  7,  1863. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commander -in- Chief  U.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C.: 

General  : The  precise  nature  of  the  duties  devolving  upon  me  in 
assuming  command  of  this  department  were  not  explained  to  me  in 
detail,  except  so  far  as  they  were  embodied  in  the  instructions  upon 
military  topics  received  from  you.  I find,  however,  on  arriving  here 
an  immense  military  government,  embracing  every  form  of  civil  ad- 
ministration, the  assessment  of  taxes,  fines,  punishments,  charities, 
trade,  regulation  of  churches,  confiscation  of  estates,  and  the  working 
of  plantations,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  affairs  of  a military  depart- 
ment. The  feature  of  this  multifarious  civil  business  most  embarrass- 
ing is  that  of  trade.  It  has  been  made  to  cover  every  form  of  commu- 
nication within  and  beyond  the  lines  of  the  army.  It  has  been  made  to 
cover  transactions  with  the  enemy  as  well  as  with  friends,  and  extends 
to  articles  contraband  of  war  as  well  as  to  those  recognized  as  legiti- 
mate objects  of  commerce. 

This  trade,  so  extensive  in  its  operations  from  motives  connected 
with  public  safety,  was  confided  to  particular  individuals,  and  became 
in  their  hands  an  affair  of  great  profit  and  importance  and  to  the  com- 
munity at  large  a matter  of  suspicion  and  reproach. 

It  is  not  my  purpose  to  impeach  in  the  slightest  degree  the  adminis- 
tration of  the  department  in  these  general  and  various  duties,  but  it  is 
my  duty  to  say  that,  in  respect  to  trade  and  the  manner  in  which  it  has 
been  conducted  by  those  whose  interests  were  adverse  to  the  Govern- 
ment and  its  officers,  the  strongest  Government  in  the  world  could  not 
safely,  for  any  length  of  time,  assume  the  responsibility  for  its  abuses 
and  protect  those  engaged  in  it. 

Assuming  command  here,  I had  but  one  of  two  courses  before  me, 
either  to  continue  abuses  committed  by  interested  private  parties,  as- 
suming responsibility  therefor,  or  to  reform  its  character  by  changing 
its  agents.  Every  consideration  of  expediency  and  justice  impelled 
me  to  the  latter  course.  I am  not  disappointed  in  the  results  of  my 
policy,  but  regret  it  has  interfered  with  matters  purely  military  in  their 
character.  It  was,  however,  a necessary  diversion.  No  government 
could  stand  the  weight  of  abuses  that  existed  here $ not  by  the  consent 
of  the  military  commander  of  the  department  any  more  than  by  my  own, 
and  no  military  operations  could  be  successfully  carried  on  with  such 
a disturbed  and  excited  community  in  the  rear  as  that  which  I found 
here. 


640 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

I have  for  these  reasons  reduced  officers  and  soldiers  in  this  city  to 
the  accommodations  provided  by  the  Army  Regulations.  All  property 
in  the  hands  of  commissions  or  committees  or  officers  belonging  to  the 
United  States  has  been  turned  over  to  the  quartermaster’s  department. 
The  immense  charities  established  here  upon  the  bounty  of  the  Gov- 
ernment are  being  reduced  to  the  lowest  possible  amount.  Trade  has 
been  cut  off  altogether  beyond  the  lines,  and  will  be,  so  far  as  allowed, 
general,  and  not  given  to  particular  individuals.  To  allay  the  fears  of 
many  classes  of  people  I published  the  President’s  proclamation  upon 
the  subject  of  emancipation,  accompanied  by  such  explanations  and  t 
orders  as  appeared  to  be  necessary.  I have  protected  the  people  as 
far  as  possible  from  the  plunder  of  their  property  for  the  benefit  of 
private  individuals,  and  have  sought  to  reconcile  them  to  the  Govern- 
ment, so  far  as  I could,  without  relaxing  in  the  slightest  degree  the 
rule  of  the  Government  in  those  matters  necessary  to  the  maintenance 
of  its  legitimate  authority.  Necessarily  I have  encountered  much  oppo- 
sition  from  those  interested  in  a different  policy,  but  the  general  result 
has  been  entirely  satisfactory.  The  new  year  opened  without  any  pub- 
lic disturbance,  and  the  planters  and  negroes  are  as  little  distressed 
as  at  any  time  since  our  occupation  of  the  city.  The  representatives 
of  foreign  governments  appear  to  be  satisfied.  Admiral  Reynaud, 
commanding  the  French  fleet  in  the  Southern  waters,  who  told  me  he 
came  here  apprehensive  of  trouble  and  to  protect  his  people,  departed 
before  New  Year’s  Day  with  an  expression  of  his  entire  satisfaction  | 
with  the  condition  of  affairs  here.  The  people  seem  to  be  well-dis- 
posed, and  were  it  not  for  the  temporary  encouragement  which  recent 
successes  have  given  the  rebellion  the  community  would  be  less  hostile  i 
than  those  of  Maryland  and  Virginia.  I do  not  observe  here  any  per- 
manent and  irreconcilable  elements  of  hostility  to  the  Government. 

In  military  matters  my  experience  is  less  satisfactory.  The  condi- 
tion of  the  troops  that  I find  here  shows  that  as  much,  or  more,  atten- 
tion has  been  given  to  civil  than  to  military  affairs.  This  has  been  in 
the  case  of  General  Butler  as  in  my  own,  to  which  I have  referred,  a 
matter  of  necessity.  The  complication  of  civil  administration  weakens 
the  force  and  power  of  the  military  department  of  the  Government  as 
a matter  of  course. 

The  troops  that  accompany  my  expedition  are  not  in  condition  for 
immediate  service.  They  are  all  new  troops,  most  of  them  never  hav- 
ing handled  a musket  until  their  arrival  here.  The  artillery  is  light, 
not  adapted  to  such  service  as  is  necessary  to  a successful  assault  upon 
the  fortifications  of  the  enemy  on  the  river.  With  30,000  troops  in 
the  department  I have  only  four  or  five  very  weak  companies  of  cav- 
alry. It  is  impossible  to  obtain  timely  information  of  the  movements 
of  the  enemy  under  such  circumstances  and  their  superiority  in  this 
arm  of  the  service  gives  them  great  advantage  and  greatly  depresses 
officers  and  men  of  my  command.  Every  possible  effort  is  making  to 
remedy  these  defects  in  the  military  organization. 

A battery  of  20-pounder  Parrott  guns  is  organizing.  I have  sent  to 
Pensacola  for  heavy  Parrott  guns  that  can  be  spared  from  that  post, 
and  I hope  soon  to  have  them  ready  for  service.  There  has  been  ample 
material  for  equipping  cavalry  in  this  department,  but  the  horses  all 
seem  to  have  been  appropriated  to  private  uses  or  sent  out  of  the 
country.  I am  endeavoring  to  extemporize  a small  cavalry  force  by 
finding  horses  wherever  I can  and  detailing  men  from  the  infantry 
service  for  that  duty,  and  I hope  my  efforts  may  be  successful.  The 
Oliemy’g  works  at  Port  Hudson  have  been  in  progress  many  months  and 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


641 


Chap.  XXV 11.] 

are  formidable.  Our  light  field  guns  would  make  no  impression  upon 

The  apparent  course  of  events  in  the  North  and  Northwest  make  me 
feel  some  anxiety  as  to  the  defenses  of  this  city.  The  garrisons  at  the 
forts  below  the  city  are  strengthened  by  additional  troops ; that  also 
at  Ship  Island  ; and  the  engineers  are  attending  to  the  defenses  of  the 
city  by  new  works  as  well  as  by  repairing  those  now  existing. 

The  enemy  is  concentrating  all  available  forces  on  the*  river,  and  in 
the  event  of  disasters  North  will  not  fail  to  turn  their  attention  to  this 

quarter.  , 

These  duties  do  not  withdraw  my  attention  from  affairs  up  the  river. 
There  are  12,000  troops  at  Baton  Bouge  under  General  Grover. 

The  brigade  organization  of  my  entire  command  is  inclosed,  and  rep- 
resents better  than  any  other  statement  the  strength  and  character  of 
my  command.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Department  of  State, 

Washington , January  7,  1863. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  and  to  invite  your  attention  to  a 
copy  of  a letter  of  the  13th  ultimo,  addressed  to  this  Department  by 
W.  F.  M.  Arny,  Secretary  and  Acting  Governor  of  the  Territory  of  New 
Mexico,  pointing  out  the  necessity  for  further  military  force  for  the  pro- 
tection of  that  Territory. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  H.  SEWABD. 


. [Inclosure.] 

Executive  Office, 

Santa  Fe,  A.  Mex.,  December  13,  1862. 

Hon.  W.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary , State  Department , Washington  City : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  a copy  of  my  message  to 
the  Legislature  of  this  Territory,*  and  I would  most  respectfully  invite 
your  attention  to  page  15,  and  again  urge  the  importance  of  additional 
troops  for  this  Territory. 

I am  reliably  informed  that  some  5,000  rebel  troops  from  Texas  are 
preparing  to  invade  New  Mexico,  with  the  intention  of  obtaining  pos- 
session of  this  Territory  and  Colorado,  and  then,  with  Utah  under  Brig- 
ham Young,  to  establish  a number  of  slave  States. 

The  present  war  originated  in  consequence  of  the  desire  of  the  South 
to  establish  slavery  in  the  Territories,  and  I am  fully  satisfied  that  they 
have  not  given  up  their  intention,  but  will  take  advantage  of  any  oppor- 
tunity to  accomplish  it.  And  I believe  that  when  our  troops  have  taken 
possession  of  the  coast  of  Texas  and  proceeded  into  the  interior  that  the 
rebels  will  retreat  into  this  and  Colorado  Territory,  and  to  save  this 


41  R R— VOL  XV 


Not  fouBd. 


642  w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

country  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  and  laid  waste  we 
should  be  fully  able  to  meet  and  repulse  them.  I have  therefore,  with 
the  concurrence  of  Brigadier-General  Oarleton,  commanding  this  de- 
partment, asked  the  Secretary  of  War  to  authorize  the  raising  of  two 
regiments  of  volunteers,  with  authority  to  recruit  them  either  m this 
Territory  or  Colorado.  As  I have  not  heard  from  that  Department,  you 
will  aid  us  and  probably  save  our  country  by  calling  the  attention  ot 
the  President  and  honorable  Secretary  of  War  to  this  subject  and  ob- 
taining for  us  the  order  desired.  , , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient -servant, 

W.  F.  M.  ABNY, 

Secretary  and  Acting  Governor  New  Mexico. 


New  Orleans,  January  7, 1863. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir  : By  the  last  mail  I forwarded  to  the  commanding  general  a dis- 
patch  received  at  the  moment  of  its  departure,  giving  a brief  account 
of  the  disaster  at  Galveston.  To-day  I send  the  full  reports  as  far  as 
received,  copies  of  which  will  also  be  forwarded  to  you,  and  also  a brief 
statement  of  the  condition  of  affairs  in  this  department,  military  and 

civil,  to  the  general- in- chief.  1TI 

I desire  to  call  your  attention  now  to  the  position  of  General  Hamil- 
ton, not  for  the  purpose  of  troubling  you  with  responsibilities  connected 
therewith,  which  I am  willing  to  assume  myself,  but  to  protect  my  ad- 
ministration  from  infamous  calumniations  propagated  by  men  on  his 
staff.  My  intercourse  with  the  general  has  been  pleasant.  He  is  not  a j 
bad  man,  but  lacks  decision  and  force  of  character.  I have  treated  him 
with  profound  respect  up  to  the  line  of  my  duty.  I did  not,  however, 
proclaim  to  him  nor  to  those  associated  with  him  my  destination,  they 
ascertained  that  for  the  first  time  when  we  were  in  New  Orleans.  On 
our  passage  I was  unable  to  attend  to  business,  and  passed  with  him 
only  such  courtesies  as  I was  able  to  offer  to  my  own  officers  and  to  my  j 
friends  on  board.  Upon  our  arrival  here  I immediately  gave  him  a full 
statement  of  my  orders  and  of  my  proposed  action.  He  was  entirely 
satisfied;  indeed  no  gentleman  could  have  been  dissatisfied,  so  lull, 
frank,  and  truthful  was  my  statement  of  my  duty  and  my  orders.  His 
impatience  and  the  violence  of  those  about  him  led  me  sooner  to  send  a 
detachment  of  troops  to  Galveston  than  I should  otherwise  have  done, 
and  is  immediately  the  cause  of  the  small  loss  the  army  has  sustained 
there.  This  was,  however,  upon  consultation  with  Admiral  Farragut 
and  General  Butler  and  the  fullest  confidence  that  our  troops  would 
be  safe  under  the  protection  of  the  fleet.  Al  . . 

General  Hamilton  is  surrounded  by  men  who  are  here  for  the  basest 
mercenary  purposes.  Disappointed  in  their  objects,  they  have  been 
unsparing  in  their  denunciations  of  the  Government,  and  especially  ot 
myself.  They  came  on  board  the  Government  transport  Illinois  with- 
out my  knowledge  and  against  my  orders,  and,  as  General  Hamilton 
has  said  to  me,  have  influence  over  him  in  consequence  of  pecuniary 
advances  made  to  him  while  in  the  North.  I desire  it  to  be  understood 
by  the  Government  that  any  representations  made  by  them  to  the  Gov- 
ernment or  the  people  will  be  at  least  only  a partial  statement  of  the 
truth,  if  they  be  not  entirely  false.  The  strongest  government  in  the 
world  would  break  down  under  such  a system  of  plunder  as  they  desire 


cr*p.  xxvn.] 


643 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

to  organize.  If  the  whole  State  were  for  the  Union  it  would  turn 
against  the  Government  if  the  purposes  of  such  men  were  tolerated. 

I know  the  difficulties  of  my  situation,  which  are  very  numerous  and 
very  great,  and  intend  to  do  my  duty  faithfully  while  here,  a duty  from 
which  I would,  in  the  failing  condition  of  my  health,  most  gladly  be 
relieved  5 but  I cannot  suffer  the  indecency,  falsehood,  and  corruption 
of  these  men  to  go  without  check.  You  need  not  be  surprised,  there- 
fore, if  they  are  ordered  to  leave  the  department. 

The  military  gentlemen  accompanying  General  Hamilton  sent  to  him 
by  Governor  Andrew  are  reputable  men.  They  were  greatly  disap- 
pointed when  they  learned  the  destination  of  my  expedition,  and  were 
severe,  if  not  greatly  unjust,  in  their  censures  upon  all  concerned.  My 
belief  is  that  their  opinion  concerning  Texan  affairs  is  essentially 
changed  since  the  recent  disaster. 

I am,  sir,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS. 


[January  7,  1863. — For  Banks  to  Halleck,  transmitting  correspond- 
ence with  French  and  Mexican  consulates,  see  Series  III,  Yol.  III.] 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  7.  f New  Orleans,  January  12,  1863. 

The  United  States  commission  of  relief  for  the  city  of  New  Orleans 
represents  to  the  commanding  general  “ that  the  necessities  of  the  poor 
are  as  urgent  to-day  as  at  any  former  period.”  Assessments  upon 
property  furnish  at  this  time  the  only  means  for  the  relief  of  this  class 
of  people,  and  those  who  have  publicly  and  voluntarily  contributed 
financial  aid,  advice,  and  example  to  destroy  public  peace  and  deprive 
the  poor  of  the  means  of  employment  and  support  may  be  justly  re- 
quired to  relieve  their  wants  and  solace  their  suffering. 

For  this  reason  and  purpose  the  commanding  general  confirms  the 
assessments  levied  by  General  Orders,  No.  105,  dated  December  9, 
1862,  and  requires  prompt  payment  thereof.  Col.  S.  B.  Holabird,  chief 
quartermaster,  is  charged  with  the  execution  of  this  order. 

Property  thus  applied  will  be  a subject  of  equitable  consideration 
hereafter.  Is  is  believed  that  a liberal  extension  of  trade,  by  furnish- 
ing employment  to  labor,  will  relieve  the  public  from  further  involun- 
tary contributions  for  the  support  of  the  poor.  The  funds  will  be  ap- 
propriated exclusively  to  public  charity,  their  disbursement  closely 
scrutinized,  and  every  possible  care  taken  to  limit  expenditures  to  the 
indigent  and  worthy.  A commission  representing  private  and  public 
interests  is  charged  with  the  investigation  of  the  subject,  and  its  re- 
port will  be  made  public  forthwith. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks  : 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  8.  j New  Orleans , January  12,  1863. 

Upon  the  report  of  the  commission*  appointed  on  the  25th  day  of  De- 


Not  found. 


644  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xxvn. 

cember,  1862,  to  consider  the  subject  of  sequestered  property  and  es- 

tates,  it  is  ordered : , 

I.  ko  further  seizures  of  property  will  be  made,  except  upon  claims  tor 
debts  due  the  Government,  without  orders  from  these  headquarters. 

II.  The  commission  will  sell  at  public  auction  all  property  in  its  pos- 
session that  has  not  been  or  may  not  be  claimed  or  released,  except 
such  as  may  be  required  for  the  use  of  the  army,  and  turn  over  the  pro- 
ceeds thereof  to  the  chief  quartermaster,  subject  to  further  orders. 

The  commission  will  cause  to  be  sold  as  it  may  deem  best  the  crops 
of  any  plantations  worked  under  permits  from  the  Government  and 
pay  over  to  the  parties  working  them  a part  of  the  proceeds,  not  ex- 
ceeding one-fourth,  until  after  the  commission  is  satisfied  that  their 
contracts  have  been  properly  carried  out,  and  take  such  other  measures 
in  regard  to  such  plantations  as  may  be  necessary,  not  involving  tne 
Government  in  any  expense  beyond  its  interest  in  the  crops. 

III.  Persons  working  plantations  under  orders  from  the  Government 
will  account  to  the  commission  herein  named  for  the  whole  cropland  the 
proceeds  to  which  the  Government  is  entitled,  when  realized  by  the  com- 
mission,  are  to  be  added  to  the  fund  in  the  hands  of  duaxtermaster 

IV  All  supplies  in  the  hands  ot  commercial  agencies  in  the  city  or 
country  will  be  sold  as  speedily  as  practicable,  the  receipts  to  ^ ap- 
plied to  the  payment  of  salaries  of  agents,  who  will  be  discharged  and 
paid,  and  the  balance  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  quartermaster.  Churns 
of  the  Government  upon  crops  for  supplies  advanced  to  planters  and 
other  parties  will  be  collected  forthwith,  and  all  unsettled  claims  will 
be  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  chief  quartermaster  for  collection. 

V.  Abandoned  estates  may  be  placed  in  the  charge  of ^jerseers  or 
other  persons  upon  such  terms  and  conditions  as  to  profits  and  labo 
as  may  be  deemed  just  and  expedient  by  the  commission  upon  full 
consideration  of  the  rights  of  the  Government  and  all  other  parties  in 

inyi.  All  property,  real  or  personal,  liable  to  confiscation  under  the 
acts  of  Congress,  will,  upon  proper  representation  and  complaint,  as 
provided  by  law,  be  adjudicated  and  disposed  of  by  the  order  of  the 
district  court  provisionally  established  by  the  President  m pursuance 

of  the  acts  du»ts  of  the  country  sent  to  the  city  of  New’  0r^a^  ia 
o-ood  faith  may  be  sold  at  market  prices  by  the  proprietors  or  then- 
factors  for  legal  currency  of  the  United  States,  without  restriction  o 
confiscation.  Planters  will  find  it  for  their  interest  to  forward  their 
crops  to  New  Orleans  rather  than  to  dispose  of  them  on  the  piautations. 

VIII  Plantation  supplies  and  other  articles  not  contraband  of  war, 
necessary  to  the  working  of  estates  or  the  support  of  loyal  persons,  may 
be  purchased  in  open  market  by  planters  or  agents  m quantities  not  in- 
consistent with  the  interests  and  safety  of  the  Government,  for  con- 
sumption within  the  lines  of  the  army,  upon  the  approval  and  order  of 
the  commission  herein  named.  This  privilege  is  accorded  to  we  al1^ 
posed  persons  as  a measure  of  relief.  Its  execution  will  be  closely 
scrutinized,  and  its  abuse  will  be  summarily  Pushed  with  the  most 
rigorous  severity  known  to  military  law.  Officers  of  the  army 
directed  and  naval  and  civil  officers  are  requested  to  assist  m enforcing 
the  faithful  observance  of  this  order.  . „ . 

TX  OohE.G. Beckwith, chief  commissary;  Lieut.  Col. U.H.  btrotner, 
aide-de-camp,  and  Oapt.  W.  Sturgis  Hooper, t aide-de-camp,  are  charged 


- Substituted  for  Major  Bell,  December  25,  1862. 
t Substituted  for  Colonel  Kinsman,  December  25,  loW, 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

with  the  responsibilities  and  duties  of  the  commission  herein  named  from 
and  after  this  day. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : g mwlN) 

Lieutenant-Colonel , Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  ) 
No.  12.  f 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , January  12,  1863. 


IY.  The  following-named  regiments  are  organized  into  brigades  as 
follows,  and  will  constitute  a division,  to  be  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen. 
Christopher  C.  Augur.  Orders  for  their  concentration  will  be  issued 

hereafter:  ^ _ 7 „ ~ 

First  Brigade , to  be  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  M^chael  Corcoran.— One 
hundred  and  seventieth  New  York,  Colonel  McDermott,  not  arrived ; 
Sixty-ninth  New  York  [One  hundred  and  eighty-second],  Colonel  Mur- 
phy, not  arrived:  One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  New  York,  Colonel 
Bryan,  part  at  Carrollton ; One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  New  York,  not 

arrived ; One  hundred  and  sixty -fourth  New  York. 

Second  Brigade . to  be  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  Godfrey  Weitzel.  Sev- 
enty-fifth New  York,  Colonel  Merritt,  La  Fourche;  One  hundred  and 
sixtieth  New  York,  Colonel  Dwight,  La  Fourche ; Twelfth  Connecticut, 
Colonel  Dealing,  La  Fourche;  First  Louisiana,  Colonel  Holcomb,  Don- 
aldson ville;  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  New  York,  Col.  E.  B.  Smith, 

Third  Brigade , to  be  commanded  by  Col.  N.  A.  M.  Dudley , Thirtieth 
Massachusetts  Volunteers.— Ninety-first  New  York,  Col.  Van  Zandt,  Ba- 
ton Rouge;  Second  Louisiana,  Colonel  Paine,  Baton  Rouge;  Fiftieth 
Massachusetts,  Colonel  Messer,  not  arrived;  One  hundred  and  sixty- 
first  New  York,  Colonel  Harrower,  Baton  Rouge; 

Colonel  Dudley  will  proceed  without  delay  to  Baton  Rouge  and  as- 
sume command  of  his  brigade.  , , 

V.  The  portion  of  Emory’s  division  now  at  Carrollton  will  be  held 
in  readiness  to  proceed  to  Baton  Rouge  at  short  notice  upon  receipt 
of  orders  to  that  effect. 

******* 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

[RICH’D  B.  IRWIN,] 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Department, 
Washington , January  13,  1863 — 2.30  p.  m. 


Brig.  Gen.  G.  L.  Andrews,  New  Yorlc  : 

Transports  for  General  Banks’  army  will  be  sent  direct  to  New 
Orleans,  following  the  sailing  directions  given  by  the  Quartermaster  s 


Department. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 


General-in-  Chief. 


646 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

War  Department, 
Washington , January  13,  1863. 


Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe , Va. : 

All  transports  and  store-sliips  intended  for  General  Banks  will  pro- 


ceed to  New  Orleans  and  report  to  him. 


H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Few  Orleans , January  13,  1863. 

# * * * * 


Special  Orders, 


No.  13. 


X.  The  following-named  regiments  are  organized  into  brigades  as 
follows,  and  will  constitute  a division,  to  be  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen. 
Thomas  W.  Sherman: 

First  Brigade , to  he  commanded  hy  Brig.  Gen.  Neal  Bow. — Sixth  JYlicin- 
gan,  Colonel  Clark,  temporarily  with  Weitzel ; One  hundred  and  twenty- 
eighth  New  York,  Colonel  Cowles,  Chalmette;  Twenty-sixth  Connecti- 
cut, Colonel  Kingsley,  Carrollton;  Fifteenth  New  Hampshire,  Colonel 

Kingman,  Carrollton.  . 

Second  Brigade , to  he  commanded  for  the  present  hy  the  senior  colonel,— 
Twenty-sixth  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Farr,  custom-house ; Forty-seventh 
Massachusetts,  Colonel  Marsh,  barracks;  Forty-second  Massachusetts, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Stedman,  and  one  regiment  to  be  hereafter  desig- 

' Third  Brigade , to  he  commanded  hy  the  senior  colonel.— Fourteenth 
Maine,  Colonel  Nickerson,  Bonnet  Carre;  One  hundred  and  seventy- 
seventh  New  York,  Colonel  Ainsworth,  Bonnet  Carr6;  One  hundred 
and  sixty-fifth  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  Abel  Smith,  Carrollton,  and  one 
regiment  to  be  hereafter  designated. 

The  Second  Brigade  will  be  stationed  for  the  present  m New  Orleans. 
The  Ninth  Connecticut  is  temporarily  assigned  to  it. 


By  command  of  Major-General  Banks:  n 

J J [RICH’D  B.  IRWIN,] 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  January  15,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  Washington , B.  C. : 


*See  reports,  p.  234. 


Chap.  XX VII. ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


647 


One  hundred  and  fourteenth  New  York,  Twenty-third  Connecticut, 
and  Sixth  Michigan,  with  two  sections  of  Bainbridge’s  regular  battery, 
were  sent  by  rail  to  his  assistance,  thus  enabling  him  to  move  against 
the  enemy  with  a force  which  we  estimate  at  4,500  infantry  and  three 
batteries  of  light  artillery.  These  operations  have  for  their  purpose 
the  control  of  the  water  communications  and  approaches  to  the  Red 
River,  which  will  become  of  great  importance  to  us  as  soon  as  We  are 
prepared  to  move  against  Port  Hudson  for  the  reduction  of  that  posi- 
tion. 

We  have  reports  from  above,  through  rebel  sources  principally,  that 
the  operations  against  Vicksburg  have  been  abandoned. 

Major-General  Augur  has  taken  command  of  Baton  Rouge. 

To  General  Sherman  I have  confided  the  command  of  the  defenses 
of  this  city.  For  active  operations  the  troops  are  organized  into  four 
divisions,' commanded  respectively  by  Major-General  Augur  and  Brig- 
adier-Generals Sherman,  Emory,  and  Grover. 

There  have  been  but  one  or  two  arrivals  of  troops  from  the  North 
recently,  and  those  have  comprised  only  small  detachments.  I had 
hoped  that  the  remainder  of  the  expedition  would  have  joined  us  ere 
this.  To  be  effective  for  offensive  operations  we  need  them  all  now. 

I trust  that  at  least  Generals  Andrews,  Dwight,  and  Bowen  may  be 
ordered  to  join  me  without  delay,  and  that  the  Second  Massachusetts 
Cavalry,  battalion  of  Rhode  Island,  squadron  of  New  Hampshire, 
squadron  of  Maine,  and  battalion  of  Metropolitan  (New  York)  Cavalry 
may  be  sent  forward  without  fail  and  at  the  earliest  practicable  moment. 
This  is  of  vital  importance,  as  the  almost  total  deficiency  of  cavalry  in 
this  department  renders  us  almost  helpless  either  for  offensive  or  de- 
fensive operations. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


[In  closure.] 

Statement  made  by  S.  H.  Partridge,  acting  master  of  the  Hatteras: 

Was  on  board  of  the  steamer  Hatteras,  off  Galveston,  at  about  3 p.  m.  Sunday, 
January  11,  when  a vessel  hove  in  sight  southeast.  We  were  signaled  from  the 
Brooklyn  to  give  chase.  As  we  came  in  sight  she  appeared  as  if  endeavoring  to  escape. 
Just  before  dark  was  able  to  discover  that  she  was  bark -rigged.  She  set  a top-gallant 
sail.  After  dark  we  gained  rapidly,  and  when  we  came  near  found  her  lying  to  under 
steam.  We  had  been  at  quarters  twenty  minutes.  As  we  came  up  Mr.  Blake  hailed 
and  asked  what  ship  it  was.  She  answered,  “Her  Britannic  Majesty’s  ship  Spitfire.” 
CaptaiD  Blake  said,  “I  will  send  a boat  on  board.”  Boat  being  lowered,  I was  ordered 
to  take  charge  and  board.  Before  we  were  one-half  boat’s  length  away  from  the  side 
the  stranger  opened  fire.  It  was  returned  by  the  Hatteras,  and  both  started  ahead 
under  a full  head  of  steam,  exchanging  broadsides,  as  fast  as  they  could  load  and 
fire,  for  about  twenty  minutes,  with  big  guns,  and  then  with  musketry  from  both 
vessels.  All  this  time  I had  been  endeavoring  to  board  my  vessel  again,  but  could 
not  come  up.  After  musketry  ceased  I discovered  that  the  Hatteras  was  stopped  and 
blowing  off  steam,  with  the  enemy  alongside  for  the  purpose  of  boarding.  Heard  the 
enemy  cheering  and  knew  that  the  Hatteras  had  been  captured,  and  thought  it  was 
no  use  to  give  myself  up  as  prisoner,  and  rowed  back  toward  the  fleet,  under  cover 
of  darkness,  in  hopes  of  giving  information  of  the  affair.  The  Brooklyn  went  out  the 
next  day  and  found  the  Hatteras  sunk. 

The  United  States  steamer  Hatteras  was  captured  and  sunk  on  Sun- 
day evening,  about  16  miles  south  of  Galveston,  by  the  rebel  pirate 
290.  Our  Texas  traitors  are  concentrating  a large  force  on  Galveston 

Island. 

JESSE  STANCEL, 
Lieutenant- Colonel  First  Texas. 


648 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap>XXVH. 

Engineer  Office,  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , January  15,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department : 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  order  to  report  the  condition  in  which  I 
find  my  department  in  this  city  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  follow- 
ing : 

General  Butler  had  had  no  officer  of  either  corps  of  engineers  upon 
his  staff  for  three  or  four  months  prior  to  our  arrival,  and  this  branch 
of  the  service  was  in  great  confusion.  , 

No  organized  system  of  reconnaissance  with  troops  existed,  anu  tne 
few  maps  and  sketches  to  be  found  in  the  department  were  mostly  scat- 
tered among  the  different  brigade  headquarters  or  filed  away  where 
they  were  of  no  general  use.  No  means  of  multiplying  copies  existed. 

For  making  surveys  within  our  lines  Mr.  W.  H.  Wilder,  a civil  en- 
gineer of  this  city,  was  employed,  at  the  rate  of  $20  a day,  with  twenty- 
three  assistants,  several  of  whom  received  $5  a day.  Mr.  Wilder 
supplied  the  department  with  maps  claimed  to  be  based  on  original 
surveys,  when  some  of  them  at  least  were  chiefly  compiled  from  pub- 
lished maps.  His  loyalty  is  not  above  suspicion,  since  I have  a map 
dedicated  by  him  to  u L.  Pope  W alker,  Secretary  of  War.”  My  first 
act  was  to  discharge  this  man  and  his  party. 

My  department  is  now  well  organized.  I have  about  a dozen  civil 
assistants,  carefully  selected  (rate  of  pay  $4  per  day),  some  of  whom 
are  attached  to  the  headquarters  of  independent  commands,  to  perform 
any  assigned  engineer  duty ; others  are  employed  in  surveys  and  recon- 
naissances under  my  immediate  direction,  and  the  rest  engaged  m pre- 
parin0,  maps  in  the  office.  I have  a photographic  establishment, 
which  these  maps  may  be  rapidly  multiplied  for  distribution,  either  on 
the  original  or  on  a reduced  scale.  I have  a large  collection  of  maps 
and  books  by  which  detailed  information  can  readily  be  obtained  rela- 
tive to  any  designated  part  of  the  department,  and  I have  submitted  a 
project  of  a plan  by  which  the  efficiency  of  this  branch  of  ray  duty  may 
be  still  further  increased. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENEY  L.  ABBOT, 

Captain  and  Chief  of  Topographical  Engineers. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office, 

Neic  Orleans , January  15,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks,  ^ ^ 7 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans: 

General  : In  reply  to  your  communication  requiring  a statement  as 
to  the  condition  of  the  inspector- general’s  department  I have  the  honor 

to  report  as  follows : , . ^ _ , . • 

The  office  of  inspector-general  was  not  created  m the  Department  oi 
the  Gulf  until  November  10, 1862,  when  Colonel  Dudley,  Thirtieth  Mas- 
sachusetts Volunteers,  was  detailed  for  the  position.  He  gave  his  per- 
sonal attention  to  the  important  duties  of  his  position,  and  from  reports 
made  by  him  I find  that  the  old  regiments  in  the  department  have  been 
much  reduced  by  the  diseases  incident  to  the  climate  and  the  efficiency 
of  regiments  much  impaired  by  detailing  officers  to  fill  civil 
This  last  cause  of  inefficiency  is  particularly  noticeable  in  the  Twelfth 
Eegiment  Connecticut  Volunteers : 


Chap.  XXVli.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  649 

Of  the  field  officers  the  major  only  was  present.  The  colonel  is  acting  mayor  of  New 
Orleans,  and  the  lieutenant-colonel  is  the  president  of  the  New  Orleans  and  Opelousas 
Railroad.  Of  the  staff  the  chaplain  only  was  present.  The  adjutant  was  sick ; quar- 
termaster under  arrest;  the  senior  surgeon  detached  to  take  charge  of  Saint  James 
Hospital  in  New  Orleans,  and  the  assistant  surgeon  was  on  duty  at  the  regimental 
hospital.  (Colonel  Dudley’s  Report.) 

The  forts  for  the  protection  of  the  city  have  been  sadly  neglected. 

Eeports  of  inspection  made  of  Forts  Macomb  and  Pike,  on  the  2d  and 
3d  of  December,  1862,  by  Colonel  Dudley,  exhibit  a criminal  neglect  of 
those  important  posts.  They  are  poorly  supplied  with  implements  for 
working  the  guns  and  very  deficient  in  ammunition. 

I relieved  Colonel  Dudley  on  the  19th  of  December,  1862,  and  com- 
menced a thorough  inspection  of  the  new  regiments.  I have  not  seen 
one  fit  to  take  the  field.  The  ignorance  of  officers  is  lamentable.  In 
one  instance  the  lieutenant-colonel  commanding  Fifteenth  New  Hamp- 
shire Volunteers  admitted  that  he  could  not  give  the  commands  to 
pass  his  regiment  in  review.  The  colonel  of  another  regiment  (Forty- 
seventh  Massachusetts)  executed  the  same  movement  in  such  a style 
that  it  was  humiliating  to  witness  it. 

The  efficiency  of  several  regiments  is  destroyed  by  their  miserable 
arms.  The  Fifteenth  New  Hampshire  had  the  old  flint-lock  musket 
altered  to  percussion.  The  arms  had  been  much  used;  many  could  not 
be  cocked.  Quite  a number  had  the  hammers  off,  and  the  bayonets  did 

not  fit  the  pieces.  _ 

The  Forty-seventh  Massachusetts  have  the  Austrian  rifle,  made  ol 
poor  material  and  badly  constructed.  I examined  eight  hundred  of 
these  rifles  and  I do  not  consider  one  hundred  serviceable. 

The  Sixteenth  New  Hampshire  have  the  Vincennes  rifle.  Twenty 
per  cent,  are  defective.  In  one  company  seventeen  were  found  that 
would  not  snap  a cap.  Even  if  the  drill  of  such  regiments  was  perfect 
they  could  not  be  relied  on. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ 8 ’ WM.  S.  ABERT, 

Lieutenant-Colonel , Assistant  Inspector- General. 


Office  Chief  of  Artillery,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf, 

January  15,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

General  : Agreeably  to  your  request  of  last  evening,  calling  for  a 
brief  statement  of  the  condition  of  the  artillery  in  this  department,  1 
have  the  honor  to  state  on  my  assuming  charge  of  this  office  I was  un- 
able to  procure  any  information  whatever  of  the  condition  of  the  artil- 
lery belonging  to  General  Butler’s  command.  From  statements  since 
received  I am  of  the  opinion  that  none  of  the  batteries  belonging  to 
that  command  are  in  a condition  to  take  the  field  efficiently,  and  t lie 
want  of  the  most  essential  parts  for  their  equipment  precludes  the 
possibility  of  preparing  them  properly  for  some  time  to  come. 

In  regard  to  the  artillery  assigned  to  your  expedition,  but  one  battery 
has  arrived  here.  The  horses  and  the  greater  part  of  the  ordnance 
stores  for  the  same  are  also  due.  Under  these  circumstances  1 of 
the  opinion  that  it  must  be  exceedingly  hazardous,  if  not  impossible,  to 
make  any  offensive  movements  at  this  time,  so  far  as  pertains  to  the 
present  state  of  my  department.  A circular  has  been  issued  from  this 


650 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII.  ; 

office  to  the  commanders  of  batteries  calling  for  an  inventory  of  ord- 
nance  and  ordnance  stores  on  hand,  and  directing  requisitions  to  be  j 
made  out  for  all  the  articles  necessary  to  place  them  in  a perfect  state  ! 
of  efficiency.  These  will  be  filled  as  rapidly  as  the  Chief  of  Ordnance 
can  meet  the  demands,  and  no  exertion  will  be  wanting  on  my  part  to 
have  the  artillery  force. ready  for  field  service  at  the  earliest  possible 
moment. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

‘ EICHAED  AENOLD, 

Captain , Fifth  Artillery , Chief  of  Artillery. 

Note. — I would  add  in  reference  to  siege  operations  that  there  are  no 
guns  whatever  here  suitable  for  the  purpose.  They  can  probably  be  i 
obtained  at  some  of  the  forts  along  the  coast,  but  the  procuring  and 
transporting  them  to  this  place  and  the  organization  of  a siege  train 
will  require  some  weeks  at  least. 

E.  A. 


Office  of  the  Chief  of  Artillery, 
Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , January  15,  1865. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

General  : Agreeably  to  your  request  I have  the  honor  to  present 
the  following  statement,  exhibiting  the  strenglh,  distribution,  and  com- 
position of  the  artillery  force  serving  within  this  department,  arranged 
under  the  following  heads,  viz  : 

LIST  OF  MOUNTED  BATTERIES. 


Commander’s  name,  company,  and  station. 

Nature  of  ordnance  and  caliber  of  each. 

Capt.  R.  C.  Duryea,  Company  F,  1st  U.  S.  Artil- 
lery, and  one  section  of  Company  A,  1st  U.  S. 
Artillery,  Carrollton  road. 

First  Lieut.  J.  B.  Eawles,  Company  G-,  5th.  U.  S. 

Artillery,  Tivoli  Circle,  New  Orleans. 

Capt.  P.  E.  Holcomb,  2d  Vermont  Battery,  Fac- 
tors’ Press,  New  Orleans. 

Captain  Mack,  18th  New  York  Artillery,  Annun- 
ciation Square,  New  Orleans. 

Capt.  Henry  W.  Closson,  Company  L,  1st  U.  S. 
Artillery,  Baton  Rouge. 

First  Lieut.  J ohn  I.  Rodgers,  Company  C,  2d  U.  S. 
Artillery,  Baton  Rouge. 

Capt.  0.  F.  Nims,  2d  Massachusetts  Battery,  Baton 
Rouge. 

Capt.  E.  C.  Bainbridge,  Company  A,  1st  U.  S. 
Artillery,  Berwick  Bay. 

Captain  Thompson,  1st  Maine  Battery,  Thibo- 
deaux. 

Capt.  W.  W.  Carruth,  6th  Massachusetts  Bat- 
tery, Thibodeaux. 

Six  12-pounder  Napoleon  guns,  two  3-inch  rifles  ; 4 
commissioned  officers,  143  enlisted  men. 

Six  12-pounder  Napoleon  guns ; 2 commissioned 
officers,  127  enlisted  men. 

Two  6-pounder  Sawyer  guns,  two  12-pounder 

howitzers,  two  3-inch  guns;  commissioned 

officers, enlisted  men. 

Six  20-pounder  Parrott  rifles. 

Four  12-pounder  Napoleon  guns,  two  10-pounder 
Parrott  rifles  ; 4 commissioned  officers,  122  en- 
listed men. 

Four  12-pounder  Napoleon  guns,  two  3-inch  rifle 

guns;  commissioned  officers,  enlisted 

men. 

Six  6-pounder  rifle  guns ; 5 commissioned  officers, 
122  enlisted  men. 

Two  12-pounder  Napoleon  guns,  two  3-inch  rifle 
guns;  6 commissioned  officers,  131  enlisted  men. 

Four  6-pounder  rifled  bronze  guns,  three  12-pound- 
er howitzers ; 5 commissioned  officers,  138  en- 
listed men. 

Four  6-pounder  Sawyer  guns,  two  12-pounder 
howitzers ; 5 commissioned  officers,  144  enlisted 
men. 

Besides  the  above  there  is  a section  of  Captain  Trull’s  Fourth  Mas- 
sachusetts Battery,  mounted,  with  two  12-pounder  rifle  guns,  and  sta- 
tioned at  Berwick  Bay  j also  the  Twenty-first  Indiana  Battery,  made 


Chap.  XXVIL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


651 


up  from  men  selected  from  that  regiment,  and  furnished  with  three 
C-pounder  guns,  captured  from  the  enemy  previous  to  the  battle  of 
Baton  Rouge. 

All  of  the  above  batteries,  with  the  exception  of  the  Eighteenth  New 
York,  Captain  Mack,  were  mounted  previous  to  my  arrival  in  the  city, 
and  I am  informed,  though  not  fully  equipped,  are  in  a condition  to 
perform  field  service.  Many  of  the  requisitions  sent  to  the  ordnance 
department  have  not  been  filled,  owing  to  the  non-arrival  of  the  stores 
now  overdue.  A circular  has  been  issued  from  this  office  to  the  com- 
manders of  batteries,  calling  for  an  inventory  of  the  ordnance  and  ord- 
nance stores  on  hand,  and  directing  requisitions  to  be  made  out  for  all 
the  articles  necessary  to  place  them  in  a perfect  state  of  efficiency. 
These  will  be  filled  as  rapidly  as  the  Chief  of  Ordnance  can  meet  the 
demand. 


LIST  OF  LOOT  COMPANIES  OF  ARTILLERY. 


Commander’s  name,  company,  and  station. 

Nature  of  ordnance  and  caliber  of  each. 

Capt.  Harvey  A.  Allen,  Company  K,  2d  TJ.  S.  Artil- 
lery. Fort  Pickens. 

Capt.  Frank  Larned,  Company  H,  2d  TJ.  S.  Ar- 
tillery, Fort  Barrancas. 

Capt.  George G.  Trull,  4th  Massachusetts  Battery, 
Fort  Pike. 

Capt.  George  W.  Duncan,  1st  Vermont  Battery, 
Camp  Parapet. 

Garrison  duty. 

Do. 

Do. 

Two  6-pounder  rifled  guns,  two  6-pounder  guns, 
two  6-pounder  howitzers. 

From  which  it  will  be  seen  there  are  ten  complete  mounted  batteries, 
one  company  of  infantry  acting  as  such,  with  three  guns,  and  a section 
of  the  Fourth  Massachusetts  mounted. 

So  long  as  Pensacola  is  hel$  by  our  forces  I could  not  recommend 
the  moving  of  the  artillery  companies  at  Forts  Pickens  and  Barrancas. 
I would,  however,  suggest,  as  soon  as  their  services  can  be  dispensed 
with,  the  ordering  of  Captain  Duncan  at  Camp  Parapet  and  Captain 
Trull’s  company  at  Fort  Pike  to  this  city  to  be  mounted. 

The  Twenty-first,  Twenty-fifth,  and  Twenty  sixth  New  York  Batteries 
are  now  on  the  way  to  this  city  on  vessels  containing  artillery  horses. 
On  their  arrival,  should  it  be  your  desire,  they  can  be  at  once  organized 
and  equipped,  which  will  give  a total  of  fifteen  batteries  and  ninety 
pieces  of  artillery  of  various  calibers  in  preparation  for  assignment  to 
the  divisions  of  the  corps. 

In  conclusion,  I would  suggest  as  a basis  of  organization  of  the  artil- 
lery for  field  operations  the  assignment  of  three  batteries  to  each  divis- 
ion, under  the  direct  orders  of  the  division  commanders,  to  be  composed 
as  follows:  One  battery  of  six  12-pounder  Napoleon  guns,  one  of  six 
rifles,  and  a mixed  battery  of  four  smooth-bore  and  two  rifles.  This, 
in  my  opinion,  will  give  the  best  proportion  and  most  efficient  combi- 
nation for  both  combined  and  separate  operations,  due  reference  being 
had  to  the  artillery  of  reserve.  Should  this  arrangement  meet  with 
your  approval  I will  furnish  a list  of  the  batteries  arranged  for  each 
division. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

RICHARD  ARNOLD, 
Captain , Fifth  Artillery , Chief  of  Artillery. 


652 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S:  MTSS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , January  15,  1863.  j 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf: 

General:  There  is  now  working  in  this  department  316  miles  of; 
telegraph,  constituting  five  separate  lines  radiating  from  New  Orleans. 

Of  the  above  57  miles  have  been  added  since  you  assumed  command 
of  the  department.  The  whole  of  this  is  working  well,  but  the  condi- 
tion is  not  satisfactory,  owing  chiefly  to  the  temporary  character  of 
repairs.  There  is  no  material  in  this  department  to  repair  old  or  build 
new  lines  except  pieces  of  old  and  mutilated  telegraphs,  and  all  that! 
has  been  received  here  since  the  occupation  of  this  city  are  instruments, 
which  will  not  exceed  $200  in  value.  We  shall  hardly  get  old  material; 
enough  to  finish  the  line  to  Donaldsonville,  a distance  of  about  5 miles. 
I exceedingly  regret  that  until  we  are  in  receipt  of  material  it  will  be 
impossible  to  push  the  lines  forward  to  desired  points. 

The  city  police  and  fire  telegraphs  are  not  included  in  foregoing. 
Repairs  are  now  going  forward  which  will  render  them  entirely  reliable. 
This  (city)  department  is  well  supplied  with  instruments  and  material, 
the  entire  expense  of  which  is  borne  by  the  city  government  of  New 
Orleans. 

I respectfully  submit  the  above,  and  have  the  honor  to  subscribe  my- 
self, your  most  obedient  servant, 

’ J OHAS.  S.  BULKLEY, 

Assistant  Superintendent  U.  S.  Military  Telegraphs. 


New  Orleans,  January  15, 1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  a report  of  the  number 
and  approximate  strength  of  the  various  cavalry  companies  in  this  de- 
partment. 

The  maximum  number  of  mounted  and  equipped  men  now  in  the  field 
cannot  exceed  635,  or  the  one-eightieth  of  the  entire  army.  As  these 
are  scattered  at  various  posts  and  are  insufficient  for  vedette  duty,  all 
expeditions  and  reconnaissances  must  needs  be  carried  on  by  infantry, 
while  no  country  presents  a fairer  field  for  the  employment  of  cavalry 
than  this  State.  It  is  level ; all  tracts  which  are  dry,  having  been  tilled, 
are  free  from  obstacles,  whilst  the  swamps  are  alike  impassable  for  the 
three  arms. 

Should  the  Mississippi,  which  is  rapidly  rising,  break  through  one  ol 
the  many  weak  points  in  the  levees  and  spread  over  the  country  to  the 
depth  only  of  one  foot,  our  infantry  would  necessarily  be  confined  to  the 
camps,  and  the  parishes  where  the  inhabitants  have  taken  the  oath  oi 
allegiance  left  open  to  the  raids  of  the  enemy’s  mounted  force,  which, 
according  to  report,  amounts  to  several  thousand.  With  a moderate 
proportional  cavalry  force  expeditions  and  aggression  might  be  simulta- 
neously made  against  the  enemy’s  line  of  operations  on  Port  Hudson  and 
Clinton  and  New  Orleans  and  Jackson  Railroad,  as  also  in  the  Opelousas 
country,  where  the  rebel  Legislature  is  in  session. 

Want  of  horses  is  the  only  obstacle  to  the  proposed  plan  of  selecting 
a small  percentum  of  good  horsemen  from  the  infantry  regiments  for  a 
provisional  cavalry.  Owing  to  the  season  of  the  year  the  risk  is  great 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


653 


in  shipping  horses,  and  owing  to  requirements  for  the  army  in  Virginia, 
the  delays  in  purchasing,  transportation,  &c.,  months  must  elapse  be- 
fore horses  can  be  procured  from  the  North. 

I have  visited  the  agricultural  districts  within  our  lines,  and  have 
taken  all  available  horses  to  the  number  of  125.  No  greater  number 
can  be  procured  without  distressing  poor  families.  Even  in  many  in- 
stances I gave  them  a mule  in  exchange. 

I am  informed  that  several  hundred  animals  fit  for  cavalry,  and  which 
are  merely  used  as  objects  of  luxury  and  convenience,  can  be  found  in 
this  city.  Many  of  the  owners  of  the  same  will  not  willingly  dispose  of 
them  at  any  price  to  forward  the  interests  of  the  United  States  Army. 

Although  the  supply  of  arms  and  equipments  is  limited,  a sufficient 
number  for  1,600  men  may  be  daily  expected  and  can  be  had  by  further 
requisition  in  thirty  days. 

In  interim  saddles  may  be  purchased  here,  confiscated  shot-guns 
substituted  for  carbines,  and  the  want  of  sabers  met  by  the  adoption  of 
the  lance,  of  which  one  thousand  can  be  manufactured  per  week  by  the 
artisans  in  the  quartermaster’s  department. 

The  prospects  of  recruiting  more  companies  for  the  Louisiana  Cavalry 
are  fair. 

Most  respectfully,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

H.  EOBINSON, 

Major , &c. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , January  15,  1863. 


General  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

General  : In  compliance  with  your  request  of  the  14th  instant,  for 
a brief  statement  of  the  condition  in  which  I find  my  department  in  this 
city,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following : 

From  Major  Strong,  whom  I relieved  as  adjutant-general  of  the  de- 
partment, and  Captain  Davis,  his  assistant,  I received  all  assistance  and 
explanation  that  I found  it  necessary  to  ask  up  to  the  time  of  their  de- 
parture. 

The  record  books  required  by  the  regulations  of  the  Adjutant-General’s 
Department  have  been  properly  kept,  with  the  exception  of  the  register 
of  letters  received.  I do  not  understand  the  principle  on  which  this  book 
has  been  kept.  It  contains  entries  of  but  a small  number  of  letters. 
Hardly  a paper  which  has  been  inquired  for  can  be  found  on  it.  The 
files  have  been  very  imperfectly  kept.  There  is  not  a trace  in  my  office 
of  many  of  the  most  important  papers. 

There  are  no  records  or  papers  relating  to  the  large  number  of  pris- 
oners confined  in  the  various  forts,  &c.,  except  a small  package,  which 
was  handed  to  me  by  General  Butler  himself.  I am  informed  that 
many  of  the  records  and  papers  were  kept  under  General  Butler’s  per- 
sonal direction  and  not  considered  as  pertaining  to  the  adjutant  gen - 
| eral’s  department. 

I found  no  account  of  the  disposition  of  the  troops.  No  return  of  the 
department  had  been  made  out  since  March.  One  for  the  month  of 
September  was  completed  after  our  arrival,  but  I could  not  use  it  for 
current  purposes. 

The  subordinate  commanders  seem  to  have  made  returns  or  not  at 


654 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

their  pleasure.  Some  made  reports  every  day;  others  never  made  any. 
General  orders  were  issued  as  soon  as  you  had  assumed  command  re- 
quiring  immediate  returns,  and  special  and.  peremptory  instructions) 
were  addressed  to  those  who  failed  to  comply  with  these  general  or- 
ders. In  consequence  we  have  a reasonably  reliable  return  for  the  31st 
ultimo,  and  shall  be  able  to  do  so,  I think,  regularly  hereafter. 

The  supply  of  blanks  on  hand  was  quite  small,  mostly  printed  here,  I 
and  was  wholly  insufficient  to  meet  the  requisitions  made  on  the  1st 
instant  for  the  next  six  months. 

No  funds  of  the  adjutant- general’s  department  were  turned  over  to 
me.  . j 

All  the  clerks  (some  five  or  six)  were  civil  employes,  paid  by  Captain 
Davis  from  what  is  generally  called  the  “ Provost  Fund.”  I found  them 
ignorant,  and  replaced  them  by  my  own  clerks,  detailed,  with  a single 
exception,  from  the  ranks. 

In  addition  to  the  military  duties  properly  belonging  to  the  adjutant- 
general  of  a department  I found  my  whole  time,  night  and  day,  taken 
up  at  first  by  applications,  almost  invariably  presented  in  person,  for 
the  return  of  guns  taken  away  from  the  citizens  under  General  But- 
ler’s orders ; for  permission  to  hunt ; for  permission  to  fish  ; for  passes 
within  the  lines  and  beyond  the  lines;  for  orders  to  release  seques- 
tered cotton  and  sugar;  for  precautionary  orders  prohibiting  their 
seizure;  for  orders  for  the  payment  of  checks  refused  by  the  banks;! 
for  the  release  of  prisoners ; for  the  suspension,  commutation,  or  remis- ; 
sion  of  sentences  imposed  by  the  judicial  officers;  to  remove  certain! 
parties  from  houses;  to  place  certain  parties  in  houses;  to  restore 
property  of  all  kinds  seized  by  officers,  soldiers,  or  citizens  “ connected* 
with  the  Government;”  to  prevent  property  from  being  so  seized  ; to 
return  negroes;  to  prevent  them  from  going  away;  to  prevent  them 
being  prevented  from  going  away ; for  bread ; for  employment ; for 
orders  to  one  citizen  to  do  or  not  to  do  all  imaginable  things  that  an- 
other citizen  might  wish  him  to  do  or  not  to  do;  to  order  the  payment 
of  debts ; to  prevent  persons  from  leaving  New  Orleans  to  escape  the 
payment  of  debts;  to  order  the  passenger-railway  company  to  redeem 
a handful  of  blue  tickets,  &c.  ij 

I also  found  that  a number  of  special  police  officers  and  innumerable 
other  petty  employes,  both  civil  and  military,  throughout  the  depart- 
ment reported  to  me  direct,  instead  of  to  the  chief  of  the  proper  mili- 
tary or  civil  department  concerned.  It  is  scarcely  an  exaggeration  to 
say  that  the  duties  of  the  adjutant-general’s  department  were  coexten- 
sive with  the  wants  and  interests  of  the  individual  citizens  of  New  Or- 
leans. 

While  things  remained  in  this  condition,  without  system  or  orgamza-i 
tion,  it  must  have  been  utterly  impossible  for  the  adjutant-general  to 
devote  his  attention  to  the  military  interests  of  the  command,  much 
less  to  the  management  of  the  details  of  his  office.  In  a word,  so  far 
as  any  information  of  the  military  affairs  of  this  department  is  con- 
cerned, I found  the  condition  of  my  department  almost  a total  blank. 
In  saying  this  I but  confirm  the  statement  which  was  made  to  me  by 
Major  Strong. 

On  many  of  the  subjects  I have  enumerated  you  have  made  general 
decisions;  others  have  been  confided  to  the  chiefs  of  the  military  or 
civil  departments  concerned  ; all  have  been  systematized. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


655 


Headquarters  Camp  Weitzel, 

Donaldsonville , January  15,  1863. 


Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General , Dept,  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans : 

Sir  : Everything  is  quiet  in  this  section  • no  appearance  of  the  en- 
emy moving  clown  from  the  Grosse  Tete. 

The  lieutenant  in  command  of  Perkins’  cavalry  at  Plaquemine  has 
just  sent  me  a dispatch  stating  that  there  was  a force  of  about  3,000  on 
the  Grosse  Tfite,  with  eight  pieces  of  artillery,  but  that  he  could  discover 
no  symptoms  of  their  moving.  I keep  my  mounted  pickets  well  up  the 
river  and  across  from  4 miles  above  this  place  on  the  river  to  Grand 
Bayou,  and  it  will  not  be  possible  for  the  enemy  to  get  by  without  my 
knowing  it.  If  he  attempts  to  go  by  I can  attack  him  4 miles  above 
this  place  on  the  river  or  about  the  same  distance  down  the  bayou,  or 
follow  him  up.  You  will  understand  that  the  enemy  can  take  what  is 
called  the  cut-off,  and  go  from  the  river  road  to  the  Bayou  La  Fourcke 
without  coming  within  4 miles  of  this  place. 

The  One  hundred  and  sixty-second  Hew  York  Regiment  and  the 
Twenty-first  Indiana  Battery  are  on  the  north  bank  of  the  bayou,  and  I 
shall  move  over  there  with  the  First  Louisiana  Volunteers  to-morrow, 
when  we  shall  be  in  convenient  position  to  attack  the  enemy  or  to  oc- 
cupy the  fortifications  if  necessary.  The  fort  is  so  nearly  finished  that 
I think  it  could  be  held,  with  the  assistance  of  the  gunboats,  against 
5,000  men.  I would  recommend  that  four  20-pounder  Parrotts  be  for- 
warded to  this  place  immediately  to  mount  in  the  fort.  The  artillery 
company  which  is  here  could  use  them  to  good  advantage  in  case  that 
we  should  be  compelled  to  occupy  the  fort.  The  lieutenant  command- 
ing the  Indiana  battery  says  there  are  two  20-pounder  Parrotts  at  Car- 
rollton which  were  exchanged  for  smaller  guns  by  a Massachusetts  bat- 
tery, and  that  they  are  doing  no  good  there.  He  would  like  them  for 
his  battery  j says  he  has  sufficient  teams  to  draw  them  easily. 

Should  the  general  think  best  to  mount  the  guns  in  the  fortification 
it  cannot  be  done  too  quickly.  At  least  250  rounds  of  ammunition 
would  be  required  for  each  gun. 

I wrote  to  the  Chief  of  Engineers  stating  that  the  fortification  was 
ready  for  the  armament,  and  requesting  that  he  should  make  arrange- 
ments for  it.  The  guns  that  I ask  for  now  are  only  a temporary  matter, 
and  would  not  interfere  with  his  arrangements.  From  your  dispatch  I 
infer  that  you  think  the  telegraph  station  is  near  this  place ; it  is  about 
40  miles  distant. 

My  regiment  is  in  good  condition  and  the  Indiana  battery  can  be 
relied  upon  in  every  place,  and  I shall  give  the  enemy  battle  if  there  are 
5,000  of  them,  and  I can  give  Weitzel’s  rear  guard  timely  warning  so 
that  it  can  get  out  of  the  way ; but  I don’t  think  the  enemy  will  attack 
this  point  or  attempt  to  pass  down  the  La  Fourche. 

Respectfully,  yours, 


R.  E.  HOLCOMB, 


Commanding  Post. 


Headquarters  Reserve  Brigade, 

Camp  Stevens , La.,  January  18,  1863. 
Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Adjutant- General,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans , La. : 

Colonel  : I was  much  surprised  to-day  to  hear  from  Lieutenant 
Harris,  United  States  Marine  Corps,  that  the  admiral  had  again  thought 


656 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

of  removing  one  of  the  gunboats  from  Berwick  Bay.  These  gunboats 
are  now  in  a very  bad  condition.  I believe  it  to  be  a solemn  duty 
to  put  them  all  at  once  in  a perfect  condition,  fill  up  their  crews, 
and  render  them  as  effective  as  is  possible,  and  that  not  only  they  be 
kept  there,  but  that  as  many  others,  to  the  number  of  six  or  eight,  be 
added  to  them— boats  that  draw  about  4 feet  of  water,  and  all  protected 
in  the  best  manner  against  riflemen  on  shore.  With  such  a naval  force 
in  that  bay,  in  co-operation  with  a suitable  land  force,  the  only  true 
campaign  in  this  section  could  be  made.  Look  at  the  map.  Berwick 
Bay  leads  into  Grand  Lake,  Grand  Lake  into  the  Atchafalaya,  the 
Atchafalaya  into  Bed  Biver.  Boats  drawing  not  more  than  4 or  5 feet, 
and  in  the  force  I mention,  with  a proper  land  force,  could  clear  out  the 
Atchafalaya,  Bed  Biver,  and  Black  Biver. 

All  communications  from  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson  cross  this  line 
indicated  by  me.  By  taking  it  in  the  manner  I propose  Vicksburg 
and  Port  Hudson  would  be  a cipher  to  the  rebels.  It  would  be  a cam- 
paign that  100,000  men  could  not  so  easily  fight  and  so  successfully. 
It  is  an  operation  to  which  the  taking  of  Galveston  Island  is  a cipher 
and  the  capture  of  the  Mobile  Bay  forts  a nonentity.  I am  so  fully 
impressed  with  the  importance  of  this  operation  that  I must  request 
the  Department  to  send  a copy  of  this  communication  to  Admiral  Far- 
ragut  and  to  the  general-in- chief  of  the  Army.  The  rebels,  seeing  the 
importance  of  this  line,  are  now  fortifying  Butte- a-la-Bose,  a knoll  sur- 
rounded by  an  almost  inaccessible  swamp  on  the  Atchafalaya  and  not 
far  from  its  entrance  into  Grand  Lake. 

I solemnly  protest  against  the  removal  of  a single  boat  from  Berwicx 
Bay,  and  insist  upon  it  that  it  is  our  duty  at  once  to  place  them  in  the 
most  efficient  condition. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier -General , United  States  Volunteers. 


Washington,  D.  G.,  January  18,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  1ST.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding , New  Orleans  : 

General:  I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  three  com- 
munications of  January  7,  with  inclosures.* 

So  far  as  thev  relate  to  the  conduct  of  Brigadier-General  Hamilton 
I am  directed  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  say  in  reply  that  General 
Hamilton’s  commission  of  Governor  of  Texas  will  be  revoked. 

In  relation  to  your  proposed  military  operations  I have  little  or  noth- 
ing to  add  to  the  instructions  already  given.  It  is  probable  that  General 
Grant  will  order  a new  attack  upon  Vicksburg  in  about  two  weeks  with 
large  re-enforcements.  It  is  hoped  that  you  may  be  able  to  co-operate, 
if  not  by  sending  him  assistance  direct  to  Vicksburg,  at  least  by  keep- 
ing a large  force  of  the  enemy  employed  at  Port  Hudson.  The  opening 
of  the  Mississippi  Biver  is  the  first  and  great  object  of  military  and 
naval  operations  at  the  Southwest,  and  every  possible  effort  must  be 
made  to  accomplish  that  object,  to  the  neglect  if  need  be  of  all  minor 
considerations.  It  has  been  suggested  that  steam  transports  could  be 
sent  up  from  Berwick  Bay  to  the  Mississippi  above  Port  Hudson,  t le 
gunboats  run  by  the  forts,  and  the  troops  at  Baton  Itouge  cross  the 


* See  pp.  200-205, 639, 642,  and  643, 


Chap.  XXVH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  657 

river,  march  by  land,  and  take  the  transports  for  Vicksburg  in  the  river 
above  Port  Hudson,  and  thus  unite  with  Grant’s  forces.  I am  not  suffi- 
ciently familiar  with  the  navigation  and  nature  of  the  country  to  judge 
of  the  practicability  of  this  suggestion.  It  is  desirable,  however,  that 
your  movements  and  Grant’s  should  be  directed  to  the  same  object  as 
far  as  possible. 

The  continued  inactivity  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  is  exceedingly 
embarrassing  to  the  Government,  and  we  must  now  look  mainly  to  the 
South  and  West  to  relieve  the  country  from  the  gloom  resulting  from 
want  of  success  here. 

Your  correspondence  with  the  foreign  consuls  in  regard  to  trade,  &c., 
has  been  given  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  and  will  probably  be  laid  be- 
fore the  President  and  Cabinet.  As  soon  as  I receive  the  Secretary’s 
directions  I will  write  you  on  that  matter. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-Chief. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , January  19,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans,  La. : 

General  : I inclose  herewith  a copy  of  a letter  of  the  14th  instant, 
this  day  received  from  the  Department  of  State,  touching  the  treatment 
of  questions  growing  out  of  claims  and  complaints  of  French  subjects 
in  the  department  under  your  command. 

In  your  transactions  with  the  subjects  of  France  you  will  please  con- 
form to  the  instructions  of  the  President,  as  recited  in  the  letter  of  the 
Secretary  of  State. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWIY  M.  STANTOY, 

Secretary  of  War. 


[Inclosure.] 


Department  of  State, 
Washington , January  14,  1863. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  communicate  herewith  an  extract  from  a 
dispatch  which  has  just  been  received  from  the  United  States  minister 
at  Paris  in  relation  to  irritations  which  have  recently  arisen  at  New 
Orleans  out  of  claims  and  complaints  of  French  subjects.  It  is  con- 
tained in  the  following  words  : 


He  (Mr.  de  Lliuys)  eitlier  said  that  he  already  had  given  or  that  he  would  give  in- 
structions to  their  agent  there  (at  New  Orleans)  to  conduct  matters  with  prudence 
and  moderation,  avoiding  occasions  for  unnecessary  difficulty,  without  abandoning  of 
course  the  protection  of  French  subjects  in  their  just  rights,  and  if  the  United  States 
Government  would  give  like  instructions  to  their  new  agent  there  he  thought  further 
difficulties  at  that  point  might  be  avoided. 

I am  authorized  by  the  President  to  request  that  this  information 
may  be  given  to  Major-General  Banks,  and  that  he  may  be  instructed 
to  reciprocate  in  his  transactions  with  subjects  of  the  Emperor  of 
France  the  just  and  liberal  spirit  thus  manifested  by  the  French  Gov- 

42  R R — VOL  XV 


658 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVEL 

ernment  to  the  extent  that  may  be  compatible  with  justice  and  the 
public  welfare. 

I am,  sir,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  H.  SEWARD. 


City  Hotel, 

New  Orleans , January  19,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks: 

General  : In  our  last  interview  you  stated  that  you  were  willing  to 
furnish  transportation  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  off  from  Matamoras, 
Mex.,  such  Texas  refugees  as  may  be  at  that  place  desirous  of  reaching 
the  protection  of  the  United  States.  From  the  United  States  consul  at 
that  place  I learn  that  there  are  quite  a number  there,  and  I shall  or- 
der Lieutenant-Colonel  Stancel,  of  the  First  Texas  Cavalry,  and  Dr. 
William  J.  Moore,  of  the  Second  Texas  Cavalry  (who  speaks  the  Span-  j 
ish  language),  to  go  as  soon  as  transportation  may  be  furnished  them 
to  Matamoras,  to  bring  off  such  refugees,  most  of  whom  are  ready  to 
join  the  service. 

As  these  gentlemen  will  necessarily  incur  considerable  expense  m the 
discharge  of  their  duty  I have  to  ask  that  you  place  a sufficient  sum  I 
for  such  contingencies  at  their  disposal. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  J.  HAMILTON, 

Brigadier- General,  &c.  j 

[Indorsements.] 


Respectfully  referred  to  Colonel  Holabird,  quartermaster,  &c.,  for  1 
consideration  and  report. 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


January  19. 

None  of  our  transports  can  go  to  Matamoras  unless  we  control  the 
river,  and  this  seems  to  involve  an  expedition  up  it.  There  is  no  har- f 
bor  or  place  where  vessels  can  lie  not  now  in  the  hands  of  the  Con 

federateS-  S.  B.  HOLABIRD, 

Colonel  and  Quartermaster . 


Headquarters  Camp  Weitzel, 

Donaldsonville , January  19,  1863. 


Col.  Bichard  B.  Irwin,  , ^ __  _ . 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Dept  of  the  Gulf,  New  Orleans: 

Sir  : It  is  reported  to  me  upon  good  authority  that  the  enemy  are 
in  considerable  force  on  the  Grosse  Tete,  and  that  they  intend  to  make 
an  attack  first  upon  Plaquemine  and  then  upon  this  place.  The  force 
is  variously  estimated  from  3,000  to  6,000,  and  have  a good  supply  of 
artillery. 

The  roads  are  in  very  bad  condition  between  this  place  and  Grosse1 
Tete,  and  if  they  intended  to  attack  before  I think  they  will  give  it  up, 
hearing  that  General  Weitzel  has  returned. 


Chap.  XXYII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


659 


I think  I could  hold  the  place  now  against  a very  large  force,  but 
would  like  a few  guns  to  mount  on  the  fortifications. 

A man  who  came  in  from  Ponchatoula  yesterday  says  that  he  read 
in  the  Memphis  Appeal  (January  15),  now  published  at  Jackson,  that 
the  United  States  forces  were  in  possession  of  Vicksburg  on  the  11th 
instant.  He  reports  that  the  enemy  have  left  Ponchatoula  and  that 
there  is  but  a small  force  at  Camp  Moore. 

Should  the  enemy  attempt  to  come  down  the  river  from  Plaquemine, 
if  General  Grover  had  transportation  to  cross  the  river  he  could  get 
in  behind  them  and  they  would  be  betwixt  two  fires. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

R.  E.  HOLCOMB, 

Commanding  Post. 


As  soon  as  I hear  of  any  movement  of  the  enemy  I will  report  by 
telegraph.  I have  charged  the  officer  in  command  of  Perkins’  cavalry, 
near  Plaquemine,  to  be  vigilant  and  on  the  lookout  and  report  any 
movement  immediately. 


United  States  Steam- Sloop  Brooklyn, 

Off  Galveston , January  20,  1863. 

Whereas  a proclamation,  dated  Galveston,  Tex.,  January  4, 1863,  and 
signed  by  J.  Bankhead  Magruder,  major-general  commanding,  declares 
the  said  port  of  Galveston  to  be  open  for  trade  with  all  friendly  nations, 
and  invites  their  merchants  to  resume  their  usual  commercial  intercourse 
with  the  said  port  of  Galveston ; therefore  the  undersigned  hereby  warns 
all  concerned  that  the  port  of  Galveston  and  also  Sabine  Pass,  as  well 
as  the  whole  coast  of  Texas,  are  under  an  actual  blockade  by  a sufficient 
force  of  United  States  vessels;  and  any  merchant  vessel  appearing  off 
the  aforesaid  ports  or  attempting  to  pass  out  from  the  said  ports  under 
any  pretext  whatever  will  be  captured,  notwith  standing  the  aforesaid 
proclamation,  and  sent  into  an  open  port  of  the  United  States  for  adju- 
dication. 

H.  H.  BELL, 

Comm.,  Comdg.  U.  8.  Forces  off  Galveston  and  Coast  of  Texas. 


Flag- Snip  Hartford, 

New  Orleans,  January  21,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Gulf: 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communi- 
cation inclosing  a document  from  Brigadier- General  Weitzel  in  relation 
to  the  gunboats  in  Berwick  Bay. 

In  reply  I have  to  say  that  it  is  the  first  I knew  of  the  gigantic  opera- 
tions in  that  quarter,  or  I certainly  would  not  have  taken  the  Estrella 
from  there  to  place  in  Lake  Pontchartrain.  In  my  last  conversation  with 
the  commanding  general  he  certainly  expressed  no  such  views  to  me, 
3ut  appeared  glad  that  I had  ordered  the  Estrella  around  to  the  lake 
intil  I could  get  others  of  more  suitable  force  for  flanking  the  position 
it  Rew  Orleans. 

Before  ordering  the  Estrella  around  I wrote  to  the  commanding  officer 


660  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chat.  XXVIL 

of  tlie  flotilla  to  know  if  he  was  in  any  danger  of  being  attacked  or  if 
he  could  spare  a boat  for  the  lake  service,  to  which  he  replied  that  he 
could  spare  her,  as  he  knew  of  nothing  to  prevent  it,  as  the  cotton  was 
destroyed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J F D.  G.  FABRAGUT, 

Rear-Admiral , Commanding. 


Matamoras,  January  22, 1863. 

Dear  Marks  : We  are  still  without  any  of  yours ; have  written  to 
vou  by  every  chance,  and  are  anxiously  waiting  to  hear  of  your  where- 
abouts, in  order  to  act  accordingly.  In  my  last  I mentioned  to  you  of 
the  Maja  not  being  discharged  yet,  and  since  then  nothing  has  been 
done,  the  weather  having  been  very  unsettled,  so  we  have  not  yet  re- 
ceived a package.  Nevertheless  we  have  made  a sale  to  — — 

amounting  to  $139,000,  to  be  paid  in  on  delivery  of  the  goods, 

at  the  rate  of  25  cents  per  pound.  This  invoice  cost  us  about  $5b,UU0, 
delivered  there,  that  is,  across  the  river,  and  at  Brownsville  we  receive 
the  bales  free  of  duty  and  expense.  This  is  a splendid  business. 


We  have  also  contracted  with  the  same  parties  for  the  following  ar- 
ticles, to  be  paid  as  above,  with  the  same  condition,  of  which  particulars 
will  be  given  to  you  by  mail  via  Tampico  or  any  other  place  that  will 

offer:  , , . 

50,000  pairs  heavy  shoes,  heavy  brogans,  assorted  sizes. 

50,000  pairs  heavy  blankets,  gray  preferred. 

50,000  pairs  heavy  woolen  socks. 

50.000  pairs  heavy  cotton  socks. 

25.000  yards  heavy  gray  cloth. 

20.000  yards  heavy  blue  flannel. 

2,500  sides  harness  leather. 

2,500  sides  sole  leather. 

2,500  pounds  shoe  thread. 

2,500  pounds  flax  thread,  black  and  white. 

Trimmings,  linings,  buckles,  buttons,  needles,  &c. 

These  articles  will  have  to  be  bought,  some  in  New  York  and  the 
balance  in  Europe,  but  not  knowing  where  you  are,  we  hardly  know 
where  to  direct  this  to  you  with  any  certainty ; but  at  any  rate  buy 
some  of  these  goods  as  quick  as  you  can  pick  them  up  and  torward 
them,  no  matter  where  this  may  find  you.  We  shall  wait  to  hear  troin 
you  soon ; if  not,  myself  or  Cam.  will  have  to  go  and  meet  you,  tor 
these  articles  must  be  got  for  our  friends ; and  besides  this  being  a 
money-making  business  and  safe.  Besides  the  Maja’s  and  Frederics 
we  will  have  in  about  ninety  days  at  least  1,300  bales,  and  we  will  tor- 
ward  it  as  vessels  will  offer  to  Europe;  so  means  will  not  be  wanted. 

This  being  sent  by  a friend  to  New  Orleans  I have  no  time  to  make 
any  further  explanations,  but  will  do  so  via  Havana  and  Tampico. 

Y0UrS’  J.  MARKS. 


Dear  John  : Having  but  a few  minutes  to  write  before  we  have  to 
send  this  off  via  New  Orleans,  so  we  cannot  write  fully.  But  what 
Jonas  mentions  above  is  all  O.  K.  As  you  well  know,  I would  not  under 
take  anything  which  we  should  run  much  risk.  This  I have  arranged 


chap,  xxvn.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


661 


safe,  and  a chance  for  us  to  make  up  all  our  losses,  and  answer.  If  we 
carry  out  what  I have  undertaken  there  is  a fortune.  The  means,  and 
plenty  of  it,  will  go  from  here.  I will  have  to  remain  here  to  see  every- 
thing" through  and  further  arrange  matters  with  my  friends.  We  will 
write  you  to-day  via  Tampico,  and  also  in  a day  or  two  via  Havana  to 
New  York.  Marks,  now  is  the  time  for  you  and  us.  Believe  me,  there 
is  hundreds  would  like  to  have  same  chance,  and,  as  I say,  no  risk $ as 
I deliver,  they  will  deliver  us  also.  Try  to  get  up  an  assorted  cargo 
again  and  with  more  impirials  as  in  the  last.  Must  close.  Write  us 
by  every  way  possible,  as  we  must  shortly  hear  from  you  or  one  of  us 
must  go  even  to  Europe  to  see  you. 

Yours, 

’ LAMBERT. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf. 
Respectfully  forwarded,  as  having  an  important  bearing  on  the  char- 
acter of  the  existing  trade  of  Matamoras. 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major-  General , Commanding , 
By  RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , January  24, 1863. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commander -in- Chief  TJ.  IS.  Army: 

General  : The  inclosed  dispatch  from  the  mouth  of  the  river  causes 
much  solicitude  in  regard  to  the  southern  defenses  of  the  city.  The 
vessel  referred  to  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  Alabama,  and  her  move- 
ments, with  the  escape  of  the  Oreta  from  Mobile  and  the  uncertainty 
as  to  the  position  of  the  Harriet  Lane,  no  news  having  been  received 
from  Galveston,  affords  some  reason  for  the  impression  that  an  attack 
from  the  south  is  contemplated.  This  is  strengthened  by  reports  re- 
ceived in  various  ways  of  a contemplated  movement  of  the  rebel  land 
forces  from  the  Red  River  country. 

We  are  prepared  for  them  all,  however.  The  forts  ( J ackson  and  Saint 
Philip)  have  been  strengthened  as  much  as  possible  since  my  arrival, 
and  a general  plan  of  defenses  adopted,  which  is  being  executed  with 
all  dispatch.  1 have  before  referred  to  the  condition  in  which  I found 
all  the  forts  in  this  portion  of  the  department.  The  deficiencies  have 
been  remedied  as  far  as  possible. 

The  naval  force  here  is  insufficient.  Admiral  Farragut  has  repre- 
sented his  wants  to  the  Navy  Department.  Recent  events  in  the  Gulf 
make  it  imperatively  necessary  that  his  fleet  should  be  strengthened. 

The  rebel  force  at  Port  Hudson  and  its  vicinity  is  larger  than  I can 
bring  against  it,  leaving  a sufficient  number  of  men  for  the  defense  of 
the  city  and  the  La  Fourche  District.  I intend  an  immediate  move- 
ment with  all  the  force  I can  spare  in  the  direction  of  Red  River.  This, 
if  successful,  will  cut  off  many  of  their  supplies  and  render  the  position 
less  important  and  impregnable  than  now  to  the  forces  I have  in  hand. 
I shall  lose  no  time  in  this. 

Nothing  is  heard  here  from  Vicksburg. 


662 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  Iivn. 


The  condition  of  this  city  is  as  favorable  as  I could  wish  and  the  mass 
of  the  people  far  less  hostile  to  the  restoration  of  the  Government  than 
I have  known  in  Baltimore  or  Virginia.  All  reports  to  the  contrary 
are  from  interested  parties. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servants 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , January  24,  1863. 

[By  telegraph  from  Southwest  Pass.] 

Bear- Admiral  D.  G.  Farragkjt: 

Sir  : Last  evening  about  one-half  hour  before  sunset  a long,  rakish, 
bark-rigged  steamer,  with  top-gallant  masts  struck,  passed  slowly  by 
the  mouth  of  the  river.  When  off  the  South  Point  she  steamed  off  rap- 
idly southeast.  During  the  time  of  her  passing  the  pilot-boat  had  a sig- 
nal in  her  main  rigging,  where  I have  never  seen  her  set  it  before.  As 
the  bar  is  improving  I cannot  but  think  a dash  is  intended  as  soon  as 
there  is  a fleet  here  to  warrant  it.  I am  in  a poor  condition  to  protect 
even  my  own  vessel.  The  Katahdin  is  here  and  will  leave  this  morning. 

Yours, 

C.  HUGGINS, 

Commanding  TJ.  8.  8.  Pampero. 


Headquarters, 

Baton  Rouge , La .,  January  27, 1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

A.  A.  G .,  U.  8.  Vols .,  Edqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans , La.  : 

Colonel  : Since  my  telegram  of  yesterday  I have  conversed  with  a 
reliable  gentleman,  perfectly  familiar  with  the  country  on  the  western  : 
bank  of  the  river  and  tolerably  so  with  the  movements  of  the  enemy’s 
troops  there.  He  says  it  is  impossible  to  operate  with  a command  be- 
tween the  Grosse  Tete  and  the  Mississippi,  except  in  the  vicinity  of 
Plaquemine  and  between  there  and  Indian  Village,  except  by  small 
bodies  of  men  who  know  all  the  lanes  and  by-paths,  and  that  any  ad-  ■ 
vance  of  the  enemy  from  Bosedale,  where  Sibley’s  command  is  said  to  1 
be,  must  be  done  by  the  water-courses.  This  gentleman  knows  that 
the  command  at  Bosedale  has  recently  been  increased  by  400  men  from 
Alexandria,  on  Bed  River,  and  that  more  were  expected,  and  his  im- 
pression  is,  from  what  he  has  heard,  that  they  are  expecting  to  go 
to  the  La  Fourche  country.  He  thinks  that  they  are  concentrating  at 
Indian  Village.  As  this  point  is  but  8 miles  from  Plaquemine  I would 
suppose  that  point  more  likely  to  be  attacked  than  Donaldson  ville, 
particularly  as  the  small  number  of  the  command  there  rather  invites 
it  and  one  of  the  gunboats  has  been  removed  to  Donaldson  ville. 

I also  learn  that  the  railroad  from  West  Baton  Rouge  to  Bosedale 
has  been  repaired  from  Bosedale  this  way  to  within  7 or  8 miles  of  the 
river,  with  a view  simply,  it  is  supposed,  of  facilitating  individual  inter- 
course with  the  river  and  sources  of  information. 

Information  from  a reliable  source  satisfies  us  that  Hindman  has 
been  badly  beaten  in  Arkansas,  losing  about  4,000  men. 


Chap.  XXVTL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  bod 

I have  nothing  further  from  Port  Hudson.  Negroes  from  there  say 
that  all  the  men  in  the  country  are  being  sent  in  and  that  they  are 
deficient  in  provisions.  I send  down  the  steamer  Laurel  Hill,  and  have 
requested  the  commanding  officers  at  Plaquemine  and  Donaldsonville 
to  give  you  all  the  information  in  their  possession  respecting  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

0.  0.  AUGUE, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Defenses  of  New  Orleans, 

January  27,  1863. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

Sir  : In  the  inspection  of  the  defenses  of  New  Orleans  I am  now 
prepared  to  report  upon  their  general  condition,  so  far  as  commencing 
at  the  Mississippi  Liver  above  the  city  and  ending  at  Proctorville,  the 
terminus  of  the  Mexican  Gulf  Railroad.  A report  upon  the  remainder 
of  the  line  will  be  furnished  as  soon  as  the  proper  examination  can  be 
made. 

The  city  is  covered  on  the  north  or  upper  side  by  a parapet,  mostly 
built  by  the  Confederates.  The  end  of  the  parapet,  resting  on  the  river, 
is  strengthened  by  a powerful  battery  of  heavy  guns,  which  covers 
both  the  river  and  the  Levee  road,  and  with  the  ship  of  war  there  an- 
chored in  the  stream  is  sufficient  to  resist  successfully  any  force  that 
can  approach  by  the  river  or  the  road. 

This  parapet  is,  besides,  armed  with  divers  other  batteries  at  intervals, 
which,  with  a sufficient  infantry  force,  I think  sufficient  to  resist  suc- 
cessfully any  force  to  that  can  approach  it  from  any  quarter.  All  ap- 
proaches artillery  and  cavalry  from  the  nature  of  the  ground  in  front 
must  be  principally  by  the  Levee  road. 

This  parapet  is  being  repaired  in  a manner  which  will  materially 
strengthen  it,  and  the  redoubt,  which  I understand  the  engineer  de- 
partment contemplates  constructing  behind  the  center,  will  make  it  an 
exceedingly  strong  position.  . 

The  next  approach  to  the  city  is  by  the  Jackson  Railroad,  which  is 
impracticable,  on  account  of  the  bridges  across  Manchac  Pass  having 
been  destroyed.  This  Pass  is  watched  by  a strong  picket  drawn  from 
Bonnet  Carrd  Bend.  No  special  defenses  are  required  at  this  point. 

The  next  approach  to  the  city  is  by  Lake  Pontchartrain,  on  the  west- 
ern shore  of  which  are  two  important  landing  places,  at  Hickox,  or  ter-^ 
mination  of  Carrollton  Railroad,  and  Lakeport,  or  Mobile  Landing,  the' 
terminus  of  the  Pontchartrain  Railroad.  Both  of  these  landings  are 
connected  with  the  city  by  narrow  defiles ; the  former  by  two  roads 
over  an  otherwise  impassable  swamp ; the  latter  by  one  road  over  the 
same  swamp  and  Saint  John’s  Bayou.  A battery  was  erected  by  the 
Confederates  on  the  Shell  road  to  protect  the  first,  but  which  has  been 
demolished.  Earthworks  of  some  magnitude  were  erected  on  Saint 
John’s  Bayou  and  at  the  crossing  of  the  Pontchartrain  Railroad  over 
Bayou  Gentilly.  These  works  are  still  good,  and  three  guns  mounted  on 
the  platforms  already  constructed  at  the  crossing  would  completely  pro- 
tect the  city  at  that  point.  Two  or  three  guns  mounted  in  the  work  on 
Saint  John’s  Bayou  would  completely  protect  it.  A battery  of  some 


664 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVXL 

nine  guns  mounted  on  a work  found  upon  the  Gentilly  road  will,  un- 
less it  be  found  that  they  are  more  useful  where  they  are  (and  I do  not 
at  present  think  they  can  be  of  any  importance  where  they  are),  prove 
sufficient  to  cover  these  points. 

A picket  of  two-companies  each  is  posted  at  Hickox  and  at  Lakeport. 
These  pickets  also  guard,  by  small  detachments,  all  the  bayous  of  any 
importance  between  Manchac  Pass  and  Point  aux  Herbes. 

I have  ordered  a battalion  to  take  post  at  the  crossing  of  Bayou 
Gentilly  and  Pontchartrain  Railroad,  which  will  hare  the  general  pro- 
tection of  these  passes  and  the  charge  of  the  works  on  Saint  John’s  , 
Bayou,  Pontchartrain  Railroad,  and  the  battery  on  the  Gentilly  road 
until  removed. 

The  approaches  into  Lake  Pontchartrain  from  Lake  Borgne  are  pro-  , 
tected  by  Forts  Pike  and  Macomb. 

Fort  Pike,  covering  the  most  important  passage,  will,  when  the  gar- 
rison becomes  more  proficient  in  the  service  of  the  guns  and  the  four 
42-pounders  there  are  mounted  on  serviceable  carriages,  be  all-suffi- 
cient for  the  protection  of  the  passage.  Fort  Macomb  is  in  good  order 
in  every  respect  save  a little  more  aptitude  and  practice  in  the  serving  j 
of  the  ordnance  that  is  required.  The  ordnance  here  is  in  the  finest 
order. 

The  next  point  of  approach  to  the  city  is  by  Bayou  Bienvenue,  where  ! 
6 feet  draught  can  be  taken  to  within  a few  miles  of  the  city.  Here  is 
a battery  with  platforms  and  pintles  for  thirteen  guns,  the  guns  hav- 
ing been  removed,  I think  injudiciously,  and  taken  to  Fort  Pike.  Fort  j 
Pike  should  rather  have  been  supplied  with  guns  and  carriages  from 
elsewhere.  I recommend  these  guns  to  be  replaced  without  loss  of 
time.  The  barracks,  magazine,  and  shot-furnace  require  repairs,  and 
the  terre-plein  of  the  work  should  be  raised  a little  to  promote  con- 
venience and  health. 

The  next  point  is  Bayou  Dupre,  which  leads  pretty  well  up  toward 
the  Mississippi;  but  as  not  over  3 feet  draught  can  enter  from  the  lake  j 
I do  not  think  it  advisable  to  place  any  guns  in  the  tower  there  at  [ 
present.  This  point,  as  well^as  Battery  Bienvenue,  is  held  by  a small 
picket  drawn  from  Fort  Macomb.  j 

The  next  point  is  Proctor ville,  the  terminus  of  the  Mexican  Gulf 
Railroad.  Here  is  an  unfinished  tower,  calculated  for  eight  guns;.  ; 
but  as  the  landing  is  a miserable  one  at  present,  a steamer  drawing  4 j 
feet  being  unable  to  get  within  a quarter  of  a mile  from  the  shore  and 
the  shore  being  exceedingly  shallow,  nothing  more  than  a picket  is  re-  i 
quired  at  the  landing.  The  cover  of  this  point  is  properly  an  earth-  : 
work,  already  constructed,  a mile  and  upward  from  the  landing  and 
across  the  railroad,  covering  actually  a narrow  defile  (of  railroad  track) 
through  an  otherwise  impassable  swamp.  There  is  a battery  of  four 
guns  mounted  here  by  the  Confederates. 

I propose  stationing  a company  at  Proctorville,  which  will  prevent 
smuggling  and  take  charge  of  the  battery  and  earthworks. 

The  points  of  this  report  I desire  to  ask  the  particular  attention  of 
the  commanding  general  to  are: 

1st.  That  every  point  seems  to  be  sufficiently  observed  except  Bayou 
Bienvenue,  which  I recommend  to  be  at  once  put  in  order,  its  guns  sup- 
plied, and  a company  to  be  stationed  there.  *j 

2d.  The  earthworks  behind  Proctorville,  those  behind  Lakeport  and 
on  Bayou  Saint  John,  though  not  necessary  to  be  actually  occupied,  to-  ( 
be  kept  in  order;  the  battery  at  Proctorville  to  remain  for  the  present 


Chap.  XXVXL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION.  665 

until  further  examination  can  be  made;  three  guns  to  be  mounted  on 
Pontchartrain  Railroad;  two  or  three  on  Bayou  Saint  John. 

The  road  leading  to  Hickox  can,  I think,  be  sufficiently  protected  by 
light  artillery. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Plaquemine , January  27,  1863. 

Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir:  I am  requested  by  the  major-general  commanding  at  Baton 
Rouge  to  communicate  to  you  any  information  that  I may  possess  with 
regard  to  the  enemy  in  this  vicinity. 

General  Sibley  is  in  command  on  Grosse  Tete.  He  has  at  least  650 
cavalry  and  some  infantry.  I have  heard  different  reports,  all  uniting 
in  saying  at  least  five  pieces  of  artillery.  From  here  to  Indian  Village 
it  is  a distance  of  10  miles  and  a good  road.  Indian  Village  is  the  only 
place  to  cross  the  Bayou  Plaquemine  from  Grosse  Tete.  There  is  a road 
from  Indian  Village  to  Bayou  Goula,  but  is  not  fit  for  artillery  to  pass 
over,  and  the  only  way  to  go  to  Donaldson ville  is  by  Plaquemine.  This 
I hear  from  the  cavalry  that  is  stationed  here. 

There  is  no  way  of  reaching  Grosse  Tete  excepting  through  Indian 
Village  or  West  Baton  Rouge.  Woods  swampy  and  the  water  is  quite 
high.  1 have  a deserter  herefrom  Grosse  T6te,  whom  I shall  send  to  Ma- 
jor-General Augur.  Three  Frenchmen  came  from  Grosse  Tete  to-day 
and  from  Opelousas  originally;  say  they  (the  enemy)  are  impressing 
every  one,  both  citizens  and  foreigners,  between  the  ages  of  seventeen 
and  fifty  into  the  Army.  I am  very  well  guarded  against  surprise ; 
cavalry  vedettes  If  miles  from  town. 

I have  had  several  flying  reports  of  their 'attacking  us.  All  agree  in 
placing  the  troops  of  the  enemy  as  high  as  3,000. 

One  of  the  gunboats  has  been  ordered  away  to  protect  Donald  son- 
ville.  If  the  enemy  come  from  Grosse  Tete  they  must,  I think,  pass  Pla- 
quemine. 

General  Sibley’s  command  has  been  divided ; part  of  it  in  Opelousas 
County,  but  all  say  that  they  could  be  brought  together  very  quickly. 

It  is  very  difficult  to  obtain  correct  information  from  Grosse  Tete,  as 
the  enemy’s  pickets  are  at  Indian  Village. 

From  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  JOHN  STORRS, 
Lieutenant-Colonel , Commanding  Post. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe.,  V.  Mex.,  January  27,  1863. 

His  Excellency  William  F.  M.  Arny, 

Acting  Governor  of  New  Mexico: 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  state  to  you  that  since  last  summer  the  por- 
tion of  this  Territory  known  as  Arizona,  and  also  all  of  that  portion  be- 
low the  Jornada  del  Muerto  called  the  Mesilla  Valley,  has  been  under 


666 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX  [Chap.  XXVH. 


the  control  of  the  military  authorities,  and  litigants  have  been  obliged, 
from  the  absence  of  civil  officers,  to  appeal  to  commanding  officers  to 
have  their  difficulties  adjusted  by  military  commissions.  This  has 
thrown  upon  my  department  of  the  public  service  a great  deal  of  labor 
that  does  not  properly  pertain  to  it,  unless  where  a country  is  wholly 
under  martial  law.  If  the  civil  authorities  have  officers  present  whose 
duty  it  is  to  attend  to  the  adjudication  of  such  matters  I am  very 
anxious  that  they  should  without  delay  relieve  the  military  of  this  un- 
usual burden  or  formally  announce  their  inability  to  do  so.  In  this 
event  the  officers  under  my  command  will  continue  to  discharge  the  duty 
without  a murmur,  as  they  hitherto  have  done. 

I write  to  you  this  letter  thus  early  after  my  return  from  Mesilla  as  I 
learn  the  Legislature  is  about  to  adjourn,  whose  province  it  may  be  to 
take  some  action  in  the  premises. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ 9 ‘ JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 

Briaadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  January  28,  1863. 

His  Excellency  John  Evans, 

Governor  of  Colorado  Territory , Denver  City , Colo.: 

My  Dear  Sir  : Your  very  kind  letter  of  December  16, 1862,  in  which 
you  offer  to  help  us  with  all  the  troops  in  your  Territory  in  case  New 
Mexico  should  be  again  invaded,  came  safely  to  hand,  as  did  likewise 
your  note  of  the  13th  instant.  Pray  accept  my  thanks  for  your  gener- 
ous and  patriotic  offer. 

I have  just  returned  from  Northwestern  Texas,  and  from  what  1 could 
learn  I do  not  believe  any  considerable  force  from  that  State  will  at- 
tempt to  invade  this  country  again,  at  least  for  the  present.  That  the 
so-called  Southern  Confederacy,  looking  to  a permanent  separation 
from  the  Union,  will  desire  to  have  a strip  of  territory  extending  across 
the  continent  to  cover  the  silver  and  gold  fields  of  Arizona  and  to  have 
a port  on  the  Pacific  there  cannot  be  a doubt ; and  that  there  will  be 
a strong  effort  made  to  this  end  sooner  or  later,  unless  we  are  more 
successful  in  the  East  than  we  have  recently  been,  is  more  than  prob-  i 
able.  But  the  chances  for  such  an  attempt  appear  to  be  so  remote  at 
the  present  moment  as  to  warrant  my  sending  the  remainder  of  the 
Colorado  troops  home.  I have  therefore  issued  an  order  to  this  end,  ; 
which  please  to  find  herewith  inclosed. 

With  many  wishes  for  your  health  and  prosperity,  I have  the  honor 
to  be,  Your  Excellency’s  most  obedient  servant, 

’ JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


General  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

$0.  12.  j New  Orleans , January  29, 1863. 

The  proclamation  of  the  President  of  the  United  States,  dated  Jan- 
uary 1,  1863,  is  published  in  general  orders  for  the  information  and 
government  of  the  officers  and  soldiers  ot  this  command  and  all  per- 
sons acting  under  their  authority.  It  designates  portions  of  the  State 


chap,  xxvn.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


667 


of  Louisiana  which  are  not  to  be  affected  by  its  provisions.  The  laws 
of  the  United  States,  however,  forbid  officers  of  the  Army  and  Navy  to 
return  slaves  to  their  owners  or  to  decide  upon  the  claims  of  any  per- 
son to  the  service  or  labor  of  another,  and  the  inevitable  conditions  of 
a state  of  war  unavoidably  deprive  all  classes  of  citizens  of  much  of 
that  absolute  freedom  of  action  and  control  of  property  which  local  law 
and  the  continued  peace  of  the  country  guaranteed  and  secured  to  them. 
The  forcible  seizure  of  fugitives  from  service  or  labor  by  their  owners 
is  inconsistent  with  these  laws  and  conditions,  inasmuch  as  it  leads  to 
personal  violence  and  the  disturbance  of  the  public  peace  and  it  can- 
not be  permitted.  Officers  and  soldiers  will  not  encourage  or  assist 
slaves  to  leave  their  employers,  but  they  cannot  compel  or  authorize 
their  return  by  force. 

The  public  interest  peremptorily  demands  that  all  persons  without 
other  means  of  support  be  required  to  maintain  themselves  by  labor. 
Negroes  are  not  exempt  from  this  law.  Those  who  leave  their  employ- 
ers will  be  compelled  to  support  themselves  and  families  by  labor  upon 
the  public  works.  Under  no  circumstances  whatever  can  they  be 
maintained  in  idleness,  or  allowed  to  wander  through  the  parishes  and 
cities  of  the  State  without  employment.  Vagrancy  and  crime  will  be 
suppressed  by  enforced  and  constant  occupation  and  employment. 

Upon  every  consideration  labor  is  entitled  to  some  equitable  propor- 
tion of  the  crops  it  produces.  To  secure  the  objects  both  of  capital  and 
labor  the  sequestration  commission  is  hereby  authorized  and  directed, 
upon  conference  with  planters  and  other  parties,  to  propose  and  estab- 
lish a yearly  system  of  negro  labor,  which  shall  provide  for  the  food, 
clothing,  proper  treatment,  and  just  compensation  for  the  negroes,  at 
fixed  rates  or  an  equitable  proportion  of  the  yearly  crop,  as  may  be 
deemed  advisable.  It  should  be  just,  but  not  exorbitant  or  onerous. 
When  accepted  by  the  planter  or  other  parties  all  the  conditions  of 
continuous  and  faithful  service,  respectful  deportment,  correct  discipline, 
and  perfect  subordination  shall  be  enforced  on  the  part  of  the  negroes 
by  the  officers  of  the  Government.  To  secure  their  payment  the  wages 
of  labor  will  constitute  a lien  upon  its  products. 

This  may  not  be  the  best,  but  it  is  now  the  only  practicable  system. 
Wise  men  will  do  what  they  can  when  they  cannot  do  what  they  would. 
It  is  the  law  of  success.  In  three  years  from  the  restoration  of  peace, 
under  this  voluntary  system  of  labor,  the  State  of  Louisiana  will  produce 
threefold  the  product  of  its  most  prosperous  year  in  the  past. 

The  quartermaster’s  department  is  charged  with  the  duty  of  harvest- 
ing corn  on  deserted  fields  and  cultivating  abandoned  estates.  Un- 
employed negroes  will  be  engaged  in  this  service  under  the  control  of 
suitable  agents  or  planters,  with  a just  compensation  in  food,  clothing, 
and  money,  consistent  with  the  terms  agreed  upon  by  the  commission, 
and  under  such  regulations  as  will  tend  to  keep  families  together,  to 
impart  self-supporting  habits  to  the  negroes,  and  protect  the  best  in- 
terest of  the  people  and  the  Government. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

By  the  President  of  the  United  States. 

A PROCLAMATION. 

Whereas  on  the  twenty-second  day  of  September,  in  the  year  of  our 


668 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVLL 


Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty-two,  a proclamation  was  j 
issued  by  the  President  of  the  United  States  containing,  among  other  j 
things,  the  following,  to  wit : 

That  on  the  first  day  of  January,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  bun-  !! 
dredand  sixty-three,  all  persons  held  as  slaves  within  any  State  or  designated  part  u 
of  a State,  the  people  whereof  shall  then  he  in  rebellion  against  the  United  States,  | 
shall  be  then,  thenceforward,  and  forever  free ; and  the  executive  government  of  the 
United  States,  including  the  military  and  naval  authority  thereof,  will  recognize  and  jl 
maintain  the  freedom  of  such  persons,  and  will  do  no  act  or  acts  to  repress  such  per- 
sons, or  any  of  them,  in  any  efforts  they  may  make  for  their  actual  freedom. 

That  the  Executive  will,  on  the  first  day  of  January  aforesaid,  by  proclamation,  i 
designate  the  States  and  parts  of  States,  if  any,  in  which  the  people  thereof  respectively 
shall  then  be  in  rebellion  against  the  United  States;  and  the  fact  that  any  State  or 
the  people  thereof  shall  on  that  day  be  in  good  faith  represented  in  the  Congress  |j 
of  the  United  States  by  members  chosen  thereto  at  elections  wherein  a majority  of 
the  qualified  voters  of  such  States  shall  have  participated  shall,  in  the  absence  of 
strong  countervailing  testimony,  be  deemed  conclusive  evidence  that  such  State  and 
the  people  thereof  are  not  then  in  rebellion  against  the  United  States. 

Now  therefore  I,  Abraham  Lincoln,  President  of  the  United  States, 
by  virtue  of  the  power  in  me  vested,  as  Commander-in  Chief  of  the 
Army  and  Navy  of  the  United  States  in  time  of  actual  armed  rebellion 
against  the  authority  and  Government  of  the  United  States,  and  as  a 
fit  and  necessary  war  measure  for  suppressing  said  rebellion,  do,  on 
this  first  day  of  January,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  sixty- three,  and  in  accordance  with  my  purpose  so  to  do, 
publicly  proclaimed  for  the  full  period  of  one  hundred  days,  from  the 
first  day  above  mentioned,  order  and  designate  as  the  States  and  parts 
of  States  wherein  the  people  thereof  respectively  are  this  day  in  rebell- 
ion against  the  United  States  the  following,  to  wit: 

Arkansas,  Texas,  Louisiana  (except  the  parishes  of  Saint  Bernard, 
Plaquemines,  Jefferson,  Saint  John,  Saint  Charles,  Saint  James,  As- 
cension, Assumption,  Terre  Bonne,  La  Fourche,  Saint  Marie,  Saint 
Martin,  and  Orleans,  including  the  city  of  New  Orleans),  Mississippi, 
Alabama,  Florida,  Georgia,  South  Carolina,  North  Carolina,  and  Vir- 
ginia (except  the  forty-eight  counties  designated  as  West  Virginia,  and 
also  the  counties  of  Berkeley,  Accomac,  Northampton,  Elizabeth  City, 
York,  Princess  Ann,  and  Norfolk,  including  the  cities  of  Norfolk  and 
Portsmouth),  and  which  excepted  parts  are  for  the  present  left  precisely 
as  if  this  proclamation  were  not  issued. 

And  by  virtue  of  the  power,  and  for  the  purpose  aforesaid,  I do 
order  and  declare  that  all  persons  held  as  slaves  within  said  designated 
States  and  parts  of  States  are  and  henceforward  shall  be  free;  and 
that  the  executive  government  of  the  United  States,  including  the 
military  and  naval  authorities  thereof,  will  recognize  and  maintain  the 
freedom  of  said  persons.  . •; 

And  I hereby  enjoin  upon  the  people  so  declared  to  be  free  to  abstain 
from  all  violence  except  in  necessary  self-defense ; and  I recommend 
to  them  that  in  all  cases,  when  allowed,  they  labor  faithfully  for  rea- 
sonable wages.  . i 

And  I further  declare  and  make  known  that  such  persons,  of  suitable 
conditions,  will  be  received  into  the  armed  service  of  the  United  States, 
to  garrison  forts,  positions,  stations,  and  other  places,  and  to  man  ves- 
sels of  all  sorts  in  said  service. 

And  upon  this  act,  sincerely  believed  to  be  an  act  of  justice,  war- 
ranted by  the  Constitution,  upon  military  necessity,  I invoke  the  con- 
siderate judgment  of  mankind  and  the  gracious  favor  of  Almighty 
God. 


Chap.  XXVII. ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


669 


In  testimony  whereof  I have  hereunto  set  my  name  and  caused  the 
seal  of  the  United  States  to  be  affixed. 

Done  at  the  city  of  Washington  this  first  day  of  January,  in  the 


, year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand 
[L.  s.J  three,  and  of  the  Independence 
eighty-seventh. 

By  the  President : 

William  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State. 


eight 


of 


hundred 
the  United 


and  sixty- 
States  the 


ABRAHAM  LINCOLN. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , January  30,  1863. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : There  are  some  cases  of  maritime  prizes  and  others  of  a similar 
character  growing  out  of  the  confiscation  acts  which  are  not  brought 
within  the  powers  of  the  provisional  court,  following  the  exact  language 
of  the  acts  relating  to  these  subjects. 

It  is  suggested  here  that  a district  court  should  be  organized  for  the 
consideration  of  these  cases.  The  appointment  of  Judge  Peabody  for 
this  duty  would  give  entire  satisfaction  here.  I do  not  know  whether 
there  can  be  said  to  be  an  incumbent  judge  of  that  court  for  the  district 
or  not.  No  one  is  here  or  claims  to  hold  or  exercise  that  power. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major - General  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  February  1,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  TJ.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C. : 

General  : I have  just  returned  from  San  Elizario  and  Franklin,  m 
Northwestern  Texas,  whither  I went  to  confer  with  the  people,  who,  in 
their  alarm  at  the  rumors  of  another  invasion  from  the  eastern  part  of 
that  State,  were  fleeing  into  Chihuahua  and  leaving  their  fields  to  lie 
uncultivated.  The  commander  of  the  District  of  Arizona  had  issued 
an  order  that  all  lands  thus  abandoned  should  for  the  year  be  given 
to  others  who  would  cultivate  them.  This  had  a good  effect.  I am 
assured  that  they  will  all  return. 

There  are  no  new  rumors  of  an  advance  of  rebels  from  Texas.  They 
could  have  but  little  to  gain  by  such  an  expedition  except  the  right  of 
way  to  the  Pacific,  to  which  great  importance  is  said  to  be  attached  by 
the  Southern  Confederacy.  As  in  the  event  of  a separation,  to  use  their 
argument,  they  could  not  claim  territory  which  they  did  not  occupy,  it 
is  possible  that  an  effort  will  be  made  to  recover  and  hold  New  Mexico 
and  Arizona.  Besides  it  is  perhaps  a part  of  the  plan  to  persuade,  if 
possible,  Chihuahua  and  Sonora  to  secede  from  Mexico  and  join  the 
Southern  Confederacy.  For  this  purpose  it  is  alleged  that  Colonel 
Reily  was  sent  by  General  Sibley  last  winter  to  confer  with  the  Gov- 
ernors of  those  Spates. 


670 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Leaving  out  of  the  question  these  reasons  for  recovering  this  country 
by  troops  of  the  so-called  Southern  Confederacy,  the  probabilities  of  an 
invasion  cease.  At  this  moment  I consider  such  probabilities  so  re- 
mote as  to  justify  me  in  employing  the  troops  under  my  command  in 
chastising  the  hostile  tribes  of  Indians  by  which  the  settled  portion  of 
the  Territory  are  surrounded.  The  Mescalero  Apaches  have  been  com- 
pletely subdued.  I have  now  350  of  that  tribe  at  Fort  Sumner  and 
en  route  thither.  These  comprise  all  that  are  left  of  those  Indians, 
except  a few  who  have  either  run  off  into  Mexico  of  joined  the  Gila 
Apaches.  I shall  try  to  settle  what  have  come  in  on  a reservation  near 
Fort  Stanton  and  have  them  plant  fields  for  their  subsistence  the  com- 
ing year. 

The  expedition  ordered  into  the  Gila  country  has  already  been  quite 
successful.  Mangus  Colorado,  doubtless  the  worst  Indian  within  our 
boundaries,  and  one  who  has  been  the  cause  of  more  murders  and  of 
more  torturing  and  of  burning  at  the  stake  in  this  country  than  all 
others  together,  has  been  killed;  and  in  one  battle  a few  days  since 
over  20  of  his  followers  were  killed  (the  bodies  counted)  and  quite  an 
amount  of  stock  captured.  Amongst  this  stock  were  found  some  of 
the  United  States  mules  captured  from  one  of  our  trains  in  an  attack 
made  on  it  by  these  Indians  last  November  on  the  Jornada  del  Muerto. 
Hostilities  against  the  Gila  Apaches  are  now  prosecuted  with  vigor  and 
will  be  productive  of  lasting  benefits. 

The  evidences  of  rich  gold  fields  and  of  veins  of  silver  and  of  inex- 
haustible mines  of  the  richest  copper  in  the  country  at  the  head  of  the 
Miembres  Fiver  and  along  the  country  drained  by  the  Upper  Gila  are 
of  an  undoubted  character.  It  seems  providential  that  the  practical 
miners  of  California  should  have  come  here  to  assist  in  their  discovery 

and  development.  . 

I have  sent  four  companies  of  California  Volunteers  to  garrison  Port 
West,  in  the  Pinos  Altos  gold  region.  I beg  to  ask  authority  to  let, 
say,  one-fourth  of  the  command  at  a time  have  one  month’s  furlough  to 
work  in  the  gold  mines  on  their  own  account.  In  this  way  the  mines 
and  the  country  will  become  developed,  while  the  troops  will  become 
contented  to  remain  in  service  where  the  temptation  to  leave  it  is  very 

^ By  the  time  the  spring  opens  the  Apaches  of  the  Gila  will  doubtless 
have  been  subdued,  when  I propose  to  punish  the  Navajo  Indians  for 
their  recent  murders  and  wholesale  robberies.  It  is  not  practicable 
with  my  present  force  and  amount  of  means  to  make  effective  demon- 
strations on  more  than  one  tribe  at  a time.  It  may  be  set  down  as  a 
rule  that  the  Navajo  Indians  have  long  since  passed  that  point  when 
talking  would  be  of  any  avail.  They  must  be  whipped  and  fear  us  be- 
fore they  will  cease  killing  and  robbing  the  people.  All  of  the  Colorado 
Volunteers  have  been  ordered  home. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 
Brigadier-  General  Commanding. 


[February  1, 1863.— For  Carleton  to  Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army, 
transmitting  Maj.  David  Fergusson’s  report  of  survey  of  Port  Lobos 
and  Libertad,  Gulf  of  California,  &c.,  see  Series  III,  Vol.  III.] 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION. 


671 


Washington,  February  2, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding , <&c.,  New  Orleans  : 

General  : I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  dispatch  of 
January  15,  with  inclosures. 

As  stated  in  the  reports  which  you  have  forwarded,  your  army  is  not 
fully  supplied  with  land  transportation ; but  as  all  your  present  opera- 
tions will  be  on  or  near  water  communications  it  is  believed  that  a defi- 
ciency of  land  transportation  should  not  retard  your  movements.  The 
companies  of  cavalry  intended  for  your  command  which  are  ready  will 
be  sent  to  you  by  steam  as  expeditiously  as  possible.  You  will  remem- 
ber, however,  that  this  is  very  expensive,  as  nearly  one-half  of  the 
horses  are  at  this  season  lost  on  the  voyage  and  the  other  half  not  fit 
for  service  on  arrival.  General  Meigs  is  assured  by  the  former  quarter- 
master of  Major-General  Butler  that  4,000  or  5,000  horses  and  mules 
can  be  •collected  in  a short  time  in  the  country  occupied  by  our  troops, 
and  that  carts  and  wagons  suitable  for  the  temporary  purposes  of  land 
transportation  can  be  collected  in  New  Orleans  and  the  neighboring 
plantations.  Under  existing  circumstances  it  is  necessary  that  you 
supply  yourself  as  much  as  possible  from  the  country  occupied. 

General  Grant’s  forces,  have  been  for  some  time  operating  in  the 
vicinity  of  Vicksburg,  and  the  President  expects  that  you  will  permit 
no  obstacle  to  prevent  you  from  co-operating  with  him  by  some  move- 
ment up  the  Mississippi  River.  Of  such  vital  importance  is  this  co- 
operation that  nothing  but  absolute  necessity  will  excuse  any  further 
delay  on  your  part. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J 1 H.  W.  HALLECK.* 


Frenier  Station,  February  11,  1863. 
Lieut.  J.  H.  Metcalf,  A.  A.  A.  G.,  Third  Brigade : 

I received  an  order  through  your  office  (Sunday  evening,  the  8th  in- 
stant) to  send  out  a scouting  party  to  ascertain  the  position  of  the  en- 
emy’s pickets,  their  actual  force,  &c.  I detailed  First  Lieut.  George 
W.  Worster  and  10  men  to  start  the  next  morning  with  ten  days’  ra- 
tions. I gave  him  orders  to  find  their  pickets  and  capture  one  or 
more  of  them,  if  possible,  He  started  by  way  of  the  lake  with  the 
only  two  boats  we  had  and  with  a head  wind.  He  was  obliged  to  put 
in  at  the  De  Sair  Station,  6 miles  above  this  place,  and  change  one  of  his 
boats.  He  then  set  out  for  Pass  Manchac ; arrived  at  the  North  Pass 
early  Tuesday  morning.  They  went  up  the  Pass  to  within  half  a mile 
of  the  bridge,  landed,  and  made  their  way  on  foot  up  to  the  railroad. 
They  arrived  at  the  road  about  sunrise,  rested  themselves,  examined 
the  country,  and  found  by  examination  that  it  had  been  frequented  by 
some  persons,  and  the  lieutenant  concluded  it  best  to  spend  the  day 
watching  for  their  pickets,  as  he  felt  sure  they  were  in  the  habit  of  fre- 
quenting the  place  he  was  then  in.  About  10  o’clock  he  discovered  5 
armed  men  approaching.  He  immediately  ordered  5 of  his  men  to  ad- 
vance through  the  woods  and  get  in  their  rear.  This  order  was  promptly 
obeyed,  but  owing  to  the  easy  access  to  shelter  4 out  of  the  5 made 
their  escape. 

The  prisoner  taken  is  thus  far  very  non-committal.  He  says  he  is  a 
private  of  Company  C,  Second  Arkansas  Regiment,  Capt.  Thomas  Coch- 
ran, commanding.  He  says  there  are  two  more  companies  of  the  same 

# Answered  February  19.  See  Appendix,  p.  1099. 


672 


W.  FLA  , S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

regiment  at  Ponchatoula,  and  one  other  company,  he  does  not  know  i 
what  to  call  them.  Says  Colonel  Miller  is  in  command  of  the  post ; he  j 
says  there  are  about  350  men  in  all  at  the  place. 

Lieutenant  Worster,  after  learning  all  he  could  from  the  prisoner,  I 
started  for  home,  arrived  near  our  pickets  about  midnight,  made  land, 
and  waited  for  daylight,  it  being  very  dark  and  foggy. 

Shortly  after  he  had  landed  a boat  with  two  men  in  it  approached  the 
shore.  The  lieutenant  halted  them,  but  they  fled.  He  fired  upon  them 
but  they  were  soon  out  of  sight  in  the  fog,  but  only  to  be  taken  by  our , 
other  boat  that  was  fetching  up  the  rear.  One  of  these  men  proved  to  be 
a planter  by  the  name  of  C.  Eead.  He  lives  about  18  miles  below  New 
Orleans.  He  had  about  $18,000  current  paper  money  about  him  and 
$2,000  Confederate  money.  He  said  he  was  going  to  Canton,  Miss., 
where  his  wife  resides.  He  has  taken  the  oath  of  allegiance.  He  said  jl 
he  had  applied  for  a pass  and  was  refused  and  thought  he  would  go 
without  one.  The  other  man  is  a wood-chopper,  who  lives  near  New 
Orleans.  He  was  hired  by  Read  to  set  him  on  shore  near  Pass  Mknchac. 
He  has  taken  the  oath.  His  name  is  Edward  Kelly.  The  thought  has 
occurred  to  me  that  the  money  found  with  Read  is  for  the  payment  of 

rebel  soldiers.  . __  _ I 

While  this  work  was  going  on  I had  sent  Second  Lieutenant  McCul- 
loch, of  Company  H,  One  hundred  and  seventy-seventh  New  York  Regi-  j 
ment,  with  15  men,  by  way  of  railroad  to  Pass  Manchac,  to  see  if  the  i 
South  Pass  had  been  frequented  by  the  rebel  pickets,  and  gave  him  or-  i j 
ders  to  cross  the  Pass  and  connect  with  Lieutenant  Worster  if  he  found 
no  signs  of  the  enemy  nearer.  He  started  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  ; 
arrived  at  the  Pass  about  noon;  saw  no  signs  of  the  enemy;  succeeded 
in  making  a raft  that  would  hold  two  men,  and  crossed  the  Pass  with 
one  of  his  men.  The  ground  showed  the  appearance  of  being  frequented,  < 
and  they  soon  saw  two  armed  men  with  bayonets  fixed.  He  recrossed 
the  Pass,  and  as  there  were  no  facilities  for  crossing  with  his  men  he 
came  home.  It  appears  from  all  the  information  that  I have  gained 
that  this  force  at  Ponchatoula  comes  down  to  the  South  Pass  and  all 
about  the  country. 

My  scouting  parties  could  not  have  succeeded  better  than  they  have 
under  the  most  favorable  circumstances,  and  it  must  be  remembered 
that  we  labored  under  the  most  unfavorable  circumstances,  having  only 
one  boat  that  was  sea- worthy  and  that  only  capable  of  carrying  six  men, 
and  having  to  go  up  a narrow  pass  a distance  of  9 miles  inside  the 
enemy’s  picket. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

1 ’ O.  W.  TRASK, 

Captain , Company  L7,  Fourteenth  Maine  Regiment , 

Commanding  Piclcet  Station  at  Frenier , La. 

[Indorsements.] 

Defenses,  New  Orleans , February  17, 1863. 

These  reports  are  quite  satisfactory.  They,  however,  show  that  in- 
tercourse still  continues  across  the  Pass  (Manchac),  and  I am  appre- 
hensive it  will  continue  until  we  can  scour  the  northwest  shore  ot  the 
lake  with  boats.  I recommend  a good  light-draught  sloop  or  schooner 
be  furnished  by  the  quartermaster’s  department  for  this  service.  A 
couple  of  small  boats  besides  are  necessary  there. 

Respectfully  forwarded  to  Headquarters  DepaHineiR^the^Gulf. 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Chai‘.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


673 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , February  24,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  the  chief  quartermaster  to  charter  a schooner 
for  the  purpose.  (To  be  returned.) 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks: 

CHARLES  A.  HARTWELL, 

Lieutenant  and  Aide-de-Camp . 


March  6, 1863. 

Would  recommand  that  the  yacht  be  purchased  now  in  hands  of 
Colonel  Butler. 


S.  B.  HOLABIRD, 
Colonel  and  Quartermaster . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , February  13,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief \ Washington : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  arrival  of  the  following  trans- 
ports of  my  expedition  with  troops  since  the  31st  ultimo : 

Montebello:  With  250  convalescents  and  three  companies  Fiftieth 
Massachusetts. 

Constellation : Forty-eighth  Massachusetts. 

Jennie  Beals : Twenty-fifth  New  York  Battery  (horses  lost)  from  the 
wreck  of  Sparkling  Sea. 

E.  Wilder  Farley : Twelfth  Massachusetts  Battery. 

Illinois : Four  companies  and  headquarters  Twenty-first  Maine $ Forty- 
ninth  Massachusetts. 

George  Peabody : Eight  companies  Fourth  Massachusetts. 

Crescent : Company  F,  Second  Rhode  Island  Cavalry. 

Jenny  Lind  : Three  companies  and  headquarters  Fiftieth  Massachu- 
setts. 

Belle  Wood  : Company  C,  Second  Rhode  Island  Cavalry. 
Undaunted:  Two  companies (B  and  D)  Second  Rhode  Island  Cavalry. 
On  the  Illinois  came  also  Brigadier-Generals  Andrews  and  Dwight. 
Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major  - Genera  l , Com  manding . 


Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Hdqrs.  Second  Brig.,  First  Div., 
Camp  Stevens , La .,  February  13,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  C.  C.  Augur, 

Commanding  Division : 

General  : In  accordance  with  your  instructions  of  yesterday  I pro- 
ceeded to  Brashear  City  last  night.  I found  the  Diana  gone,  under 
your  order,  and  at  once  ordered  the  Kinsman,  with  Lieutenant  Loring 
on  board,  to  overhaul  the  Diana,  and  both  to  make  the  reconnaissance 
of  Butte-Ala-Rose  together.  I have  full  and,  I think,  perfectly  accu- 
rate information  of  the  landing  at  Indian  Bend.  A steamer  drawing  6 

43  R r — VOL  XV 


674 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXV IL 

feet  can  get  no  closer  than  3 miles  from  the  shore.  The  Kinsman, 
drawing  4 feet,  can  get  within  a mile.  The  flats  that  we  can  collect  can 
get  within  about  100  to  200  yards  of  shore.  The  bottom  of  the  lake  at 
this  point  is  sandy  and  hard.  Whether  hard  enough  or  not  to  bear  my 
light  artillery  I could  not  ascertain.  There  is  a levee,  which  could 
serve  the  purpose  of  an  intrench  ment,  about  three-quarters  of  a mile 
long,  just  below  the  road  along  the  lake  shore. 

The  road  from  the  lake  to  Bayou  Teche  is  good  and  about  three- 
quarters  of  a mile  long.  Where  the  road  strikes  the  bayou  is  a ferry ; 
this  ferry  is  a small  flat,  pulled  from  one  side  to  the  other  by  rope.  -A 
mile  above  this  ferry  is  a bridge  (the  nearest  one  to  the  road).  The 
distance  from  this  road  to  the  position  which  the  enemy  now  occupies 
below  Centreville  is  20  miles  by  road.  I am  collecting  all  the  flats  I 
can  find.  Whether  I can  get  a sufficient  number  is  a question ; whether 
after  I get  them  I can  transport  my  force  in  there  depends  upon  the 
weather.  The  landing  will  be  very  slow  for  everything  but  infantry, 
as  this  can  jump  overboard. 

The  crossing  of  the  Teche,  if  the  enemy  is  vigilant,  can  be  made  a 
still  slower  operation  by  the  destruction  of  the  ferry  and  bridge  or  the 

latter  alone.  , , . 

The  gunboats  which  attack  in  front  must  have  a force  on  shore  to 
clear  out  rifle  pits  and  to  assist  in  removing  the  two  very  serious  ob- 
structions in  the  channel  of  the  Teche  or  they  cannot  get  within  range 
of  the  enemy  at  all.  Infantry  above  on  the  boats  will  not  accomplish 
this.  If  I give  from  my  brigade  a force  equal  to  this  task  I will  have 
too  small  a force  to  attack  the  enemy  in  rear.  All  the  information  I 
get  of  the  enemy’s  movements  is  that,  in  expectation  of  an  attack  from 
a large  force,  he  is  concentrating  all  his  troops  at  Camp  Bisland,  which 
is  the  intrenched  position  about  6 miles  below  Centreville. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’■  G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General,  JJ.  8.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Brigade. 

p#  s. X have  ordered  an  expedition  to-night  to  capture,  if  possible, 

some  of  the  enemy’s  pickets,  and  through  them,  if  possible,  to  get  in- 
formation. 


Mesilla,  Ariz.,  Februarg  13,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  R.  West, 

Commanding  District  of  Arizona , Mesilla : 

I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  compliance  with  your  instructions, 
dated  the  3d  of  January,  I proceeded  to  Chihuahua,  haying  left  here  on 
the  5th  and  arrived  at  my  destination  on  the  17th  ultimo,  and  at  once 
presented  myself  to  His  Excellency  Don  Luis  Terrazas,  Governor  of  the 
State,  who  appointed  the  21st  for  conference.*  In  the  mean  time  I had 
met,  dined  with,  and  had  considerable  social  intercourse  with  him. 

At  the  appointed  time  I opened  the  subject  of  my  mission  to  His  Ex- 
cellency, viz,  “The  prevention  of  abuses  against  the  Government  ol  the 
United  States,  which  have  been  committed  by  certain  rebels  who  have 
taken  refuge  in  Mexican  territory.”  In  bringing  the  subject  before  the 
Governor  I adhered  to  the  language  of  your  letter,  which  presented  .he 
case  lucidly.  The  Governor  stated  that  he  had  already  been  mtormed 

* See  also  Fergusson’s  letter  of  same  date,  inclosed  in  Carleton  to  Thomas,  February 
23,  1863. 


Chap.  XXYH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  675 

by  the  authorities  of  the  Presidio  del  Norte  and  El  Paso  of  the  facts 
complained  of,  and  that  he  had  issued  orders  for  the  prevention  of  the 
like  occurrence  again,  further  assuring  me  that  he  would  reiterate  his 
orders,  enjoining  a strict  compliance  with  them,  and  would  give  me 
certified  copies  of  said  instructions,  which  I have  the  honor  to  inclose 
herewith.  The  Governor  said  the  prefects  of  the  frontier  allowed  the' 
passage  of  Skillman  and  others,  as  they  came  under  the  pretext  that 
they  were  on  purposes  of  trade,  &c.,  and  were  armed  solely  for  self- 
defense  against  Indians. 

He  stated  that  he  would  with  pleasure  grant  passports  to  United 
States  officers,  and  such  arms  and  escorts  as  might  be  necessary  for 
their  protection,  desiring  to  visit  Chihuahua  for  the  purpose  of  obtain- 
ing supplies,  and  assured  me  that  no  efforts  of  any  parties  to  prejudice 
the  Mexican  people  against  our  cause  would  avail,  as  they  were  almost  - 
unanimous  in  their  good-will  toward  our  Government,  looking  upon/ 
the  cause  of  the  Union  as  the  cause  of  human  progress  and  closely 
identified  with  their  own  welfare  as  a nation.  Much  social  intercourse 
with  the  principal  families  in  Chihuahua  has  convinced  me  that  such  is 
the  fact,  and  I am  sure  the  Governor  is  very  friendly,  and  understands 
the  question  at  issue  in  our  country  very  intelligently,  and  heartily 
yields  our  cause  all  his  sympathies.  He  has  given  proofs  during  my 
limited  stay,  which  I cheerfully  acknowledge  and  bear  testimony  to. 
He  desired  me  to  convey  the  assurance  of  his  distinguished  considera- 
tion to  the  general  commanding  the  Department  of  New  Mexico  and  to 
myself,  and  to  express  his  good-will  and  utmost  desire  to  preserve  and 
cherish  the  friendly  relations  existing  between  the  two  nations,  and  to 
say  that  he  will  prevent,  so  far  as  in  his  power,  the  passage  through 
Chihuahua  of  any  armed  organizations  having  hostile  designs  against 
our  Government. 

His  Excellency  expressed  a hope  that  some  measures  might  be  adopted 
to  rid  the  neighborhood  of  the  Presidio  del  Norte  of  a gang  of  Mexican 
and  American  desperadoes  who  live  at  Leatoffs  Fort,  on  the  Texas 
side  of  the  Rio  Grande.  He  stated  that  recently  they  crossed  to  Del 
Norte  and  took  a peaceable  citizen  (naturalized  American  I understand), 
named  Wolfe,  from  his  bed,  and  carrying  him  across  the  river  hanged 
him  until  life  was  nearly  extinct,  for  no  other  reason  than  that  he  was 
a Union  man.  Outrages  of  this  nature  are  reported  as  frequent  there 
by  these  villains,  the  chief  of  whom  is  one  Edward  Hall,  living  at  Lea- 
toffs  Fort.  In  the  absence  of  American  troops  or  civil  authorities  I 
would  strongly  recommend  that  the  Governor  of  Chihuahua  be  author- 
ized, on  the  proper  requisition,  to  cross  the  river  and  arrest  at  least  the 
Mexican  desperadoes.  Hall,  the  American  desperado,  recently  robbed 
Fort  Davis  of  much  public  property,  I was  informed,  and  sold  it  in 
Chihuahua.  He  claims  to  be  an  agent  of  the  so-called  Confederate 
States,  and  exhibited  a paper  signed  by  a notary  public  to  the  effect 
that  he  was  legally  empowered  to  dispose  of  property  taken  from  Fort 
Davis.  Justice  has  a strong  claim  on  this  bad  rebel. 

I left  Chihuahua  on  the  2d,  returning  via  Guadalupe  and  San  Elizario, 
and  arrived  yesterday,  the  12th  instant.  I will  hereafter  submit  an 
itinerary  of  the  route  traveled. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  FERGUSSON, 

Colonel  First  Cavalry , California  Volunteers. 


676 


W.  FLA  , S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXV1L 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , February  14,  1863. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  communica- 
tion of  19th  January  last,  inclosing  copy  of  communication  from  the 
Secretary  of  State  in  relation  to  the  treatment  of  questions  growing  out 
«of  claims  of  French  subjects. 

Since  assuming  command  of  this  department  I have  accorded  to  the 
^representatives  of  foreign  governments  all  the  consideration  they  could 
possibly  claim.  All  matters  relating  to  the  claims  of  French  citizens 
have  been  treated  with  prudence  and  moderation,  and  the  relations 
between  myself  and  the  French  agent  in  this  city,  as  well  as  with  the 
• other  representatives  and  agents  of  foreign  governments,  are  of  the 
friendliest  nature. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

’ N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  First  Division, 
Camp  Stevens , La.,  February  15,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  C.  0.  Augur, 

Commanding  Division : 

General  : I feel  it  a duty  which  I owe  you  and  my  country  to  ad- 
dress you  at  this  late  hour  of  the  night  on  the  present  proposed  move- 
ment on  Butte-a  la-Eose  and  the  Teche  country.  I of  course  do  not 
know  your  general  plans;  but  I judge  from  my  instructions,  and  what 
I heard  while  in  company  with  you  and  the  other  generals,  that  your 
obiect  is  to  gain  possession  of  Butte-a-la-Rose,  and,  if  possible,  capture 
the  force  on  the  Teche.  In  all  honesty  and  candor  I do  not  believe  the 
present  plan  to  be  the  proper  one,  and  for  the  following  reasons : 

We  have  enough  proof  that  the  country  in  the  vicinity  of  Butte-a-la- 
Rose,  on  the  banks  of  theGrosse  Tete  and  the  Atchafalaya,  is  overflowed. 
We  also  know  that  the  only  other  communication  from  the  Atchafalaya 
(that  is  via  Red  River)  to  Port  Hudson  is  controlled  by  the  gun- 
boats which  have  passed  Vicksburg.  Re-enforcements  cannot  there- 
fore be  sent  from  Port  Hudson.  We  have  ample  proof  that  by  this 
time  the  whole  of  Sibley's  Texan  brigade  is  somewhere  in  the  Opelousas 
country,  either  at  Opelousas,  to  act  as  a reserve  to  General  Mouton  s 
force,  or  at  Alexandria,  to  hold  the  Red  River.  I have  engaged  Gen- 
eral Mouton's  force  twice  and  have  been  opposed  to  it  during  tflree 
and  a half  months,  and  I think  I know  its  exact  strength,  condition, 
and  position.  The  main  body  is  in  rear  of  intrenchments  on  Madam 
Meade's  plantation,  6 miles  below  Centreville.  If  we  defeat  these  two 
commands  we  form  a junction  with  our  forces  near  Vicksburg.  By 
pursuing  our  success  to  Alexandria  we  may  capture  General  Mouton  s 
force  and  with  little  loss,  unless  it  form  a junction  with  Sibley.  It  it 
forms  a junction,  we  will  meet  them  near  Iberia  and  engage  them  in 
open  field,  and  with  a proper  force  can  defeat  them.  General  Emory  s 
whole  division  (moved  to  Brashear  Gity)  and  my  brigade  can  do  this 
work.  Let  the  light  transportation  now  with  General  Emory  and  all 
destined  for  and  collected  by  me  be  collected  at  Brashear  City  Let 
two  of  the  brigades  be  moved  to  and  landed  at  Indian  Bend,  while  tne 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  677 

other  two  are  crossed  and  attack  in  front.  If  Mouton  escapes  (which 
I think,  if  properly  conducted,  will  he  doubtful)  we  form  a junction  at 
Indian  Bend.  We  proceed  to  attack  and  with  much  superior  force 
(because  I do  not  believe  Mouton  and  Sibley  united  will  exceed  6,000 
men).  We  can  defeat  them,  pursue  our  success  to  Alexandria,  and  of 
course  get  Butte-a-la-Rose;  our  gunboats,  to  facilitate  its  fall,  attacking 
it,  as  they  cannot  accompany  us  farther  up  than  Saint  Martinville.  I 
believe  this  to  be  the  true  and  only  correct  plan  of  the  campaign,  and 
hence  these  views  are  submitted. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  February  16,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,, 

General-in-  Chief : 

Sir  : Upon  assuming  command  of  this  department  I found  the  dis- 
position of  troops  at  Pensacola  and  in  that  vicinity  substantially  as  fol- 
lows : Three  regiments  of  infantry,  say  1,300,  for  duty  in  the  city  of 
Pensacola;  two  companies  of  the  Second  Artillery  at  Port  Barrancas 
and  three  companies  of  the  same  regiment  at  Fort  Pickens.  The  forces 
at  Forts  Pickens  and  Barrancas  combined  reported  263  for  duty. 

Reflection  upon  this  subject,  confirmed  by  the  opinions  of  officers 
who  have  studied  the  position  and  upon  whose  judgment  I rely,  satis- 
fied me  that  this  disposition  was  founded  in  the  radical  error  of  placing 
the  main  force  at  a comparatively  unimportant  point,  by  no  means  the 
key  of  the  position,  and  leaving  the  salient  points  defended  by  minimum 
garrisons.  I regard  the  occupation  of  the  town  of  Pensacola  by  the 
bulk  of  our  forces  as  unwise,  for  the  reason  that  we  can  hold  the  point 
with  a third  of  the  force,  unless  the  enemy  attacks  in  large  numbers 
and  with  determination,  in  which  case  the  whole  force  would  not  suffice 
for  the  purpose;  that  if,  expecting  such  an  attack,  we  attempted  to  de- 
fend it  in  this  manner  we  should  be  cut  off  from  the  forts  and  from  re- 
treat, leaving  two  positions  of  great  national  importance,  defended  by 
263  men,  open  to  attack,  and  one  of  them  (Barrancas)  to  probable  cap- 
ture ; and,  finally,  that  this  occupation  of  a town  without  purpose  tends 
greatly  to  the  demoralization  of  the  command. 

I have  therefore  dispatched  Lieutenant-Colonel  Abert,  inspector-gen- 
eral of  this  department,  to  Pensacola,  with  written  instructions,  should 
he  find  the  condition  of  things  in  that  district  to  correspond  with  my 
impression,  to  put  in  force  the  following  disposition : City  of  Pensacola, 
400  men,  infantry ; Fort  Barrancas  and  its  redoubt,  one  regiment  of  in- 
fantry and  one  regular  battery — say  two  companies  of  the  Second  Ar- 
tillery— and  Fort  Pickens  and  Santa  Rosa  Island,  the  remainder  of  the 
infantry — say  one  regiment  and  three  companies  of  the  Second  Artil- 
lery. 

With  Lieutenant-Colonel  Abert,  as  a demonstration  induced  by  re- 
cent reports  of  an  intended  attack  on  Pensacola,  I have  sent  the  Twenty- 
eighth  Maine,  Colonel  Woodman,  for  temporary  service  only,  to  be 
posted  where  Colonel  Abert  may  deem  best,  and  to  return  here  in  sea- 
son to  aid  our  river  movements,  if  necessary. 

Since  my  No.  3 of  this  morning  a report  reaphes  me,  which  I should 
be  sorry  to  believe,  that  the  enemy  has  been  re-enforced  at  Port  Hudson 


678  w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

by  General  E.  K.  Smith  with  8,000  men,  and  that  they  have  now  at  that 
place  43,000  men.  This  is  said  to  have  been  written  by  one  ol  Smith  s 
staff  officers  to  an  intimate  friend  in  this  city.  There  is  nothing  to  con- 
firm it  nor  does  it  confirm  our  previous  accounts,  which  have  placed 
the  force  at  Port  Hudson  at  less  than  20,000.  They  are  short  of  sup- 
plies at  Port  Hudson,  and  if  the  enemy  had  had  35,000  men  there,  or 
anything  like  that  number,  we  should  not  have  had  long  to  wait  tor  an 
attack  on  us  at  Baton  Eouge. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

X,  P . BAXkb, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) 
No.  17.  f 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , February  18, 1863. 

I.  No  negroes  will  be  taken  from  the  plantations,  until  further  orders, 
by  any  officer  or  other  person  in  the  service  of  the  United  States  with- 
out previous  authority  from  these  headquarters. 

II.  All  privates  of  the  nine-months  regiments  of  infantry  serving  m 
this  department,  desiring  to  re-enlist  for  three  years  or  during  the  war 
in  one  of  the  regiments  of  cavalry  or  batteries  of  artillery  also  serving 
in  this  department,  will  be  honorably  discharged  from  the  former  regi- 
ments by  orders  from  these  headquarters  upon  so  re-enlistmg.  lhey 
will  record  their  names  at  the  adjutant’s  office  of  their  respective  regi- 
ments at  once  or  before  the  1st  of  April  next.  Lists  of  the  names  so 
recorded  will  be  forwarded  weekly  to  brigade  or  division  headquarters. 
Cavalry  or  artillery  officers  desiring  to  enlist  such  men  will  apply  at 
the  proper  brigade  or  division  headquarters  for  these  lists  and  tor  per- 
mission  to  visit  the  regiments  to  recruit.  Not  more  than  50  men  will 
be  so  taken  from  any  one  regiment,  and  none  will  be  taken  under  any 
circumstances  whose  names  are  not  on  such  lists. 

III.  The  various  headquarters  in  the  Department  of  the  Gull  will  be 
designated  by  small  fiags  or  guidons,  4 feet  square,  attached  to  a lance 
12  feet  long,  made  in  two  joints,  as  follows : 

The  headquarters  of  the  Nineteenth  Army  Corps  and  Department 
of  the  Gulf  by  a blue  flag,  with  a white  four-pointed  star  in  the  center ; 

the  figures  19,  in  red,  on  the  star.  . _ 

Division  headquarters,  red,  with  a white  four-pointed  star  m the 
center ; the  number  of  the  division  in  black  figures  on  the  star. 

Brigade  headquarters,  blue,  white  and  blue  horizontal  stripes  ol 
equalwidth  5 the  number  of  the  brigade  in  black  figures  on  the  white 

" These  flags  will  be  habitually  displayed  in  front  of  the  headquarters 
they  designate  and  on  the  march  will  be  carried  near  the  person  ot  the 
commanding  officer. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : R mWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Emory’s  Division, 

Indian  Village , La.,  February  20,  1863. 

Capt.  B.  O.  Ives, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : In  obedience  to  the  order  of  the  brigadier-general  com- 


•Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


679 


manding  division,  issued  on  the  18th  instant,  I made  arrangements  on 
that  day  for  an  expedition  to  Rosedale  on  the  next,  but  before  midnight 
of  the  18th  a citizen  arrived  from  Port  Hudson  via  False  River  (old 
bed)  and  Rosedale,  who  satisfied  me  that  the  enemy  evacuated  Rosedale 
on  the  morning  of  the  17th  instant  and  marched  up  to  Grosse  Tete,  but 
whether  to  Port  Hudson  via  False  River  or  to  the  Atchafalaya  he 
was  uncertain,  because  the  two  routes  are  identical  as  far  as  the  con- 
fluence of  the  Grosse  Tete  and  Fordoche.  I then  decided  to  clear  the 
Grosse  T6te  of  all  obstructions  to  steamboat  navigation,  and  requested 
Colonel  Gooding  and  Lieutenant  Watson  to  send  with  me  the  291, 
the  Bee,  and  two  of  the  launches,  so  that  I might  take  up,  besides  my 
infantry,  20  artillerists  mounted  as  cavalry,  and  during  the  night,  from 
Rosedale  as  a base,  send  a small  party  to  gallop  to  False  River  and 
back;  another  to  the  Atchafalaya;  also  a party  on  hand  cars  to  ex- 
amine the  railway  toward  Baton  Rouge,  and  still  another  to  seize  loco- 
motives and  cars  on  the  railroad  near  the  Marigouin,  and  take  them, 
with  a part  of  the  troops,  to  the  river  if  practicable. 

My  communication  to  Colonel  Gooding  and  Lieutenant  Watson  (who 
were  at  Plaquemine),  requesting  the  use  of  the  boats,  was  met  by  your 
telegraph  ordering  away  the  brigade.  Having  nothing  but  small  boats, 
I could  only  hope  to  accomplish  a part  of  my  purpose.  I immediately 
set  out  with  80  men,  and  before  sunset  cleared  the  obstructions  from 
the  Grosse  Tete,  so  as  to  make  it  navigable  for  gunboats  or  steamboats. 
We  then  marched  6 miles  from  Little  Portage  to  within,  say,  3 miles  of 
Rosedale,  and  halted  there.  I went  to  Rosedale  with  a small  party  (6) 
on  borrowed  horses. 

The  enemy  had  left  on  the  morning  of  the  17th  instant  by  the  road 
which  lies  along  the  west  bank  of  the  Grosse  Tete,  and  branches  off  at 
the  junction  of  the  Grosse  Tete  and  Fordoche  into  two  roads,  of  which 
one  extends  along  the  Upper  Grosse  T6te  to  the  river  above  Port  Hud- 
son, and  the  other  along  the  Fordoche  to  the  Opelousas  road,  which 
connects  the  west  bend  of  the  Fordoche  with  the  Atchafalaya.  The 
distance  from  Rosedale  to  False  River  is  about  25  miles,  and  from  Rose- 
dale to  the  Atchafalaya  about  the  same.  Both  are  good  roads.  The 
roads  near  Rosedale  I found  excellent  and  the  country  is  very  fine  and 
high  and  dry.  The  Grosse  Tete  is,  I believe,  navigable  by  the  smaller 
steamers  and  gunboats  10  miles  above  Rosedale  and  by  the  smallest 
(steamer  Louisiana  Belle)  to  a bridge  within  6 miles  of  False  River.  It 
may  be  that  steamers  of  a larger  class  can  make  that  point  at  the  pres- 
ent stage  of  water. 

The  rolling  stock  of  the  railway  can  be  secured,  but  I was  informed 
(how  correctly  I cannot  confidently  state)  that  the  railway  is  submerged 
for  a considerable  distance  about  4 miles  east  of  Rosedale. 

It  would  have  been  very  gratifying  to  me  to  be  able  to  send  the 
scouts  to  False  River  and  the  Atchafalaya.  We  marched  back  to  our 
boats  and  embarked,  arriving  at  Indian  Village  before  morning. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HALBERT  E.  PAINE, 

Commanding  Brigade. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Third  Division, 

Carrollton , La .,  February  21,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  Major-General  Banks.  Colonel  Gooding,  in 
withdrawing  the  gunboat  and  launches,  mistook  my  order,  which  was 


680 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.XXVIL 

telegraphed  from  your  headquarters,  and  which  directed  not  to  inter- 
fere with  this  movement  of  Colonel  Paine.  Yesterday,  as  soon  as  I 
learned  Colonel  Gooding’s  mistake,  I sent  back  the  launches  under 
Lieutenant  Watson,  of  the  Navy,  and  telegraphed  to  Colonel  Paine 
that  if  he  desired  it  I would  also  send  back  the  Barataria. 

I think  you  should  see  this  at  once.  It  may,  in  connection  with 
other  information  you  may  possess,  suggest  a new  disposition  of  Paine’s 
brigade.  His  transports  will  reach  him  to-day,  and  I shall  telegraph 
him  to  await  further  orders  at  Plaquemine.  This  will  give  you  time 
to  deliberate  without  essentially  delaying  the  original  movement. 

W.  H.  EMORY, 
Brigadier - General . 

— 

Brashear  City,  February  21,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  G.  Weitzel,  U.  S.  V., 

Commanding  Brigade : 

General  : The  gentleman  who  arrived  to  day  says  he  has  seen  and 
talked  with  General  Sibley,  who  has  relieved  Mouton ; that  the  only 
re-enforcements  yet  arrived  as  low  as  the  obstructions  near  Patterson- 
ville  are  the  cavalry  that  have  been  at  Grosse  Tete  under  Colonel  Fre- 
ret,  numbering  about  300.  They  have  been  the  last  two  days  below 
Patterson ville.  He  has  dined  with  General  Sibley,  whom  he  heard  say 
expected  re-enforcements  immediately,  consisting  of  3,500  men  (all 
mounted).  He  (the  Spanish  gentleman)  has  heard  of  a large  number 
of  troops  passing  through  Opelousas,  coming  this  way,  all  Texans.  He 
says  Kirby  Smith  is  daily  expected  to  take  command ; that  he  is  to- 
bring  two  Louisiana  brigades  (recently  from  Virginia)  with  him ; he 
does  not  know  whose  brigades  they  are.  The  Host  is  near  New  Iberia \ 
is  not  yet  ready  for  service.  He  passed  through  the  earthworks  above 
Pattersonville  yesterday.  There  are  no  heavy  guns  there.  Mouton  is 
in  New  Iberia.  Two  new  batteries  arrived  a few  days  since  at  New 
Iberia  from  Alexandria ; these  he  saw ; they  were  finely  equipped,  and 
had  six  pieces  each,  all  brass;  they  were  both  Louisiana  batteries* 
Besides  these  he  is  sure  there  are  two  more,  making,  with  Semmes’, 
Winchester’s,  and  the  Saint  Mary’s,  seven,  all  of  them  having  six  guns 
each.  The  Saint  Mary’s  battery  is  near  Indian  Bend,  where  the  gun* 
boats  went  last  Saturday ; but  on  the  Teche  there  is  a shell  road  from  ; 
the  Teche  to  the  lake.  Semmes  and  Winchester  have  each  four  pieces 
at  Camp  Bisland,  and  each  one  section  at  the  Cote  Blanche,  Weeks7 
plantation,  on  the  sea-shore.  At  Camp  Bisland  they  have  the  Twenty- 
eighth  Louisiana,  Fournet’s  regiment,  and  half  of  the  Eighteenth  Lou- 
isiana, Vincent’s  cavalry,  and  100  or  200  Texans,  besides  Freret’s  men.  f 

Waller’s  battalion  is  at  Indian  Bend.  The  other  half  of  the  Eight- 
eenth is  at  Fausse  Point,  on  the  lake.  At  Butte-a-la-Rose  they  have 
two  or  three  heavy  guns  (he  does  not  know  which),  one  of  the  new  bat- 
teries, and  the  Crescent  Regiment.  He  does  not  know  how  many  the 
Crescent  numbers,  but  knows  they  have  had  a great  many  recruits 
lately.  The  Eighteenth  has  also  recruited,  and  new  regiments  are 
being  formed  from  recruits  and  conscripts  raised  on  the  Red  River  and 
all  about  this  part  of  the  State. 

The  giver  of  this  information  is  a Spanish  subject;  has  a Spanish 
passport,  dated  Cadiz,  1859.  He  is  going  to  Havana;  has  lived  the 
last  two  years  at  Indian  Bend. 

The  new  regiments  are  being  organized  at  Camp  Pratt.  He  thinks- 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


681 


no  torpedoes  have  been  placed  in  the  Teche,  but  does  not  know.  He 
says  the  officers  told  him  if  questions  were  asked  him  by  us  to  say  he 
knew  nothing,  but  made  him  give  no  parole.  I think  he  tells  the 
truth.  He  was  in  Hew  Iberia  last  Monday.'  He  says  they  have  the 
Host  nearly  ready.  The  Zouave  (small),  he  has  heard,  they  intend 
arming.  The  Cricket,  Darby,  Gossamer,  Blue  Hammock  were  all 
small  stern-wheel  boats,  the  Gossamer  being  the  largest.  The  Queen 
of  the  West  was  reported  to  have  been  captured  and  believed  by  Gen- 
eral Sibley  to  be  true.  All  the  small  boats  last  named  are  used  as 
transports.  The  deserters  they  have  had  from  us  have  told  them  we 
did  not  intend  attacking  them  at  present.  Two  men  from  the  battery 
escaped  yesterday  and  went  over  to  them.  These  he  saw  yesterday 
evening  or  this  morning.  I suppose  you  must  have  heard  of  the  recent 
deserters,  7 in  number,  from  our  forces  here  to  tbe  enemy.  I had  not 
heard  of  them  before  now.  The  Spaniard  is  now  here,  but  goes  to  Hew* 
Orleans  to-morrow. 

If  you  wish  anything  done  with  him  telegraph. 

Respectfully, 

PICKERIHG  D.  ALLEH. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  First  Division, 

Camp  Stevens , February  21,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  P.  Banks, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans , La. : 

General  : The  above  is  from  my  aide-de-camp  at  Berwick  Bay.  1 
believe  every  word  of  it.  It  agrees  with  all  I previously  knew  and 
heard  from  reliable  sources.  I will  be  at  Brashear  City  with  my  whole 
brigade  by  to-morrow  night. 

G.  WEITZEL, 

Brigadier- General,  U.  S.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Brigade . 


Headquarters  Department  of  Hew  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe , N.  Mex.,  February  23, 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C. : 

General  : Early  in  January  of  this  year  I authorized  General  West, 
United  States  V olunteers,  commanding  the  District  of  Arizona,  in  this  de- 
partment, to  send  to  the  city  of  Chihuahua,  in  Mexico,  Maj.  (now  Lieut. 
Col.)  David  Fergusson,  First  Cavalry,  California  Volunteers,  that  he 
might  make  arrangements  with  parties  living  in  that  city,  so  that  we 
could  gain  intelligence  of  the  rebel  troops  in  Texas,  particularly  with 
regard  to  an  advance,  if  any  should  be  made,  of  any  considerable  force, 
having  in  view  a re-occupation  of  Hew  Mexico  or  Arizona. 

Major  Fergusson  has  filled  the  requirements  of  his  mission  in  a most 
satisfactory  manner.  Inclosed  herewith  please  find  a copy  of  his  re- 
port. You  will  see  that  it  is  very  full,  and  gives  much  information  that 
will  be  very  valuable  to  the  War  Department  as  to  the  strength  and 
probable  disposition  of  troops  in  Texas ; of  the  dissatisfaction  alleged 
to  prevail  among  those  troops ; of  the  cost  of  provisions  and  other 
articles  in  that  State $ of  the  resources  of  Chihuahua ; of  rebels  escap- 
ing from  California  through  Chihuahua  to  the  South. 


682 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 


I also  inclose  a separate  communication  from  Major  Fergusson  in  re- 
lation to  some  pieces  of  artillery  bought  by  a private  citizen  of  Chihua- 
hua from  the  rebels  as  they  retreated  from  New  Mexico.  It  is  submitted 
if  it  would  not  be  well  for  the  President  to  present  these  pieces  to  the 
Governor  of  Chihuahua,  who  now  has  them  in  his  possession.  It  would 
cement  the  good  feeling  now  growing  up  between  us  and  the  Mexican  ! 
authorities  along  the  line. 

You  will  also  find  herewith  inclosed  a copy  of  a letter  from  myself 
to  His  Excellency  the  Governor  of  Chihuahua,  which  touches  on  points 
that  should  be  known  to  the  War  Department. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Mesilla,  Ariz.,  February  13,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  R.  West, 

Commanding  District  of  Arizona , Present : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  accordance  with  your 
verbal  instructions  previous  to  my  leaving  for  Chihuahua  to  make  if 
possible  arrangements  to  obtain  intelligence  of  military  movements  of 
Texas  toward  New  Mexico  and  Arizona,  I endeavored  to  carry  out  your 
orders  in  the  following  manner: 

Feeling  my  way  cautiously,  I commenced  at  El  Paso  to  make  inqui- 
ries regarding  the  status  and  political  sentiments  of  Americans  residing 
in  Chihuahua.  Mr.  Reuben  W.  Creel,  a native  of  Kentucky,  a mer- 
chant in  Chihuahua,  was  highly  spoken  of  in  El  Paso  by  gentlemen  ' 
entitled  to  confidence  as  a true  loyal  American ; also  Charles  Moye, 
esq.,  a native  of  Hamburg  and  a naturalized  American,  and  Mr.  Henry 
Muller,  but  the  latter  gentleman  was  not  in  the  country.  Dr.  David 
R.  Diffendorfer,  of  El  Paso,  gave  me  a letter  of  introduction  to  Mr.  1 
Moye,  which  insured  me  a princely  reception  from  this  most  hospitable 
gentleman  and  worthy  American. 

On  my  arrival  Mr.  Creel  called  upon  me,  and  I was  soon  convinced 
he  is  a sound,  enthusiastic,  loyal  citizen,  unwavering  in  his  devotion  to 
the  Union.  He  was  the  only  native  American  resident  who  called  dur- 
ing my  stay  in  the  city;  a fair  index  of  the  political  sentiments  of  the 
few  others  residing  there. 

Mr.  Creel  assured  me  that  it  was  impracticable  to  obtain  intelligence, 
political  or  military,  from  Texas  through  the  medium  of  correspond- 
ence between  merchants  and  business  men  residing  in  Texas  and  Chi- 
huahua. The  system  of  repression  and  espionage  being  so  complete  in 
Texas,  no  one  dares  allude  in  letters  to  the  forbidden  topics.  All  let- 
ters going  through  the  mails  are  opened,  and  death  is  the  penalty  of 
alluding  to  the  condition  of  public  affairs. 

I soon  found  no  one  would  risk  the  lives  of  their  correspondents  living 
in  Texas  by  writing  on  these  subjects  of  intense  interest  to  all.  I there- 
fore wrote  a note  (copy  herewith)  to  each  of  the  American  consuls  at 
Monterey  and  Matamoras,  having  been  satisfied  of  their  loyalty,  asking 
them  to  assist  in  obtaining  and  forwarding  the  desired  information. 

I appointed  Mr.  Creel  confidential  agent  of  the  military  authorities  of 
the  Department  of  New  Mexico.  He  undertook  very  readily  and  cheer- 
fully to  make  every  effort  to  gain  intelligence  by  correspondence  with 
the  consuls  named  above,  and  with  merchants  and  others  in  whom  he 
has  confidence  at  Monterey,  Matamoras,  &c.  Mr.  Creel  addressed  a 


jhap.  xx  vn.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


683 


iote  to  each  of  the  consuls  previous  to  my  leaving.  I have  every  con- 
idence  he  will  spare  no  effort  to  obtain  and  forward  reliable  informa- 
;ion.  He  has  lived  about  sixteen  years  in  Chihuahua ; is  highly  re- 
spected by  all,  and  will  ascertain  from  other  residents  such  intelligence 
is  they  may  receive  every  mail  in  their  private  correspondence  on  the 
subject  in  question.  I respectfully  recommend  that  he  be  paid  a salary 
such  as  the  commanding  general  may  deem  equitable.  He  asked  for 
lone  and  will  serve  his  country  cheerfully  gratis,  but  he  has  been  un- 
fortunate in  business,  and  has  a large  family  to  support,  and  “ the  laborer 
s worthy  of  his  hire.” 

Some  responsible  German  gentlemen,  who  sympathize  with  our  cause, 
ind  other  persons  of  distinguished  position  have  promised  and  will  aid 
Mr.  Creel  in  gaining  intelligence.  These  gentlemen  receive  correspond- 
ence from  Monterey  and  Matamoras  every  mail,  and  the  condition  of 
rexan  affairs  are  pretty  well  known  at  these  points,  for  fugitives  arrive 
there  almost  daily  from  Texas.  The  States  of  Tamaulipas  and  Nuevo 
Leon,  particularly  the  latter,  have  large  numbers  of  Union  families,  who 
sscaped,  residing  in  them.  In  conversation  with  people  from  Presidio 
lei  Norte  who  have  been  over  to  Texas,  to  the  Limpias,  Fort  Davis, 
Puerco,  and  to  a salt  lake  recently  discovered  about  two  days’  travel 
from  the  Puerco  above  the  El  Paso  and  between  the  Missouri  and  San 
Antonio  road,  I was  assured  that  no  force  of  the  enemy  was  in  that 
neighborhood  or  suspected  to  be. 

A Mexican  (Lieut.  Santiago  Ramirez),  of  Del  Norte,  offered  to  advise 
Mr.  Charles  Moye  of  any  Texas  troops  coming  this  way.  Ramirez  is  a 
very  respectable  man,  and  will  act  as  guide  to  our  troops,  if  required,  as 
he  knows  all  the  trails,  &c.,  in  that  section  of  the  country. 

During  my  stay  in  Chihuahua  a Texan  deserter  arrived  there,  whom  I 
brought  with  me.  He  was  forced  into  the  service  as  a conscript.  He 
says  he  was  born  in  Rochester,  New  York;  his  name,  James  Hoffman; 
further,  that  he  was  placed  on  extra  duty  in  the  quartermaster’s  depart- 
ment under  Captain  Merritt,  chief  quartermaster  of  the  Department  of 
Texas,  at  San  Antonio;  that  being  sent  as  express  messenger  to  Fort 
Duncan,  Eagle  Pass,  with  letters  for  Captain  Donelson,  commanding 
officer,  he  escaped  to  Mexico.  He  left  San  Antonio  on  the  23d  Decem- 
ber, and  escaped  on  the  28th. 

He  states  that  General  Baylor  was  then  in  San  Antonio,  and  had  5,000 
or  6,000  troops  (the  only  troops  there)  in  and  around  San  Antonio;  that 
it  was  said  he  had  orders  to  march  upon  New  Mexico,  but  that  he  heard 
from  Captain  Donelson,  at  Fort  Duncan,  that  Baylor’s  order  had  sub- 
sequently been  countermanded,  and  that  he  was  ordered  to  march  to 
the  Gulf  (Corpus  Christi,  Hoffman  thinks)  with  his  command.  He  rep- 
resents subsistence  as  very  scarce  and  dear  at  San  Antonio:  flour  25 
cents  per  pound;  corn  $5  to  $6  per  bushel;  coffee  $3  to  $4  per  pound; 
beef  abundant  at  5 cents  per  pound;  domestics  $1  to  1.50  per  yard: 
pegged  boots  $20  per  pair,  and  extremely  scarce. 

He  states  that  mostly  all  subsistence  for  Texas  troops  has  been  drawn 
last  year  from  Mexico;  this  is  so,  as  is  well  known  in  Chihuahua,  and 
to  such  an  extent  has  New  Leon  and  Coahuila  been  drained,  that  Gov 
ernor  Yidaurri  has  prohibited,  under  severe  penalties,  the  exportation 
of  any  more  breadstuff’s,  &c.,  from  those  States.  The  export  of  shoes 
even  is  prohibited.  Hoffman  gives  the  following  as  the  forts  in  Texas 
which  he  knows  are  garrisoned,  viz : 

San  Antonio  and  vicinity,  Baylor’s  command  of  5,000  to  6,000  prin- 
cipally encamped  on  the  Salado.  Fort  Brown,  three  companies  Third 
Texas  Infantry  and  two  batteries  of  artillery. 


684 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


Oil  the  Eesaca,  three  companies  of  Bangers. 

Fort  Inge,  25  men. 

Fort  McIntosh,  one  company. 

Fort  Binggold,  two  companies  (Buquor’s,  Arbuckle’s,  and  Kamp- 
mann’s) ; battery  (Maclin’s)  of  artillery. 

Fort  Duncan,  one  company  of  cavalry — Donelson’s.  Powder  Horn,i j 
two  to  three  companies. 

Corpus  Christi,  one  company  artillery  (Willke’s  battery)  and  part 
of  Yager’s  battalion  of  cavalry. 

Fort  Clark,  two  companies. 

Further  in  this  direction  he  is  not  aware  of  any  troops,  and  heard  noth- 
ing of  such  being  nearer. 

At  Galveston  there  was  a considerable  force  under  General  Hebert,  - 
he  says;  and,  further,  that  it  was  reported  that  General  Magruder  had 
arrived  at  Galveston. 

A contraband  who  escaped  from  Fort  Brown  last  July  corrobo- 
rated the  above  in  many  particulars.  This  negro  was  slave  to  Dr. 
Ganahl,  the  surgeon  at  Fort  Brown,  and  he  states  that  deserters  were 
very  numerous  from  that  place,  a whole  company  having  left  at  once;  i 
that  three  or  four  companies  deserted  during  the  last  few.  months. 
Most  of  them  were  sent  to  New  York  by  Mr.  Pierce,  American  consul 
at  Matamoras.  j 

This  negro  represents  the  officers  as  very  dissipated  and  demoralized 
and  in  great  anxiety  about  an  attack  from  Federal  forces  ascending 
the  river,  and  that  the  most  of  the  troops  are  Mexicans  (native  Tex- 
ans) ; that  the  inhabitants  of  Brownsville  are  looked  upon  by  the  gar-'  t 
rison  as  Unionists.  I shall  bring  the  negro  and  Hoffman  to  you,  in 
order  that  you  may  interrogate  them  on  these  subjects.  Lieutenant 
Baldwin  (First  Cavalry,  California  Volunteers)  knows  some  of  Hoff- 
man’s relatives  in  Bochester  as  very  respectable  people,  and  I believe 
his  statement  and  those  of  the  negro  are  worthy  of  credence. 

I delayed  a few  days  in  Chihuahua  for  further  news  from  the  Bio 
Grande,  as  I hoped  some  of  the  merchants  would  hear  from  their  cor- 
respondents at  Matamoras  and  Monterey  about  matters  of  moment,  as 
the  week  I arrived  a gentleman  received  a note  from  a respectable  cor- 
respondent, stating  that  several  Federal  officers  were  then  (December 
22)  in  Matamoras,  making  arrangements  about  supplies  for  a Federal 
force  expected,  and  further  states  that  there  were  7,000  Federal  troops 
at  the  Brazos  Santiago. 

The  last  mail  brought  no  news  on  this  subject. 

In  regard  to  supplies  and  resources  of  Chihuahua  and  Durango  for 
a military  force  moving  on  Texas  from  this  quarter,  and  whether  ave- 
nues and  means  of  transportation  are  available  to  this  end,  I fear  that 
we  cannot  rely  with  much  certainty  upon  either. 

The  prohibition  of  exportation  of  breadstuff's,  &c.,  from  Coahuila 
and  Nuevo  Leon  arises  from  the  scarcity  of  those  articles,  as  before 
stated,  on  account  of  the  great  demand  for  them  in  Texas. 

In  Durango  we  can  expect  nothing;  it  is  too  poor  and  distant.  In 
Chihuahua  there  are  about  four  rancheros,  who  own  each  about  2,000 
head  of  steers  and  bullocks.  Two  of  those,  Don  Luis  Terrazas  and  Don 
Pedro  Zuloago,  will  sell  their  cattle  for  $20  a head  on  the  ranches,  near 
Chihuahua.  The  same  parties  own  about  50,000  sheep,  which  they  ask 
$2  to  $2.50  each  for.  The  weather  has  been  unfavorably  dry  for  crops 
for  the  last  three  seasons,  and  cereals  are  scarcer  and  dearer  than  usual 
in  consequence  in  the  southern  part  of  the  State.  In  the  city  of  Chi- 
huahua flour,  unbolted,  costs  now  $12  per  carga— usual  price,  $7 ; beaus, 


Chap.  XX VII.  J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


685 


scarce,  $9  per  fanega  (of  160  pounds);  wheat,  $12  per  carga  of  300 
pounds — usual  price  $2  to  $2.50  per  fanega  of  150  pounds.  Wheat 
promises  well  this  year  and  is  harvested  in  the  beginning  of  May. 
Two  trains  loaded  with  grain  and  flour  left  Chihuahua  for  Monterey 
the  week  before  I left,  so  that  but  little  dependence  can  be  placed  upon 
a large  supply  from  that  point  at  reasonable  figures.  The  mercantile 
house  of  Gustavo  Mayo  y Hermans  offered  to  furnish  such  supplies  as 
we  require  at  market  prices  at  any  time,  and  they  believe  that  large 
quantities  of  subsistence  and  grain  is  stored  in  Chihuahua. 

To  ascertain  the  condition  of  the  market  in  Chihuahua  is  not  easy 
for  a stranger.  There  is  only  one  flour-mill  in  Chihuahua  City,  and 
that  will  not  grind  over  3U0. pounds  a day.  The  great  grain-growing 
districts  in  the  State  are  as  follows : _ , . _ . n 

Wheat:  San  Geronimo,  San  Miguel  Dolores,  San  Pablo,  Santa  Cruz, 

Santa  Rosalia.  . , , , . 

Corn:  Santa  Ysabel,  where  leagues  and  leagues  are  planted,  but 

corn  grows  also  in  the  wheat  districts.  . 

At  Guadalupe  and  San  Ignacio,  on  the  Rio  Grande,  I was  assured 
that  about  7,000  fanegas  of  grain  can  be  bought,  and  at  $3  per  fanega 
for  corn.  Moye  & Brother  will  furnish  supplies,  taking  Treasury  notes 
at  their  market  value  in  New  York.  They  can  be  relied  upon  as  every- 
thing required  in  the  way  of  respectability,  credit,  and  capital. 

There  is  much  less  grain  grown  for  the  last  two  or  three  years  than 
usual  in  Chihuahua  in  the  south  on  account  of  the  demand  for  cotton, 
which  is  raised  extensively  at  Santa  Rosalia  and  manufactured  in 
Manta  at  the  factory  at  Talamantac. 

Cotton  grows  from  San  Rosano  to  Parras,  in  Coahuila,  and  even  at 
Presidio  del  Norte  and  along  the  Conchos  River  it  is  beginning  to  at- 
tract attention.  It  yields  enormous  profits  to  the  farmer  and  manufact- 


At  El  Paso  there  is  some  considerable  grain,  and  at  Carrizal  there 
is  also  probably  500  fanegas.  In  the  valley  of  the  Carrizal  20,000 
fanegas  could  be  grown  annually.  The  soil  is  fertile,  extensive,  and 
abundanceof  water  for  irrigation.  Means  of  transportation  can  be  hired 
in  Chihuahua  very  readily.  There  is  a distance  of  70  leagues  between 
Chihuahua  City  and  the  Presidio  del  Norte,  and  freight  costs  1£  cents. 
The  road  is  good  as  the  average  in  the  State,  and  this  will  give  an  idea 
of  the  freight  to  any  part  of  the  State. 

There  is  a large  tract  of  valuable  fertile  land  at  Presidio  del  Norte, 
and  about  3,000  acres  at  Leaton’s  Fort,  on  the  opposite  side,  all  easily 
irrigated.  General  Merino  owns  a large  tract  of  land  above  Presidio  del 
Norte,  extending  8 leagues  from  the  Conchos  to  the  Rio  Grande. 

The  valley  of  Buenaventura,  about  100  miles  southwest  of  Carrizal,  is 
extensive  and  fertile  and  yields  large  crops  ot  grain.  There  is  a popu- 


lation of  about  3,000.  . 

The  distance  from  Mesilla  via  El  Paso  and  El  Medano  is  259.8^  miles, 
as  measured  by  my  odometer ; but  I fear  that  the  instrument  was  not 
in  good  order  en  route  to  Chihuahua,  and  that  this  will  fall  short  of  the 
real  distance  via  Guadalupe  and  San  Elizario.  Returning,  the  distance 
measured  302.40  miles.  # • 

I may  here  state  in  conclusion  that  the  entire  distance  from  El  Paso 
to  Chihuahua,  except  the  first  20  miles  or  so,  the  country  is  capable  ot 
supporting  immense  herds  of  cattle.  The  grass  is  excellent.  The  valley , 
extending  from  Samalayuca,  is  mostly  owned  by  one  man,  Don  Martinez 
del  Rio,  a resident  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  With  the  exception  of  a tew 
head  of  stock  owned  at  Carrizal  and  about  2,000  head  of  cattle  and 


686 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH.  i 

' 

sheep  to  the  number  of  about  30,000,  owned  by  Terrazas  and  Muller,  I 
there  is  not  a hoof  of  stock  in  this  great  valley,  where  formerly  they  , 
were  innumerable. 

The  only  settlements  on  the  route  are  Carrizal,  a small,  poor  village  of 
about  300  inhabitants ; Los  Encenillas,  a hacienda,  and  El  Sanz,  a ranch,.  i 
where  the  Governor  has  a few  peons  living,  and  Sacramento,  contain- 
ing 200  or  thereabouts.  From  the  latter  place  to  Chihuahua  there  are- 
three  or  four  ranches. 

Chihuahua  is  a neat,  clean  city,  of  about  13,000  inhabitants.  Its- 
police  is  excellent,  and  good  order  and  cleanliness  are  characteristics  • 
of  it.  Very  little  cultivation  in  its  vicinity.  The  nearest  is  San  Gero- 
nimo,  to  any  extent,  about  6 leagues  distant. 

Many  secessionists  from  California  make  their  way  in  small  parties  : 
to  Texas  through  Chihuahua.  Nelson,  the  captain  of  Showalter’s  party,,  i 
and  three  or  four  more  of  his  band,  with  Yancey,  late  of  Tucson,  and 
about  ten  more  of  the  same  brood,  were  in  Chihuahua  when  I arrived. 
Dan  Showalter,  David  Douglass,  late  secretary  of  state  of  California, 
and  some  seven  or  eight  more,  passed  two  months  previous. 

I was  told  at  Guadalupe  that  between  50  and  GO  Californians  passed 
en  route  for  Texas  through  that  place  on  the  5th  and  6th  instant. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  FERGUSSON, 

Major  First  Cavalry , California  Volunteers . 

[Sub-incloeure.] 

Chihuahua,  Mex.,  January  27,  1863. 
United  States  Consul,  Matamoras , Mex. : 

Sir:  It  is  of  vast  importance  that  the  military  authorities  of  the; 
District  of  Arizona  and  the  Department  of  New  Mexico  should  have 
reliable  and  detailed  intelligence  of  any  movements  of  the  enemy  from 
Texas  upon  Arizona  or  New  Mexico.  ; 

It  occurs  to  me  that  you  are  very  favorably  situated  to  obtain  such 
information,  and  I do  not  hesitate  to  apply  to  you  as  a public  officer 
to  keep  the  commanding  officer  of  the  Military  District  of  Arizona  (sta- 
tioned at  Mesilla)  advised  of  all  such  intelligence  upon  this  point  as  you 
can  obtain.  Intelligence  of  arrival,  operations,  &c.,  of  our  national 
troops  from  the  East  in  Texas  will  be  very  desirable  and  highly  es- 
teemed, as  also  general  information  of  the  force  of  the  enemy  in  Texas, 
their  composition,  the  condition  of  their  supplies  and  resources,  and 
such  resources  as  might  be  obtained  for  our  troops  on  the  Rio  Grand© 
in  your  vicinity. 

Communications  on  the  above  subjects  forwarded  under  cover  to  Mr. 
Reuben  TV . Creel,  a loyal,  patriotic  American  merchant  and  confiden- 
tial military  agent  in  this  city,  will  be  sent  by  Mr.  Creel  to  their  desti- 
nation without  delay.  Any  expense  incurred  in  acquiring  and  forward- 
ing information  as  above  will  be  paid  by  the  quartermaster’s  department 
on  the  order  of  the  commanding  officer  of  the  District  of  Arizona  or 
Department  of  New  Mexico. 

You  can  place  implicit  confidence  in  Mr.  Creel,  who  may  correspond 
with  you.  There  is  no  American  consul  here  at  present. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  FERGUSSON, 

Major  First  Cavalry , California  Volunteers. 

(The  same,  mutatis  mutandis , to  the  American  consul  at  Monterey, 
Mex.) 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  687 

[Inclosure  No.  2.| 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  F6,  N.  Mex.,  February  20,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Don  Luis  Terrazas, 

Governor  of  Chihuahua , Mex. : 

My  Dear  Sir  : I beg  to  express  to  Your  Excellency  my  deep  and 
heartfelt  thanks  for  the  very  kind  and  hospitable  reception  which  you 
gave  to  my  agent,  Maj.  (now  Lieut.  Col.)  David  Fergusson,  of  the  First 
Cavalry,  California  Volunteers,  on  his  late  visit  to  the  capital  city  of 
the  sovereign  State  of  which  Your  Excellency  is  the  Chief  Magistrate. 
If  it  shall  ever  happed  that  Your  Excellency  will  give  myself,  or  the 
officers  and  men  whom  I have  the  honor  to  command,  an  opportunity  to 
make  a return  for  all  your  courtesy  and  kindness,  you  will  see  that  we 
are  mindful  of  the  deep  obligations  under  which  you  have  placed  us. 

I have  understood  that  a band  of  outlaws  and  desperadoes  reside  at 
a place  called  Leaton’s  Fort,  in  the  State  of  Texas,  and  that  it  is 
their  habit  to  cross  the  Eio  Grande  near  that  point  and  commit  outrages 
upon  the  citizens  of  Presidio  del  Norte,  in  the  State  of  Chihuahua. 

Should  Your  Excellency  desire  to  send  across  the  river  and  seize  by 
force  the  ruffians  alluded  to  this  shall  be  your  authority  for  so  doing, 
and  more  particularly  shall  this  be  full  authority  for  you  to  send  across 
the  Eio  Grande  and  arrest  for  trial  those  who  seized  on  the  Chihuahua 
side  a naturalized  American  citizen  named  Wolfe  and  bore  him  across 
to  the  Texas  side,  and  there  hung  him  until  life  was  nearly  extinct, 
simply  because  he  was  a Union  man. 

There  is  a villain  at  Leaton’s  Fort  name  Edward  Hall,  who  is  said  to 
be  the  leader  of  that  gang.  If  he  conducted  the  party  that  seized  and 
hung  Wolfe  he  should  be  dealt  summarily  with.  A stern  example 
should  be  made  of  such  a ruffian.  In  case  Your  Excellency  desires  co- 
operation on  our  part  to  break  up  this  nest  of  outlaws  you  have  but 
to  appoint  a time  and  arrange  a place,  when  we  will  give  you  our  hearty 
support. 

The  question  about  the  people  in  Janos  and  other  frontier  town& 
selling  powder  to  Apache  Indians,  as  it  is  alleged  they  do,  will  merit 
your  serious  consideration. 

Pray  accept  my  best  wishes  for  your  health  and  prosperity. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  Your  Excellency’s  obedient  and  humble  serv- 
ant, 

JAMES  H.  CAELETON, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding . 

[Inclostire  No.  3.] 

Mesilla,  Ariz.,  February  13, 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  E.  West, 

Commanding  District  of  Arizona , Present ; 

General  : When  in  conversation  with  the  Governor  of  Chihuahua 
the  subject  of  the  guns  referred  to  in  your  letter  of  January  3 was 
brought  up.  He  told  me  that  he  had  received  General  Carleton’s  com- 
munication, dated  October  9,  and  had  two  or  three  days  previous  to  my 
arrival  answered  it.  He  desired  me  to  assure  General  Carleton  that 
no  question  will  arise  relative  to  these  guns  that  will  in  any  manner 
interrupt  the  friendly  relations  which  he  desires  to  exist  between  him- 
self, the  general,  and  all  the  United  States  authorities.  He  said  that 


688 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


he  had  taken  the  guns  from  Leonards  Ligineroz,  a citizen  of  Chihuahua, 
who  had  brought  them  into  the  State  because  he  would  not  suffer  any 
private  individual  to  be  possessed  of  such  material  of  war ; that  Lig- 
ineroz represented  that  he  had  got  the  guns  in  payment  for  hospital  and 
other  supplies  for  sick  and  dying  Texans  at  Franklin  ; that  they  were 
anxious  to  get  them  at  El  Paso,  as  they  were  in  fear  of  the  rebel  Texans 
taking  that  place.  Young  Ligineroz  does  business  in  El  Paso. 

The  Governor  assured  me  that  the  guns  should  never  go  again  into 
the  possession  of  any  private  persons,  or  out  of  his  possession  until 
delivered  to  the  United  States,  if  that  were  insisted  upon.  I requested 
that  I might  see  the  pieces,  and  accordingly  the  Governor  sent  Colonel 
^ieto  and  Major  Quiltz  to  accompany  me  and  show  the  guns.  They  are 
as  follows:  Two  12-pounder  mountain  howitzers,  mounted;  one  12- 
pounder  mountain  howitzer,  dismounted.  Those  mounted  are  on  old 
clumsy  carriages ; have  been  badly  used,  and  were  spiked,  as  was  the 
dismounted,  which  latter  is  totally  unserviceable,  one  trunnion  being bent 
and  the  piece  fractured  near  the  trunnions,  and  two  6-pounder  field  pieces, 
brass,  both  dismounted;  one  is  battered  so  much  with  a hammer  as  to 
dent  and  bend  the  piece  near  the  muzzle;  the  other  was  also  badly  ham- 
mered and  the  knob  of  the  cascabel  is  broken  off.  Both  were  spiked 
and  both  were  burnt. 

It  is  evident  that  the  intent  was  to  destroy  or  render  unserviceable 
all  the  above  pieces.  They  are  more  dangerous  to  their  owner  than 
to  any  enemy,  in  my  opinion.  I would  recommend  that  the  United  States 
make  a present  of  them  to  the  State  of  Chihuahua.  Governor  Terrazas 
is  a gentleman  who  would  not  hesitate  to  return  them  when  demanded; 
but,  like  all  men  with  advanced  liberal  human  ideas  in  Mexico,  he  has 
to  contend  with  a vicious,  superstitious  band  of  reactionists,  who  would 
plunge  the  world  again  back  into  the  darkness  and  cruelty  of  the  Mid- 
dle Ages,  and  nothing  would  please  this  party  in  Chihuahua  better  than 
to  see  those  unserviceable  guns  taken  from  the  present  excellent  Gov- 
ernor. He  is  a fast  friend  of  our  Government,  understands  precisely 
the  condition  of  his  own  unhappy  country,  and  labors  to  infuse  energy, 
industry,  and  a tone  of  good  morals  in  his  State.  The  time  may  come 
when  he  will  be  of  great  value  to  our  country. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

9 ■ ‘ D.  FERGUSSON, 

Major  First  Cavalry , California  Volunteers. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , February  26,  1863. 

General  M.  C.  Meigs, 

Quartermaster -General,  &c. : 

General  : Your  letter  referring  to  the  statement  of  Colonel  Shaf- 
fer, late  quartermaster  in  this  department,  was  delayed  by  the  loss  of 
the  Ella  Warley,  and  I received  it  only  a day  or  two  since,  I regret  to 
say  that  Colonel  Shaffer’s  report  is  wholly  incorrect.  There  are  ab- 
solutely no  horses  to  be  had  here.  It  would  be  utterly  impossible  to 
raise  a thousand  horses  here,  taking  all  the  people  have  got.  Mules  are 
more  plenty,  but  there  are  few  of  these,  and  not  enough  in  the  whole 
department  to  supply  the  number  necessary  for  the  cultivation  of  the 
soil,  without  which  there  must  be  a famine  here. 

I send  you  a report  of  Major  Robinson,  who  sought  horses  for  a 


Chaf.  xxvn.  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


689 


squadron  of  cavalry  in  every  part  of  the  State  within  our  lines,  upon 
which  his  commission  was  depending,  and  his  statement  will  show  you 
what  supply  of  horses  are  now  to  be  found  here.  Colonel  Chandler  also 
will  report  the  facts  to  you  in  relation  to  transportation. 

I regret  to  say  that  water  transportation  is  as  deficient  as  that  re- 
quired for  land  operations.  Seizing  all  the  steamers  on  the  river,  and 
suspending  its  navigation  except  for  coastwise  and  foreign  trade,  we 
have  at  our  command  only  twelve  or  thirteen  vessels,  mostly  decayed 
and  helpless  boats. 

I cannot  understand  how  river  transportation  here  should  be  reduced 
to  so  low  an  amount.  Be  assured,  general,  that  while  I represent  the 
facts  I make  no  complaint,  and  shall  make  no  delay  on  account  of  ex- 
isting deficiencies  in  our  supplies,  and  whatever  is  needed  for  the  Gov- 
ernment service  will  be  taken  for  the  army  without  a moment’s  hesita- 
tion. Nothing  has  been  and  nothing  will  be  left  in  private  hands  which 
is  useful  or  necessary  to  the  public. 

It  will  be  of  great  service,  however,  if  light-draught  steamers  could 
be  sent  here.  Business  is  increasing  and  will  bring  them,  but  this  takes 
time.  Our  transport  and  dispatch  boat  service  extends  from  Pensacola 
to  the  Bio  Grande,  and  fills  the  whole  State  with  bayous,  lakes,  rivers, 
and  bays.  The  steamers  we  have  at  hand  are  wholly  inadequate  to 
this  work. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Baton  Rouge , La.,  February  26,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Bichard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  with  the  exception  of  trans- 
portation, I consider  my  division  in  fit  condition  to  take  the  field.  If 
all  the  available  force  in  this  department  is  massed  here  at  an  early 
date  I have  no  doubt  but  that  we  can  cut  off  the  enemy’s  force  at  Port 
Hudson.  If  their  supplies  from  the  Bed  Biver  are  cut  off  by  the  Navy 
and  their  supplies  from  the  interior  by  a movement  of  the  Army  to  their 
rear  they  will  be  forced  to  meet  us  on  our  own  ground  or  to  surrender. 
They  have  not  now  and  they  cannot  for  some  time,  I think,  have  enough 
force  to  do  that.  I think  their  force  at  Port  Hudson  has  been  overesti- 
mated, and  I do  not  think  that  much  reliance  can  be  placed  upon  their 
conscripts  at  present.  I am  informed  by  an  intelligent  man  belonging 
to  the  Twelfth  Maine  Volunteers,  and  who  'recently  escaped  from 
Port  Hudson,  that  the  plan  of  building  a raft  in  the  river  to  enable 
them  to  cross,  if  found  necessary  to  evacuate  in  consequence  of  our  cut- 
tiug  off  their  supplies  and  their  retreat  inland,  has  been  discussed,  and 
it  is  quite  probable  that  an  attempt  may  be  made  to  do  it. 

I am,  sir,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  GBOVEB, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


44  r r — yol  xy 


690 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH 


Washington,  February  27,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding , New  Orleans  : 

• General  : Your  letter  of  the  12th  instant  has  been  received  and 
submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

River  steamers  cannot  at  this  season  be  sent  from  here  to  New  Or- 
leans. The  Navy  Department  has  sent  some  additional  vessels  to  Ad- 
miral Farragut,  which  must  have  arrived  after  the  date  of  your  letter. 

The  efficiency  of  the  fort  at  Ship  Island  could,  I think,  be  increased 
by  walling  up  the  embrasures  where  the  guns  are  not  mounted  and  by 
preparing  for  musketry  fire  over  the  parapet.  To  take  artillery  to  the 
island  will  only  increase  the  temptation  for  attack  by  the  enemy.  The 
Navy  at  this  time  can  afford  you  very  little  additional  aid. 

It  is  hoped  that  your  operations  up  the  river  will  be  pushed  with 
vigor.  There  is  much  dissatisfaction  here  at  the  .delay,  but  probably 
the  obstacles  you  have  had  to  contend  with  are  not  fully  appreciated. 

It  is  expected  that  the  gunboats  will  be  able  to  pass  through  the 
canal  at  Vicksburg  by  or  before  the  5th  of  March.  But  as  this  is  un- 
certain and  dependent  upon  the  height  of  the  water  in  the  river  your 
^operations  must  not  be  delayed  for  those  of  General  Grant. 

The  course  pursued  by  you  in  regard  to  trade  in  cotton  is  approved. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the*  Gulf,  19th  A.  0., 

No.  21.  j New  Orleans , March  7,  1863. 

By  General  Orders,  No.  8,  published  on  the  12th  day  of  January,  j 
1863,  it  was  declared  that  “ all  products  of  the  country  sent  to  the  city 
of  New  Orleans  in  good  faith  might  be  sold  by  the  owner  or  his  factor 
for  the  legal  currency  of  the  United  States  without  restriction  or  con-  i 
fiscation.”  Trade  was  then  in  the  control  of  few  persons  and  of  small 
value.  Under  the  influence  of  this  order  it  has  become  of  importance 
to  the  city  and  country.  Honorable  merchants,  availing  themselves  of 
these  and  other  advantages  of  the  order,  have  complied  with  its  restric- 
tions. The  evasions  of  other  parties  require  its  republication  and 
strict  execution.  It  is  therefore  ordered  as  follows : 

I.  “ Products  of  the  country  sent  to  the  city  of  New  Orleans  in  good 
faith  mav  be  sold  at  market  prices  by  the  proprietors  or  their  factors 
for  the  legal  currency  of  the  United  States  without  restriction  or  con- 
fiscation.” 

II.  United  States  Treasury  notes  having  been  made  a legal  tender  in 
the  payment  of  debts,  except  for  duties  at  the  custom-house,  they  will 
be  received  and  paid  out  in  all  business  transactions  without  discredit 
or  depreciation ; and  whenever  such  notes  are  refused  in  the  payment 
of  any  claim  or  debt  such  refusal  shall  be  held  and  is  hereby  declared 
to  be  a discharge  pro  tanto  of  such  debt  or  claim. 

III.  Any  person  who  shall  attempt,  in  the  transaction  of  business,  to 
discredit  or  depreciate  the  legal  currency  of  the  United  States  in  favor 
of  and  to  the  advantage  of  any  other  paper  currency  shall  forfeit  to  the 
use  of  the  Government  the  merchandise  which  shall  be  made  the  basis 
of  such  transaction  and  his  commercial  privileges  to  the  use  of  the 
people. 

IV.  All  special  deposits  or  contracts  which  are  made  or  tend  to  ex- 


chap,  xxvn.) 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


691 


elude  or  discredit  the  legal  currency  of  the  United  States  are  hereby 
prohibited  and  declared  invalid. 

Y.  The  provisions  of  paragraph  II  of  the  regulations  of  the  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury,  dated  August  28,  18G2,  will  be  strictly  enforced.  The 
paragraph  referred  to  is  as  follows  : 

II.  All  transportation  of  coin  or  bullion  to  any  State  or  section  heretofore  declared! 
to  be  in  insurrection  is  absolutely  prohibited,  except  for  military  purposes  and  under- 
military  orders  or  under  the  special  license  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury.  Audi 
no  payment  of  gold  or  silver  shall  be  made  for  cotton  or  other  merchandise  withim 
any  such  State  or  section.  And  all  cotton  or  other  merchandise  purchased  or  paid1 
for  therein,  directly  or  indirectly,  in  gold  or  silver,  shall  be  forfeited  to  the  Uniled 
States. 

YI.  The  provost-marshal,  general  is  charged  with  the  exemption,  off 
this  order. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks  : 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Quartermaster-General’s  Office, 

Washington  City , March  11,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans , La. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  26th  February  is  just  received : 

I am  much  disappointed  at  your  statement  of  the  resources  of  the 
State.  I had  hoped  from  Colonel  Shaffer’s  report  that  you  would  have 
been  able  to  supply  yourself  with  horses  and  mules. 

Our  shipments  have  been  unfortunate.  Many  horses  have  been 
thrown  overboard)  many  have  been  wrecked.  The  last  shipment  of 
cavalry  went  by  steamer  and  I hope  will  get  through  safely.  I order 
to-day  500  cavalry  and  artillery  horses  shipped  to  you  from  New  York 
to  make  up  for  losses.  They  will  go  forward  as  soon  as  they  can  be 
obtained. 

I advise  you  to  cause  all  your  chief  quartermaster’s  requisitions  to' 
be  sent  to  this  office  in  the  first  place.  It  will  save  time  and  make  the- 
supply  more  certain  than  if  sent  to  subordinate  officers  direct,  as  to  the 
quartermasters  in  New  York  or  Boston. 

If  you  will  keep  me  fully  and  timely  advised  of  the  wants  of  your 
troops  so  far  as  depends  upon  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  no  ef- 
fort will  be  spared  to  supply  you.  I will  endeavor  to  send  you  two  or 
three  steamers  suitable  for  the  river,  but  the  voyage  is  dangerous  at 
this  season.  Were  none  of  those  which  carried  out  your  troops  suited 
to  the  service?  If  so,  it  is  a pity  they  were  not  retained.  Advise  me 
fully  of  the  character  aud  size  of  boats  you  need.  In  the  mean  time, 
the  boats  in  your  possession  should  be  repaired,  and  if  there  are  any* 
partly  finished  engines  or  engines  upon  old  boats  I suggest  that, 
they  may  be  put  into  new  hulls  built  in  New  Orleans.  There  are,  un- 
less destroyed  by  the  rebels,  facilities  at  New  Orleans  for  building,  and 
there  are  many  persons  unemidoyed,  some  of  whom  must  be  capable  of 
doing  the  work. 

Advise  me  fully  that  I may  aid  you. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  C.  MEIGS, 
Quartermaster * General. 


692 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Baton  Rouge , March  13,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding , &c.,  New  Orleans  : 

The  commanding  general  directs  me  to  inform  yon  that  the  fleet 
passed  up  this  afternoon,  the  admiral  intending  to  run  by  Port  Hud- 
son to-morrow  morning  or  the  following  day,  according  to  circumstances. 
Grover’s  and  Emory’s  divisions  marched  this  afternoon.  Augur’s 
division  and  headquarters  will  march  iu  the  morning.  Colonel  Chick- 
ering,  Forty-first  Massachusetts,  will  remain  in  command  at  Baton  Bouge, 
with  three  regiments  of  infantry,  two  batteries,  and  a company  of  cav- 
alry. The  siege  train,  manned  by  the  Twenty-first  Indiana,  will  be  placed 
in  position  on  the  river  front.  Our  main  object  is  to  create  a diversion 
in  favor  of  the  Navy,  and  it  is  not  proposed  to  assault  the  enemy’s  works, 
but  we  will  of  course  avail  ourselves  of  any  advantage  that  occasion 
may  offer.  If  the  admiral  succeeds  we  shall  open  communication  with 
him  on  the  other  side  of  the  river. 

Please  inform  General  Weitzel  of  our  movement.  It  is  of  course  im- 
possible to  give  you  detailed  instructions  to  j)ro vide  against  every  event 
that  may  occur,  but  the  commanding  general  relies  fully  upon  your 
judgment  and  discretion  in  any  emergency. 

We  have  no  information  that  would  excite  apprehension  of  a move- 
ment against  New  Orleans. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

J BICH’D  B.  IB  WIN, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Baton  Rouge , La.,  March  13,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee : 

General:  Anticipating  the  success  of  Admiral  Farragut’s  proposed 
attempt  to  run  the  enemy’s  batteries  at  Port  Hudson  and  to  open  com- 
munication with  you,  I will  avail  myself  of  the  opportunity  to  give  you 
a statement  of  our  position,  force,  and  intentions. 

We  have  at  Baton  Bouge  a force  of  about  17,000  effective  infantry 
and  one  negro  regiment;  one  regiment  of  heavy  artillery,  with  six  light 
batteries;  one  20-pounder  battery;  a dismounted  company  of  artillery, 
and  ten  companies  of  cavalry,  of  which  eight  are  newly  raised  and 
hardly  to  be  counted  on.  Of  this,  three  regiments  of  infantry,  the 
heavy  artillery  (manning  the  siege  train),  the  dismounted  artillery,  and 
one  company  of  cavalry  will  remain  at  Baton  Bouge. 

Leaving  this  force  to  hold  the  position  of  Baton  Bouge,  we  march 
to-day  upon  Port  Hudson  by  the  Bayou  Sara  road,  to  make  a demon- 
stration upon  that  work,  for  the  purpose  of  co-operating  in  the  move- 
ment of  the  fleet.  The  best  information  we  have  of  the  enemy’s  force 
places  it  at  25,000  or  30,000.  This  and  his  position  precludes  the  idea 
of  an  assault  upon  our  part,  and  accordingly  the  main  object  of  the  pres- 
ent movement  is  a diversion  in  favor  of  the  Navy,  but  we  shall  of  course 
avail  ourselves  of  any  advantage  which  occasion  may  offer. 

Should  the  admiral  succeed  in  his  attempt  I shall  try  to  open  com- 
munication with  him  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  and  in  that  event 


Chap.  XXVIL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


693 


trust  I shall  hear  from  you  as  to  you»  position  and  movements,  and 
especially  as  to  your  views  of  the  most  efficient  mode  of  co-operation 
upon  the  part  of  the  forces  we  respectively  command. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


United  States  Flag-Ship  Hartford, 

March  — , 1863. 

(Received  by  General  Grant  March  20, 1863.) 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  U.  8.  Forces , Vicksburg: 

Sir  : 1 herewith  transmit  to  you,  by  the  hand  of  my  secretary,  a dis- 
patch from  Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks.  It  was  sent  up  to  me  the  evening 
I was  to  pass  the  batteries  at  Port  Hudson. 

Having  learned  that  the  enemy  had  the  Bed  River  trade  open  to 
Yicksburg  and  Port  Hudson,  and  that  two  of  the  gunboats  of  the  upper 
fleet  had  been  captured,  I determined  to  pass  up,  and,  if  possible,  re- 
capture the  boats  and  stop  the  Red  River  trade,  and  this  I can  do  most 
effectually  if  I can  obtain  from  Rear-Admiral  Porter  or  yourself  coal 
for  my  vessels.  By  my  trip  up  the  river  I have  become  perfectly  ac- 
quainted with  the  enemy’s  forces  on  the  banks  and  his  boats  in  the 
adjacent  waters.  I shall  be  most  happy  to  avail  myself  of  the  earliest 
moment  to  have  a consultation  with  yourself  and  Rear-Admiral  Porter 
as  to  the  assistance  I can  render  you  at  this  place;  and,  if  none,  then 
I will  return  to  the  mouth  of  Red  River  and  carry  out  my  original 
design. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  G.  FARRAGUT, 

j Rear-Admiral. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , March  27,  1863. 

Col.  S.  B.  Holabird: 

Dear  Sir  : In  your  interview  with  the  officers  of  the  Government  at 
Washington  it  is  important  that  the  true  condition  of  affairs  in  this 
department  in  several  important  relations  should  be  fully  stated.  In  re- 
gard to — 

1st.  Water  transportation.  It  should  be  stated  in  such  a manner  as 
to  make  the  fact  appreciated  as  the  basis  of  all  military  speculations 
that  in  Louisiana  the  bayous,  lakes,  &c.,  stand  in  the  place  of  roads  in 
other  parts  of  the  country,  and  that  a force  that  moves  in  any  direc- 
tion by  land  can  be  attacked  by  the  enemy  on  his  water  communica- 
tions. It  is  indispensable  that  we  should  have  ample  water  transports 
for  supplies  and  gunboats  for  attack  or  defense  in  any  expedition  that 
may  be  undertaken.  W~hen  I came  here  I was  assured  by  the  Govern- 
ment that  there  was  an  abundance  of  transportation  of  this  character. 
You  can  well  state  from  your  own  knowledge  how  entirely  inadequate 
it  is  to  the  public  service.  The  expenses  of  the  department  would  be 
greatly  diminished  if  a sufficient  number  of  light-draught  steamers  could 
be  obtained  without  the  necessity  of  impressing  private  vessels  or  those 


694 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  £Cha*.  Xxvil. 


engaged  in  the  active  commerce  of  the  country.  In  addition  to  the 
question  of  finance  presented  by  such  seizure  is  the  still  more  important 
fact  that  publication  of  any  military  enterprise  is  made  at  the  outset  of 
any  military  movement  by  the  seizure  itself. 

1 appreciate  the  difficulty  that  attends  the  transport  of  light-draught 
vessels  here,  but  I believe  that  some  method  of  relief  can  be  devised, 
both  in  regard  to  transports  and  gunboats  of  light  draught,  whicji  are 
i so  entirley  indispensable  in  this  department. 

Land  transportation,  which  has  been  entirely  created  since  we  en- 
■ tered  the  department,  is  now  in  a fair  way  of  being  made  equal  to  our 
wants.  The  necessities  of  both  the  Army  and  Navy  in  regard  to  water 
(communications  and  defenses  are  imperative,  and  cannot  in  the  present 
'critical  condition  of  affairs  be  too  strongly  presented  by  you.  The  fleet 
'of  Admiral  Porter,  both  of  transports  and  war  vessels,  makes  us  weep. 

2d.  Cavalry.  The  second  deficiency  in  our  army  organization  is  in 
1th  e cavalry.  This  arm  of  the  service  can  be  used  to  great  advantage 
everywhere.  There  are  plenty  of  recruits  to  be  had  from  the  citizens 
or  from  the  nine-months’  regiments.  We  want  equipments  and  horses. 
There  are  about  700  equipments  in  sets,  but  no  horses.  The  statement 
made  by  Colonel  Shaffer,  late  quartermaster,  that  horses  were  to  be 
found  within  the  lines  of  the  department,  is  utterly  without  foundation. 
The  country  has  been  stripped  by  somebody  before  our  arrival,  and  not 
enough  are  left  for  the  support  of  life  among  the  planters  and  people. 
If  it  be  possible  to  send  here  a regiment  of  cavalry  I hope  it  will  be 
done.  It  is  indispensable  to  the  public  service.  The  Wisconsin  regi- 
ment would  be  glad  to  come.  The  Massachusetts  regiment  was  raised 
especially  for  this  service  upon  my  own  representations  to  the  city 
government  of  Boston  and  the  people  of  the  State,  and  ought  not  to  be 
diverted  from  its  original  destination.  We  shall  in  our  approaching 
movements,  however,  leave  nothing  undone  to  extend  our  lines  and  in- 


crease our  supply  of  horses. 

I hope  it  will  be  in  your  power  to  procure,  by  purchase  if  necessary, 
the  additional  water  transportation  which  is  so  much  needed.  The  loss 
of  the  gunboat  Diana,  news  of  which  comes  to  us  this  morning,  and  the 
possible  loss  of  the  Calhoun,  which  is  aground  in  Grand  Lake,  creates 
a most  pressing  urgency  for  increased  power. 

Yery  truly,  yours, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , March  27,  1863. 

Col.  S.  B.  Holabird, 

Assistant  Quartermaster , &c. : 

Dear  Sir  : In  addition  to  the  suggestions  presented  to  you  in  regard 
to  the  deficiencies  of  the  army  organization  in  this  department  I desire 
you  to  call  the  attention  of  the  Government  to  some  affairs  of  an 
; administrative  character. 

There  are  in  fact  three  or  four  governments  here  which  claim  to  have 
, distinct  and  original  duties  and  powers  : 1st,  the  military  government ; 
2d,  the  State  government ; 3d,  the  judicial  establishment,  and,  4th, 
i the  revenue  or  custom-house  department. 

I have  had  and  intend  to  have  no  collision  with  the  officers  of  any  of 
; these  departments,  but  the  time  is  rapidly  approaching  when  it  will  be 


I;hap.  xXvii.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  695 

necessary  to  define  and  limit  the  powers  of  each.  My  attention  is  now 
called  specially  to  the  claims  of  the  judicial  government. 

Under  the  act  establishing  a provisional  court  and  the  confiscation 
act  the  marshals  follow  the  army,  and,  by  themselves  or  deputies,  selected  ' 
from  civil  life,  seize  and  appropriate  without  much  discrimination  all 
movable  property,  mules,  horses,  sugar,  cotton,  &c.,  using  for  this  pur- 
pose escorts,  detachments,  and  the  transportation  of  the  army  itself. 
They  anticipate  the  movements  of  the  army  and  necessarily  extend  to 
outside  parties  a knowledge  of  its  movements.  If  the  army  is  to  sup- 
port itself,  as  I desire,  the  only  means  of  effecting  this  is  in  the  power 
of  levying  contributions  upon  the  property  of  the  country.  It  is  entirely 
deprived  of  this  power  if  the  understanding  of  the  civil  officers  is  cor- 
rect as  to  their  jurisdiction,  and  the  army  here  must  be  supported  ex- 
clusively by  legislative  appropriations.  This  is  inconsistent  with  the 
laws  of  war,  as  well  as  with  our  own  legislation,  and  reduces  the  army 
to  the  standard  of  a marshal’s  posse  comitatus.  The  division  now  estab- 
lished is  that  the  possession  of  the  property  taken  is  to  remain  with 
the  officers  of  the  army,  they  receipting  to  the  court  for  the  same  and 
being  accountable  to  the  court  for  the  property  or  its  proceeds.  This  effect- 
ually destroys  the  right  of  the  army  to  levy  contributions  for  its  support, 
and  leaves  it  dependent  upon  legislative  appropriations.  If  this  is  to  be 
the  rule  it  should  be  known.  I desire  to  be  held  accountable  for  every  dol- 
lar applied  to  the  support  of  the  army,  whether  from  appropriations  or  en- 
forced contributions  upon  the  country,  but  it  should  be  definitely  deter- 
mined by  the  Government  whether  this  power  so  freely  exercised  by  my 
predecessor  with  such  general  favor  is  entirely  removed  from  the  military 
authorities  by  the  establishment  of  a provisional  court.  It  would  seem  to 
be  an  utterly  unfounded  assumption  of  power.  In  a department  under 
martial  law  the  army  cannot  be  held  subordinate  to  a civil  tribunal  in 
matters  which  clearly  affect  its  existence.  The  court  ought  only  to 
adjudicate  upon  subjects  turned  over  or  transferred  to  it  by  the  mili- 
tary branch  of  the  Government.  I beg  you  to  seek  explicit  instructions 
and  explanations  on  this  subject  to  avoid  future  difficulties. 

The  late  collector  claimed  to  have  entire  control  of  trade  within  the 
lines  of  the  army.  This  is  equivalent  to  making  trade  with  the  enemy 
independent  of  the  will  of  the  military  commander,  because  an  unlim- 
ited  supply  of  goods  within  the  lines  enables  speculators  at  any  time  to 
extend  their  traffic  beyond  the  lines.  The  rebel  army  has  been  in  a 
great  degree  supplied  in  this  manner.  I am  confident  much  of  their 
munitions  of  war  as  well  as  clothing  and  food  have  reached  the  rebels 
in  this  manner.  It  is  necessary  that  trade  should  be  restricted  to  such 
limits  as  will  prevent  this  result.  This  can  be  done  only  by  those  who 
possess  a knowledge  of  military  movements. 

The  State  government  does  not  assist  us  as  it  should.  It  brings  into 
service  many  citizens  whose  interests  are  adverse  to  the  Government, 
and  who  in  executing  orders  do  it  in  such  a manner  as  to  impair  or 
defeat  their  object.  This  is  especially  true  of  the  police  of  New  Or- 
leans. It  should  be  one  of  the  chief  supports  of  the  army.  It  really 
does  but  little  good  and  much  harm. 

There  has  been  no  conflict  between  these  branches  of  the  government, 
but  they  are  not  as  strong  as  they  would  be  if  acting  together.  I hope 
the  Government  will  see  the  necessity  of  making  some  general  rule  by 
which  all  will  be  governed. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS. 

Major - General , Commanding. 


696 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXV TI. 

Headquarters  Defenses  of  New  Orleans, 

March  1a,  1863. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  bring  to  the  notice  of  the  commanding  gen- 
eral the  following  points,  which  I deem  to  have  an  influence  upon  the 
defenses  of  New  Orleans : 

1st.  Many  persons  are  daily  brought  in  by  our  outer  pickets  as  having 
arrived  from  across  the  lines.  This  number  is  getting  to  be  quite  large. 

2d.  Some  of  these  express  a willingness  to  take  the  oath  and  do  so. 
Some  of  the  others,  after  first  refusing  to  do  so,  submit  to  the  oath  as 
soon  as  they  find  that  to  be  the  only  condition  on  which  they  can  be 
allowed  to  go  at  large.  Others,  and  a large  number,  claim  to  be  foreign 
subjects,  and  sometimes  have  in  their  possession  the  certificate  of  some 
consul  that  they  are  such,  although  many  of  them  have  been  residents 
of  the  country  for  a series  of  years. 

3d.  That  I believe  that  many  of  these  persons,  whatever  their  pro- 
fessions, are  a species  of  spies. 

4th.  Consequently  I take  the  liberty  to  recommend  that  an  order  be 
issued  prohibiting  any  person  from  being  passed  within  the  lines  with- 
out a pass  from  the  commanding  general  or  provost-marshal-general, 
unless  they  are  willing  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United 
States  Government  in  good  faith. 

As  to  foreign  subjects,  I do  not  believe  that  the  position  they  claim 
as  foreign  subjects  entitles  them  to  pass  and  repass  our  lines  without 
special  permission  in  all  cases ; and  if  the  commanding  general  agrees 
with  me  in  this  point  I recommend  that  they  be  prohibited  from  coming 
into  our  lines  altogether. 

All  improper  persons  thus  coming  to  our  outposts  should  be  sent  back 
by  the  way  and  conveyance  in  which  they  came,  without  being  allowed 
to  enter  the  city  or  proceed  any  distance  within  the  lines.  A general 
order  prohibiting  persons  or  transports  from  bringing  such  persons 
would  be  a sufficient  apology  for  ordering  the  transports  back  with  such 
persons. 

5th.  We  are  carrying  on  a desperate  war  for  the  salvation  of  the 
Union  ; the  Confederates  are  doing  the  same  for  the  destruction  of  the 
Union.  We  have  no  worse  enemies  than  the  inhabitants  of  Louisiana 
and  Mississippi  across  the  lakes.  Why  then  should  we  feed  them  and 
clothe  them  in  any  degree  ? 

I earnestly  recommend  that  no  transport  hereafter  be  permitted  to 
cross  the  lakes  unless  in  the  public  employ.  That  I am  sure  is  the 
only  mode  to  put  a stop  to  all  traffic  on  those  shores.  If  the  Confed- 
erates there  are  suffering  for  food  and  clothing  let  them  acknowledge 
their  proper  allegiance ; but  to  trample  upon  our  flag  and  at  the  same 
time  to  ask  favors  of  us  is  an  incongruity. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHEBMAN, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Orleans , March  29, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief  U.  8 . Army: 

Sir  : Since  the  date  of  my  No.  8,  of  the  27th  instant,  another  brigade  of 
Grover’s  division  has  been  reported  as  arrived  at  Donaldsonville,  and 


Chap.  XXVH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC UNION.  by  i 

the  remainder  of  the  division  probably  reached  there  last  night  or  this 
morning. 

Part  of  the  seige  train  arrived  here  yesterday,  and  was  immediately 
sent  on  to  join  Weitzel.  It  must  be  with  him  now. 

I regret  to  have  to  report;  the  loss  yesterday  of  the  gunboat  Diana 
while  making  a reconnaissance  in  the  Atchatalaya.  All  the  particulars 
so  far  received  of  the  unfortunate  affair,  which  is  reported  by  General 
Weitzel  to  have  occurred  in  consequence  of  a direct  and  unaccountable 
disobedience  of  his  orders,  are  given  in  the  inclosed  copies  of  three 
telegrams  from  that  officer.* 

The  inclosed  newspaper  slip,  containing  items  copied  from  the  Mem- 
phis- (Jackson)  Appeal  of  the  22d,  gives  the  latest  information  we  have 
of  the  position  and  mpvements  of  the  Hartford  and  Albatross. 

It  appears  from  these  reports  that  Admiral  Farragut  was  at  Natchez  * 
on  the  afternoon  of  the  17th  and  left  there  on  the  morning  of  the  18th 
and  passed  Grand  Gulf  on  the  morning  of  the  19th  instant.  This, 
probably  true,  seems  to  corroborate  the  information  I received  on  the 
evening  of  the  15th,  that  the  admiral  had  gone  up  within  a few  hours 
after  daylight  on  that  day. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteethn  Army  Corps, 

New  Orleans , March  31,  1863. 

Col.  E.  G.  Beckwith, 

President  Sequestration  Commission : 

Colonel  : The  property  referred  to  in  your  letter  comes  into  posses- 
sion of  the  Government  under  an  order  of  the  general  commanding 
this  department  dated  November  9,  1862.  Section  10  of  this  order 
authorizes  and  empowers  the  commissioners  to  hear,  determine,  and 
report  definitely  upon  the  loyalty,  disloyalty,  or  neutrality  of  the  various 
claimants  for  this  property,  and  also  to  report  such  persons  as  in  their 
judgment  ought  to  be  recommended  to  the  President  by  the  command- 
ing general  for  amnesty  or  pardon,  so  that  they  may  have  their  prop- 
erty returned. 

The  manifest  intention  of  this  order  is  that  the  property  shall  not  be 
returned  except  upon  authority  of  the  Government  at  Washington,  and 
1 do  not  feel  at  liberty,  in  view  of  this  fact,  upon  my  own  authority  to 
authorize  its  surrender  to  claimants. 

The  establishment  of  a provisional  court  in  this  department,  with 
powers  analogous  to  those  authorized  to  execute  the  confiscation  law, 
makes  it  proper  that  final  adjustment  of  these  cases  be  referred  to  that 
tribunal. 

In  cases  where  the  property,  real  or  personal,  is  likely  to  receive 
injury  temporary  measures  may  be  adopted  to  preserve  it,  and,  pend- 
ing the  decision  of  the  court  referred  to,  the  use  and  occupation  of  any 
real  estate  or  plantation  may  very  properly  be  granted  to  the  claimant 
or  claimants,  subject  to  the  decision  of  this  tribunal.  The  preservation 
of  the  property  itself  may  require  this  course  to  be  pursued.  When- 
ever any  well-disposed  person  makes  application  for  the  use  and  occu- 
pation of  the  property  under  this  condition  I would  recommend  that 


See  p.  290. 


698 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVJi. 

it  be  granted,  under  such  rules  and  regulations  as  may  secure  all  pos-  j 
sible  interests  of  the  United  States. 

Their  personal  property,  as  cotton,  sugar,  and  molasses,  inasmuch  as 
it  may  be  disposed  of  and  the  United  States  lose  any  claim  it  has  there- 
upon, must  be  held  subject  to  a different  rule,  and  under  the  provis- 
ions of  this  order  cannot  be  surrendered  to  claimants  except  upon 
decision  of  the  Government  at  Washington  or  of  the  provisional  court. 

Whenever  the  value  of  the  estate  or  the  possession  of  other  species 
of  property  is  dependent  upon  the  working  of  the  estate,  so  much  of 
the  personal  property  or  product  of  the  estate  as  may  be  necessary  for 
that  purpose  may  be  surrendered  to  the  claimants,  subject  to  the  decis- 
ion of  the  Government  in  regard  to  the  question  of  the  final  possession 
and  ownership. 

The  amount  so  surrendered  shall  be  secured  by  a lien  upon  the  year’s 
crop  to  that  amount,  so  that  all  future  interests  of  the  Government  in 
the  property  may  be  protected.  jj 

Upon  the  question  of  loyalty,  the  oath  of  allegiance  is  only  one  of 
the  incidents  to  be  considered  in  determining  the  question  of  loyalty  or 
disloyalty,  and  judgment  should  be  formed  upon  this  subject  on  full 
consideration  of  all  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  case  and  the 
person. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  most  obedient  serv- 
ant, ' I y 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Troops  in  West  Florida, 

Barrancas , Fla..  April  2,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Bichard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : ( 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  evacua- 
tion of  the  city  of  Pensacola,  Fla.,  by  the  troops  under  my  command 
and  of  the  circumstances  attending  it : 

Immediately  on  the  receipt,  on  Sunday,  15th  instant,  by  the  steamer 
Eastern  Queen,  of  instructions  transmitted  from  Headquarters  Depart- 
ment of  the  Gulf,  Baton  Bouge,  March  12,  1863,  by  telegraph  to  New 
Orleans,  I proceeded  to  take  the  necessary  measures  to  put  the  same 
into  immediate  execution.  I 

I am  sorry  to  say  that  I found  it  more  difficult  to  execute  the  order 
than  I at  first  had  supposed,  owing  to  the  peculiar  circumstances  in 
which  the  inhabitants  were  placed.  The  population  was  principally 
composed  of  persons  .who  had  remained  there  on  the  evacuation  of  it 
by  the  Confederates  and  who  had  preferred  to  remain  at  that  time, 
and  of  others  who  had  come  in  from  the  adjacent  country  for  protec- 
tion from  the  enemy  and  to  avoid  conscription,  and  were  all,  or  nearly 
all,  of  loyal  sentiments,  and  the  idea  bf  again  falling  into  the  power  of 
the  enemy  was  so  repugnant  to  them  that  they  entreated  to  be  allowed 
to  follow  and  remain  under  the  protection  of  the  troops  at  Barrancas 
or  the  navy -yard,  although  they  were  well  aware  that  numbers  of  them 
would  there  be  without  sufficient  shelter.  Their  number  I estimate  at 
1,000  to  1,200,  a large  portion  of  whom  were  either  directly  or  indirectly 
dependent  on  the  United  States  Government  for  subsistence ; conse- 
quently, when  the  troops,  stores,  and  sutlers  would  be  withdrawn,  there 
would  remain  for  them  no  means  of  living  there  at  all.  Gunboats  can 


HAP.  XXYII.'J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC— UNION.  699 

.revent  the  enemy  from  occupying  the  place  in  force,  but  could  not 
.invent  small  parties  from  committing  any  depredations  they  choose ; 
otisequently  the  fear  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  on  the  one  hand  and 
tarvation  on  the  other  induced  nine-tenths  of  the  inhabitants  to  fol- 
[>w  the  movement. 

Under  these  circumstances  I considered  it  my  duty  to  afford  the  peo- 
>le  all  the  facilities  to  move  which  it  lay  in  my  power  to  extend,  and 
Laving  but  one  steamer  (Eastern  Queen)  to  transport  ordnance,  quar- 
ermaster,  and  commissary  stores,  inhabitants,  with  their  effects,  as 
rell  as  the  troops,  it  was  necessarily  a very  tedious  and  embarrassing 
peration.  To  add  to  the  difficulty  some  evil-disposed  persons,  either 
ut  of  a spirit  of  mischief  or  a hope  of  plunder,  took  occasion  to  set 
ire  to  several  buildings,  although  the  most  rigorous  precautions  were 
aken  to  prevent  it,  ^hich  resulted  in  the  destruction  of  thirty  or  forty 
Louses,  mostly  of  the  poorer  class. 

Although  the  movement  was  tedious,  owing  to  unavoidable  circum- 
tances,  the  public  property  was  all  removed  without  loss  or  damage, 
aid  the  majority  of  the  troops  behaved  with  credit. 

On  Friday,  20th  instant,  the  Twenty-eighth  Connecticut  Volunteers 
removed  from  Pensacola,  and  the  Fifteenth  Maine  left  on  Sunday,  22d 
nstant.  The  Twenty-eighth  Maine  Volunteers  sailed  for  New  Orleans 
n Monday,  23d  instant,  in  the  Eastern  Queen,  which  steamer  I was 
aider  the  necessity  of  detaining  until  the  completion  of  the  evacuation. 
All  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ISAAC  DYEE, 

# Colonel  Fifteenth  Maine  Volunteers , Commanding. 


rENERAL  ORDERS,  ) HDQRS.  DEPT.  OF  THE  GULF,  19TH  A.  C., 

No.  25.  ) Few  Orleans , April  6,  1863. 

I.  So  much  of  paragraph  II  of  General  Orders,  No.  17,  current  series, 
rom  these  headquarters,  authorizing  the  re-enlistment  of  men  belong- 
ng  to  the  nine-months’  regiments  in  the  cavalry  and  artillery,  as  limits 
he  period  within  which  such  re-enlistments  may  be  made  to  the  1st  in- 
tant,  is  hereby  revoked. 

II.  As  a mark  of  respect  for  the  memory  of  the  gallant  officer  who 
all  in  the  defense  of  that  place  the  new  field  work  at  Baton  Eouge 
dll  be  known  as  Fort  Williams. 

III.  All  persons  coming  within  the  lines  of  this  department  will  be 
equired  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United  States,  except 
>risoners  of  war  and  deserters  from  the  military  or  naval  service  of  the 
nemy. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

BICH’D  B.  IBWIN, 

* Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Defenses  New  Orleans, 

April  8,  1863.- 

iieutenant-Colonel  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Gulf: 

Colonel:  I informed  the  general  of  the  loss  of  the  Barataria  this 
lorning.  The  position  at  Manchac  Pass  is  as  follows : 

Jones  Island  occupied  by  a few  companies,  with  two  field  pieces  in 


700  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYll 

position  at  the  North  Pass;  pickets  from  thence  thrown  out  on  the 
railroad  toward  Ponchatoula. 

Several  companies  occupy  the  south  side  of  South  Pass.  Communi- 
cation with  island  yet  very  precarious,  no  good  ferry  yet  having  been 
fixed.  The  peninsula  (De  Sair  and  Frenier  Stations)  occupied  by  a 
few  companies.  An  enemy  that  has  means  of  transportation  can  take 
the  whole  position  in  reverse  from  either  side.  An  enemy  with  such 
means  can  also  enter  the  Pass  from  Lake  Pontchartrain  and  cut  ofl 
communication  by  water. 

The  railroad  is  in  operation  no  farther  than  De  Sair  Station,  7 miles 
from  the  Pass. 

Whilst  the  railroad  is  being  completed  and  the  battery  designed  ail 
the  South  Pass  is  being  constructed  great  dependence  was  placed  ir 
the  Barataria  and  the  Corypheus.  The  Corypheus  is  a sail  vessel,  car 
rying  two  guns,  and  is  now  alone  to  depend  on. 

The  greatest  attention  must  now  be  paid  to  secure  this  position,  and 
until  railroad  is  completed  water  transportation  must  be  used  to  send; 
stores,  &c.,  to  the  Pass,  and  enough  must  be  kept  in  the  Pass  to  insure 
rapid  communication  with  the  island.  The  steamer  Brown  should  be 
on  the  lake  at  once ; she  can  carry  a few  guns. 

I shall  try  to  get  the  Corypheus  to  go  up  at  once  and  see  if  the  wreck 
of  the  Barataria  can  be  reclaimed,  or,  if  not,  to  insure  her  total  destruc- 
tion. In  the  mean  time  some  means  must  be  taken  to  prevent  these 
vessels  from  being  caught  in  Lake  Maurepas  by  any  blockade  the 
enemy  might  contrive  to  make  at  the  Mouth  of  the  Passes. 

I will  at  once  see  what  can  be  contrived  in  the  way  of  transportation. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  SHERMAN,  # 1 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


— 

I 

Washington,  April  9, 1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks,  New  Orleans: 

General:  Your  dispatch  No.  8,  of  March  27,  is  just  received : 

You  will  have  learned  long  before  this  reaches  you  that  Admiral 
Farragut  reached  Warrenton  in  safety  and  is  in  communication  with 
Admiral  Porter  and  General  Grant.  It  was  expected^  that  he  would 
soon  be  able  to  collect  a sufficient  force  below  Vicksburg  to  control  the 
Mississippi  between  that  place  and  Port  Hudson,  and  also  to  destroy 
the  enemy’s  steamers  in  Red  River.  The  flooded  condition  of  the  conn-1 
try  has  greatly  embarrassed  and  delayed  the  operations  of  General 
Grant. 

I have  urged  the  latter,  and  will  repeat  the  same  to  you,  to  give  but 
little  [attention]  to  the  occupation  of  the  country.  Troops  should  gar- 
rison -no  part  not  absolutely  essential  to*  the  success  of  his  plan  of 
operations.  The  great’ object  should  now  be  to  concentrate  his  forces, 
so  as  to  strike  the  enemy  an  important  blow.  As  soon  as  you  have 
determined  from  your  reconnaissances  upon  which  side  of  the  river  you 
will  operate  all  your  available  forces  should  be  massed  upon  that  line. 

'Some  additional  companies  of  cavalry  were  recently  sent  to  you. 
Every  department  is  urgently  asking  for  an  increase  of  this  arm.  We 
will  assist  you  all  we  possibly  can,  but  the  organization  of  cavalry  forces 
is  very  slow. 

It  is  hoped  that  the  operations  at  Charleston  have  by  this  time  been 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


701 


terminated.  Whether  favorably  or  unfavorably,  their  termination  will 
leave  some  vessels  available  for  the  Mississippi  Eiver.  The  delay  has 
been  entirely  unexpected  and  has  greatly  disarranged  the  plans  of  the 
Government. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  oe  the  Gulf,  19th  A.  0., 

No.  27.  1 Camp  at  Brashear  City , April  9,  1863. 

Pillage  and  depredations  upon  private  property  are  forbidden  and 
must  be  suppressed. 

Whatever  property  is  necessary,  to  the  support  of  the  army  will  be 
taken  by  the  Government,  and  liberal  compensation  will  be  made  there- 
for, according  to  its  value,  in  the  country  where  it  is  taken,  to  all  well- 
disposed  persons. 

The  loss  of  property  applied  to  the  use  of  the  rebels  or  destroyed  by 
fire  will  fall  upon  the  owners  and  the  people. 

If  they  ask  reparation  for  their  losses,  the  preservation  of  their  prop- 
erty, or  a return  to  peace,  prosperity,  and  power,  let  them  restore  the 
Government  of  the  United  States. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks: 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


April  11,  1863. 

To  Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Carleton, 

Commanding  the  Forces  of  New  Mexico , Santa  Fe : 

The  citizen  political  chief  of  the  canton  Aldama,  office  Ko.  25,  date 
7th  instant,  says  the  following  to  the  sovereignty  of  this  Government : 

The  citizen  president  of  the  municipality  of  the  north  tells  me  in  an  official  note 
from  the  9th  of  March  last  what  I herewith  copy,  viz: 

“ No  knowledge  was  had  at  this  presidency  that  the  American  Esquilman  and  his 
companions,  12  in  number,  as  I have  afterward  learned,  had  a mission  of  war  when 
be  touched  the  Mexican  soil,  nor  has  it  remotely  occurred  to  me  that  he  was  an  ex- 
ploring officer,  who  should  penetrate  into  this  country  for  the  purpose  of  insidiously 
watching  the  movements  of  the  Army  of  the  North  of  the  United  States. 

“ Esquilman  and  his  12  companions  arrived  here  with  the  appearances  of  sojourners 
who  were  going  to  California.  Their  clothing  and  manners  gave  no  reason  to  suspect 
them  to  be  military  men  from  the  South,  as  they  were  in  disguise,  and  it  was  very 
probable  to  suppose  them  to  be  some  common  sojourners,  as  well  for  their  small  num- 
ber as  for  their  bad  accouterments.  Furthermore,  they  were  at  this  place  only  when 
they  returned  from.El  Paso,  because  I knew  then  that  when  they  came  they  did  so  on 
the  other  side,  crossing  the  Bravo  near  the  Ford  of  Stone  (Bado  de  Piedra)  to  gain 
the  right  river  side. 

“Notwithstanding  all  this,  if  hereafter  it  should  come  to  my  knowledge  that  any 
foreign  force  should  intend  a passage  by  this  place  I shall  prevent  it  and  account 
for  it,  as  being  according  to  our  laws  and  the  neutrality  of  our  conduct. 

“Herewith  I comply  and  answer  to  the  supreme  order  which  you  were  pleased  offi- 
cially to  transcribe  to  me  of  the  date  of  February  2 last.  I insert  it  for  you,  that  you 
may  have  the  kindness  to  bring  it  to  the  knowledge  of  the  citizen  Governor,  assuring 
him  of  my  most  distinguished  regard  and  esteem. 

| “I  also  have  the  honor  to  transcribe  it  to  you  as  the  result  of  the  advice  and  charges 
which  Maj.  David  Fergusson,  in  his  mansion  in  this  city,  made  in  your  name  in  regard 
to  this  same  affair  to  the  authority  of  the  Presidio  del  Norte  in  the  month  of  January 

last. 

“Herewith  I offer  you  my  very  respectful  regards.” 

God,  liberty,  and  reform. 

Chihuahua,  April  11,  1863, 


LUIS  TERRAZAS. 


702 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 


Washington,  D.  C.,  April  18,  1863. 
Major-General  Banks,  New  Orleans  : 

General  : Last  advices  from  General  Grant  state  that  he  was  in 
possession  of  New  Carthage,  and  hoped  soon  to  get  sufficient  forces  and 
transports  past  Vicksburg  to  attack  Grand  Gulf,  and  perhaps  co 
operate  with  you  against  Port  Hudson.  I need  not  remind  you  of  the 
importance  of  making  every  effort  to  open  communication  with  him  and 
Admiral  Farragut. 

I have  carefully  examined  your  instructions  of  the  27th  to  Col.  S.  B, 
Holabird.  The  Government  had  already  been  fully  informed  by  you  oJ 
most  matters  contained  in  those  instructions.  If  we  could  possibly 
have  given  you  what  you  asked  we  should  have  done  so  long  ago.  You 
were  told  before  you  left  here  what  we  could  give  you.  We  have  done 
that  and  even  more.  We  must  re-ehforce  and  strengthen  the  most  im 
portant  and  exposed  points.  Others,  although  in  themselves  important, 
must  wait.  Large  numbers  of  troops  and  transports  were  sent  to  Gen- 
eral Hunter  to  assist  Admiral  DuPont  in  his  operations  against  Charles- 
ton. It  was  supposed  at  the  time  that  these  operations  would  hav€ 
been  terminated  long  ago  and  that  the  transports,  iron  clads,  and  troops 
would  have  been  sent  to  the  Mississippi.  The  result  has  not  equaled 
expectations,  and  everything  is  still  detained,  there  by  orders  of  the 
President.  The  military  forces  there  merely  act  as  auxiliary  to  the 
Navy,  and  are  entirely  dependent  upon  the  movement  of  Admiral  Du 
Pont.  Should  he  succeed  in  his  next  attack  or  determine  not  to  rene^ 
it,  both  transports  and  troops,  and,  I hope,  also  iron  clads,  will  be  avail 
able  for  operations  on  the  Mississippi. 

The  court  at  New  Orleans  was  organized  under  the  auspices  of  the 
State  Department,  and  the  Secretary  of  War  has  not  been  advised  whal, 
duties  were  assigned  to  it  or  to  its  officers.  In  this  matter,  however 
general  principles  must  govern. 

Louisiana  is  essentially  hostile  territory,  in  the  military  occupation oi 
the  United  States.  The  common  laws  and  usages  of  war  must  govern 

You  represent  the  military  power  of  this  Government  in  that  depart 
ment,  and  must  necessarily  control  all  military  operations  there 
Neither  this  court  nor  its  officers  should  be  permitted  to  interfere  with  oi 
embarrass  your  movements.  If  it  becomes  necessary  to  seize  trails 
portation,  provisions,  &c.,  for  the  use  of  your  army  or  the  success  o: 
your  operations,  you  will  do  so  without  any  regard  to  this  court  or  iff 
officers.  Moreover,  if  they  interfere  with  your  operations  iu  the  field 
send  them  back  to  the  city,  or,  if  necessary,  out  of  the  department. 

The  War  Department  has  given  you  full  power,  and  you  have  onlj 
to  exercise  it  with  discretion  and  justice. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief \ 


Department  of  the  Gulf, 

United  States  Military  Telegraph  Office , New  Orleans , 

Cote  Gelee , near  Vermillionville , April  18,  1863, 
Brig.  Gem  Thomas  W.  Sherman: 

Please  send  the  following  to  the  general-in-chief : 

I beg  leave,  at  the  risk  of  being  considered  importunate,  to  repeat  my  earnest  re- 
quest that  more  cavalry  may  be  sent  tb  this  department.  Every  day  but  confirms 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


703 


the  experience  that  our  operations  are  seriously  crippled  by  want  of  it.  If  you  will 
send  me  the  Second  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  raised  expressly  for  my  command,  with 
their  arms  and  equipments,  I will  mount  them  here  from  the  horses  captured  in  this 
expedition.  Its  commander,  Colonel  Lowell,  is  personally  nearly  as  important  to  us 
as  his  regiment. 

b N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major-General. 

Very  respectfully, 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN. 


[Indorsement.] 

April  19,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  to  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army. 

T.  W.  SHERMAN, 

Brigadier-  General , Comdg.  Defenses  of  New  Orleans . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 
Cote-Gelee,  near  Vermillionville , April  18,  1863. 

Brig  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Defenses  of  New  Orleans  : 

Sir  : I wish  you  immediately  on  receipt  of  this  dispatch  quietly,  but 
with  least  possible  delay,  to  collect  all  the  saddles  and  bridles  in  the 
city  of  New  Orleans,  except  those  in  public  service  and  those  in  the 
stores  and  shops,  concerning  which  Captain  Hill  has  orders,  and  for- 
ward them  to  these  headquarters  in  the  field.  Do  not  allow  any  to  re- 
main, not  even  in  the  church.  Take  especial  care  that  the  men  appointed 
to  collect  this  material  shall  commit  no  depredations  upon  property 
and  punish  with  the  utmost  severity  those  who  do. 

Oar  success  is  complete.  The  enemy  resisted  our  passage  of  Bayou 
Vermillion  with  cavalry,  infantry,  and  artillery,  but  were  promptly  dis- 
lodged from  their  position,  and  we  now  occupy  the  north  side  of  the 
bayou,  ready  to  resume  our  march. 

The  reconstruction  of  the  bridge  which  was  destroyed  has  been  a 
difficult  work.  It  is  now  nearly  completed.  We  shall  probably  occupy 
Opelousas  in  two  days. 

It  is  possible,  but  not  probable,  that  our  absence  from  New  Orleans 
may  be  longer  than  contemplated  when  we  parted.  In  any  event,  how- 
ever, our  success  has  so  crippled  the  enemy,  amounting  almost  to  the 
annihilation  of  his  Army  and  Navy,  that  it  is  hardly  possible  he  can 
contemplate  an  attack  on  New  Orleans  in  our  absence.  If,  however, 
the  forces  of  Mobile  or  Port  Hudson  should  move  in  that  direction,  you 
will  defend  all  the  positions  to  the  last  extremity.  If  by  any  chance 
the  enemy  should  get  any  advantage  he  cannot  retain  it,  and  even 
success  in  that  quarter  would  do  us  no  serious  harm  and  give  him  no 
permanent  advantage.  But  you  will  use  every  precaution  necessary  in 
the  premises.  Be  vigilant  in  getting  information  of  his  movements 
and  prompt  to  attack  and  disperse  him  if  he  shows  himself  in  any 
quarter. 

Let  there  be  no  communication  of  the  people  * of  New  Orleans  with 
the  enemy  on  the  other  side  of  our  lines,  under  any  circumstances,  until 
our  return.  Notify  General  Augur  to  keep  a close  watch  on  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy  at  Port  Hudson.  No  portion  of  their  force  must 
be  allowed  to  depart. 

Assured  of  your  success  in  all  things,  I am,  very  truly,  yours,  &c., 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


704 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gelf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Cote-GeUe , near  Vermillionville , April  18,  1863.  j 
Maj.  Gen.  0.  0.  Augur, 

Commanding  First  Division , Baton  Rouge  : 

Sir  : We  encountered  the  enemy,  what  there  is  left  of  his  infantry,! 
cavalry,  and  artillery,  at  Bayou  Yermillion.  He  masked  his  batteries? 
and  sharpshooters  and  fired  on  Grover  and  Dwight,  who  occupied 
opposite  banks  and  were  engaged  in  a reconnaissance.  They  were  ulti-l 
mately  driven  off.  We  sustained  some  loss,  but  the  enemy’s  was  much! 
greater.  They  have  destroyed  the  bridge,  which  will  be  reconstructed; 
with  some  difficulty  and  delay  our  march  a few  hours.  We  shall  resume] 
it  at  the  earliest  moment  and  press  a vigorous  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  i 

I desire  you  to  observe  closely  the  movements  of  the  enemy  at  Port; 
Hudson,  especially  in  the  direction  of  New  Orleans. 

You  will  make  offensive  demonstrations  every  day  in  the  direction  of 
Port  Hudson,  with  the  view  and  effect  of  deterring  him  from  weakening 
his  forces  there. 

Let  it  be  understood  that  we  shall  be  down  upon  him  before  he  knows 
it  and  from  an  unexpected  quarter.  All  these  things  are  important, 
and  must  not  be  neglected. 

Belying  with  confidence  on  your  vigilance  and  activity,  I am,  very 
truly,  yours, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 
Cote-GeUe , near  Vermillionville , April  18,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  C.  C.  Augur,  Comdg.  Forces  at  Baton  Rouge : 

Sir  : The  commanding  general  wishes  you  to  send  the  following  to 
Admiral  Farragut : 

We  shall  occupy  Opelousas  probably  on  tbe  20th ; we  can  be  in  Alexandria  in  the 
last  week  of  this  month.  Can  you  reach  that  point  on  the  Red  River  with  your  fleet? 
When  will  Grant's  force  reach  the  mouth  of  Black  River  ? Communicate  with  him 
and  ascertain. 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

EICH’D  B.  IEWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 
Cote-Gele <e,  near  Vermillionville , April  18,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  C.  C.  Augur,  Comdg.  Forces  at  Baton  Rouge  : 

Sir  : The  commanding  general  wishes  you  to  communicate  the  fol- 
lowing to  Admiral  Farragut : 

We  have  destroyed  the  Diana,  Hart,  Queen  of  the  West,  and  many  transports  of  the 
enemy.  We  have  captured  2,000  prisoners,  his  best  officers  of  the  Army  and  Navy, 
demolished  his  founderies,  and  are  now  in  full  pursuit  of  the  remnant  of  his  force. 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

‘ BICH’D  B.  IEWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


705 


Donaldsonville,  April  19, 1863. 

Capt.  Wickham  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Lieut.  0.  H.  William,  Twenty- eighth  Maine  Volunteers,  who  was  sent 
across  from  Plaquemine  with  7 men  by  the  provost-marshal,  was  pur- 
sued by  a squad  of  rebel  cavalry,  and  as  he  would  not  surrender,  was 
shot  and  robbed  and  left  for  dead  on  the  bank  of  the  river  in  sight  of 
PlaquemiDe.  Recovering,  he  reported  that  17  of  my  men  were  taken  ; 
that  he  saw  onlv  80  or  100  of  the  enemy  uniformed  in  gray,  mounted, 
aud  armed.  My  men  were  extended  along  the  telegraph  wire  to  pro- 
tect it.  It  is  now  unprotected  from  this  place  to  Baton  Rouge.  Two 
steamboats,  the  Sallie  Robinson  and  Union,  which  went  up  river  with 
freight  for  Manchac  Landing,  I have  ordered  not  to  land  on  the  east 
side  at  all.  Is  this  right  ? Lieutenant  Witham  reports  a large  amount 
of  pork  and  other  stores  taken  at  Manchac  Pass,  &c. 

E.  W.  WOODMAN, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Opelousas , April  21,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  C.  C.  Augur, 

Commanding  First  Division , Baton  Rouge : 

General  : I am  directed  by  the  commanding  general  to  inform  you 
of  the  arrival  here  of  Lieutenants  Tenney  and  Skinner,  of  Colonel  Dud- 
ley’s staff,  with  important  dispatches  from  General  Grant. 

The  commanding  general  desires  to  acknowledge  the  valuable  service 
rendered  by  these  officers  and  by  Lieutenant  Dean  and  the  officers  of 
the  Signal  Corps,  Captain  Roe  and  Lieutenants  Herbert  and  Abbott,  in 
opening  communication  with  the  forces  above  Port  Hudson. 

We  occupy  Opelousas  and  hold  Washington  by  a strong  advance 


post.  * . _ . . 

The  command  rests  to-day.  The  enemy  took  the  road  to  Alexandria. 
In  a proclamation  issued  on  the  19th  Brigadier-General  Pratt,  then 
commanding  here,  says  the  brave  men  of  Texas,  Arkansas,  and  Mis- 
souri will  soon  be  with  them,  apparently  showing  that  he  expects  no  re- 
enforcements from  Port  Hudson.  The  Opelousas  Courier  of  the  18th 
speaks  of  the  recent  engagements  as  u sad  events,”  and  the  Alexandria 
papers  of  the  same  date  mention  them  as  serious  reverses  and  disasters. 
They  put  their  loss  at  50  killed  and  200  wounded. 

The  commanding  general  desires  you  to  keep  him  constantly  informed 
of  the  state  of  affairs  in  your  vicinity. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

[KICH’D  B.  IRWIN,] 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  A.  C., 

No.  29.  j Opelousas,  April  21,  1863. 

The  exigencies  of  the  service  and  the  safety  of  the  troops  impera- 
tively demand  that  the  disposable  force  of  the  corps  shall  march  in 
column,  except  where  necessary  detachments  upon  special  duty  are 
ordered  by  supeiior  officers.  The  desertion  of  the  column  upon  the 

45  R R— VOL  xy 


706 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL  j 

march  or  straggling  for  the  purpose  of  pillage  and  plunder  is  an  of-  I 
fense  made  punishable  with  death  by  the  Articles  of  War.  The  honor  I 
of  the  flag  and  the  safety  of  the  men  who  faithfully  discharge  their  I 
duty  demand  that  this  law  be  enforced;  and  the  commanding-general  j 
gives  notice,  absolute  and  positive,  that  this  punishment  will  be  exe-  j 
cured  upon  those  men,  of  whatever  command,  who  violate  the  Army 
Regulations  and  dishonor  the  service  by  inexcusable  and  atrocious  acts 
of  this  kind.  All  officers,  of  whatever  grade,  who  shall  allow  the  men 
under  their  respective  commands  to  leave  the  line  of  march  or  the  camp 
without  authority  will  be  summarily  and  dishonorably  discharged  the  ! 
service,  as  unworthy  to  participate  in  the  triumphant  march  of  this  i 
column.  The  army  is  now  hundreds  of  miles  from  its  base  of  operations, 
in  the  enemy’s  country.  The  campaign  may  be  made  one  of  the  most  i 
creditable  of  the  war  or  it  may  disgrace  the  troops  and  dishonor  the  j 
country.  The  commanding  general  appeals  to  officers  and  men  to  re- 
flect upon  their  position,  to  consider  their  duties,  and  faithfully  to  dis-  I 
charge  the  obligations  which  rest  upon  them,  and  is,  for  himself,  deter- 
mined to  execute  the  severest  sentence  of  military  law  upon  those  who 
basely  betray  the  service  and  dishonor  their  country  in  this  regard. 
Whatever  property  may  be  necessary  for  the  support  of  the  army  or 
may  be  prostituted  to  support  the  rebellion  will  be  taken  by  the  Gov- 
ernment, and  due  reparation  will  be  made  therefor.  But  we  do  not  war 
upon  women  and  children,  however  much  and  in  whatever  way  they 
may  have  erred.  Our  contest  is  with  the  men  and  the  armies  of  the 
rebellion. 

Information  has  been  received  at  these  headquarters  that  the  lives 
of  officers  as  well  as  of  the  men  of  the  line  have  been  endangered  by  the 
unauthorized  and  criminal  discharge  of  fire-arms  by  persons  engaged  in 
pillage.  Notice  is  given  to  all  officers  and  soldiers  that  the  parties  en- 
gaged in  these  practices  will  be  held  responsible  for  the  consequences 
of  their  acts,  and  that  such  offenses  will  be  punished  with  the  severest 
penalties  prescribed  by  the  Articles  of  War.  This  order  is  not  a matter 
of  form,  but  will  be  rigidly  enforced  during  the  campaign. 

Officers  in  every  division,  brigade,  and  regiment  of  this  command 
are  directed  to  place  a rear  guard  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  strag- 
glers from  falling  to  the  rear  of  the  column.  Where  men  are  sick  or 
foot  sore,  upon  the  certificate  of  the  surgeon  they  will  be  allowed  such 
conveyance  or  provided  with  such  hospital  accommodations  as  their 
situation  may  require.  The  captured  straggler  is  the  best  source  of  in- 
formation that  the  enemy  possesses.  A soldier  who  deserts  his  column 
in  the  face  of  the  enemy  will  not  hesitate  to  betray  his  comrades,  and 
deserves  the  penalty  which  the  law  provides  for  his  great  wrong. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks: 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Opelousas , April  22,  1863. 

General  Dwight, 

Commanding  Advance  Brigade : 

On  your  expedition  you  will  mount  negroes,  as  many  as  possible, 
and  direct  them  to  drive  in  the  cattle,  which  is  a business  they  under- 
stand well,  and  their  services  will  relieve  your  troops.  They  can  also  give 
you  much  information  as  to  the  hiding  places  of  the  horses.  Promise 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


707 


them  freely  any  reward  you  may  think  proper  for  their  services  in  money 
and  I will  furnish  you  the  funds.  I desire  you  to  advance  as  far  as  you 
think  safe,  and  if  it  requires  more  than  one  day’s  march  in  advance  the 
time  is  at  your  disposal.  Bring  back  all  the  negroes. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  yours,  respectfully, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Opelousas , La.,  April  23,  1863. 

Admiral  Farragut,  Flag- Ship  Hartford: 

My  Dear  Admiral  : Accept  my  thanks  for  your  dispatch  of  April 
6,*  which  I received  on  the  21st  instant  with  the  dispatches  of  General 
Grant.  Accept  my  congratulations  upon  your  success  in  controlling 
the  open  sea  between  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson.  The  blockade  of 
the  Red  River  is  a most  important  affair  to  our  arms.  We  have  now 
achieved  the  freedom  of  the  Atchafalaya,  of  which  we  have  spoken  so 
much  together,  and  I hope  at  no  distant  time  to  communicate  with  you 
through  that  route. 

The  gunboats  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Cooke  captured  Butte- 
a-la-Rose  on  the  20th  instant.  You  have  doubtless  had  a full  report  of 
this  affair.  The  engagement  was  short,  but  decisive.  We  captured 
their  guns,  considerable  ammunition,  the  commander  of  the  post,  and 
60  prisoners.  This  gives  us  the  entire  control  of  the  Atchafalaya  and 
the  Red  River.  Since  we  parted  at  Baton  Rouge  I have  accomplished 
the  design  which  was  interrupted  by  your  enterprise  for  passing  the 
batteries.  Immediately  upon  the  achievement  of  that  distinguished 
success  by  your  own  ship  and  the  Albatross  we  recommenced  our  under- 
taking. On  the  12th  of  April  we  were  before  the  fortifications  at  Camp 
Bisland,  where  we  commenced  an  engagement  with  the  enemy  which 
lasted  two  days.  Our  men  behaved  splendidly  and  have  achieved  at 
every  point  a complete  success.  The  works  would  have  been  assaulted 
on  the  morning  of  their  evacuation.  They  commenced  their  retreat  at 
about  12  o’clock  at  night,  and  we  followed  them  at  3 o’clock  in  the 
morning.  Grover’s  division  had  landed  near  Indian  Bend  with  the  in- 
tention of  intercepting  their  retreat  at  Franklin,  but  the  difficulties  of 
transportation  and  landing  prevented  his  reaching  that  point  within  a 
few  hours,  and  the  enemy  escaped  with  his  artillery  and  cavalry.  The 
infantry  has  been  almost  entirely  dispersed.  We  have  captured  nearly 
2,000  prisoners,  more  than  1,000  stand  of  small  arms,  twenty  siege 
guns,  including  one  field  gun,  considerable  ammunition,  and  the  chiefs 
of  the  three  arms  of  the  rebel  service : Captain  Fuller,  commanding 
the  fleet ; Captain  Semmes,  commanding  the  artillery  j and  Colonel 
Vincent,  commanding  the  cavalry.  We  compelled  them  to  destroy  the 
Diana  and  Hart,  and  the  fleet  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Cooke  sunk 
the  Queen  of  the  West  in  the  contest  for  the  possession  of  Butte-a-la- 
Rose,  on  Grand  Lake.  We  have  captured  more  than  10,000  head  of 
cattle,  and  horses  and  mules  sufficient  for  the  entire  service  of  the 
army.  It  will  be  impossible  for  the  enemy  to  reorganize  his  forces  in 
this  department  at  present. 

We  are  anxiously  waiting  to  hear  from  General  Grant.  With  the  force 


* See  Inclosure  No.  3 to  Banks’  report  of  April  23,  p.  301. 


708  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

that  he  is  able  to  furnish  us  I regard  the  fall  of  Port  Hudson  as  certain. 
The  difficulty  is  to  ascertain  how  and  when  it  can  be  sent  to  us.  Now 
that  we  have  achieved  the  freedom  of  the  Atchafalaya  my  belief  is  that  j 
he  should  join  his  forces  to  us  by  that  river,  crossing  the  Grand  River 
and  the  Plaquemine  to  Baton  Rouge.  This  is  the  most  feasible  point  of 
junction  of  our  forces,  and  can  be  accomplished  with  the  least  danger 
and  in  the  least  time. 

The  enemy,  counting  upon  the  misfortunes  which  had  happened  to  our 
little  Navy,  had  completed  his  plans  for  an  assault  on  Brashear  City. 
They  were  kept  in  entire  ignorance  of  our  purposes,  and  were  not  aware 
of  our  movement  until  we  stood  before  their  fortifications  at  Camp  Bis- 
land.  Their  surprise  and  their  rout  has  been  complete,  and  leaves  us 
leisure  for  other  operations.  The  Navy  has  done  everything  that  we 
could  desire,  and  is  worthy  of  its  distinguished  leader. 

I beg  you  will  forward  the  communication  to  General  Grant*  as 
speedily  as  possible,  and  communicate  the  substance  of  his  answer  by 
telegraph.  My  dispatch  is  substantially  the  same  as  this  addressed  to 
you.  I am  very  anxious  to  hear  his  conclusions  and  to  know  how  soon 
we  may  effect  a co-operation.  I regard  the  passage  of  the  batteries  by 
the  Hartford  and  Albatross  and  the  fights  you  have  had  with  the  enemy 
at  Grand  Gulf  and  elsewhere  on  the  river  as  among  the  most  brilliant 
operations  of  the  war  and  effecting  most  important  results  in  the  future  , 
affairs  of  this  part  of  the  country.  I hope  you  are  in  health,  as  I am 
sure  you  must  be  in  spirit.  We  have  no  news  from  the  North  of  im- 
portance, except  that  the  expedition  to  Charleston  has  failed  and  that  ! 
the  land  and  naval  forces  have  returned  to  Port  Royal.  The  spirit  of  ; 
the  people  is  cheerful  and  confident  and  opinion  more  united  than  it  has 
been. 

The  Government  is  firm  in  its  purposes,  and  will,  I believe,  soon  bring 
the  war  to  an  end. 

I am,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 
Albuquerque , N.  Mex.,  April  23, 1863. 

Mr.  Reuben  W.  Creel,  Chihuahua , Mex. : 

My  Dear  Sir:  Your  letter  of  the  31st  ultimo,  directed  to  the  com- 
manding officer  at  Mesilla,  reached  me  last  evening  at  this  point,  where 
I had  just  come  from  the  country  of  the  Navajoes.  I am  greatly  in- 
debted to  you  for  the  valuable  information  which  is  received  from  you. 

I cannot  believe  any  large  force  from  Texas  is  en  route  to  invade  New 
Mexico  and  Arizona  at  this  season  of  the  year.  That  Skillman  may 
attempt  a raid  upon  El  Paso  and  Franklin  is  possible,  so  I pray  you 
will  procure  through  an  eye-witness  information  as  to  Skillman’s  present 
whereabouts,  his  exact  strength,  how  his  men  are  armed,  how  mounted, 
what  means  of  transportation  they  have,  and  what  quantity  of  provis- 
ions ; to  get  information  as  to  whether  he  is  followed  or  is  likely  to 
be  followed  by  any  considerable  force ; if  so,  by  what  description  ot 
force,  whether  cavalry,  infantry,  or  artillery,  and  the  strength  of  each 
arm:  the  means  of  transportation;  whether  the  wagons  are  drawn  by 
oxen  or  mules,  &c.  If  Skillman  remains  in  Presidio,  what  appears  to 

* See  Inclosure  No.  4 to  Banks’  report  of  April  23,  p.  303. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


709 


be  bis  present  business  and  what  is  supposed  to  be  his  purpose.  All 
these  are  points  that  should  be  covered  by  intelligence  gained  through 
one  who  has  seen  the  force,  at  least  of  Skillman,  with  his  own  eyes. 

I beg  you  will  do  me  the  favor  to  ask  the  Governor  of  Chihuahua  if 
he  cannot  prohibit  the  exportation  of  any  more  provisions  from  his  State 
to  Texas  or  the  Texans.  T shall  esteem  it  a friendly  act,  and  as  such  it 
will  be  appreciated  by  my  Government.  I understand  that  this  was 
done  by  the  Governor  of  Nuevo  Leon. 

Send  me  letters  of  pressing  importance  by  special  couriers.  These 
should  be  hired  as  low  as  would  be  a fair  and  just  compensation.  They 
will  be  paid  on  the  delivery  of  the  letters  to  the  commander  at  Frank- 
lin, Tex. 

I leave  for  Santa  F6  to  morrow.  Your  letters  to  me  can  remain  un- 
sealed in  an  envelope  directed  to  Brigadier-General  West,  Hart’s  Mill, 
Tex.,  or,  in  his  absence,  to  the  commanding  officer  Franklin,  Tex. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  CARLETONx 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  114th  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers, 
Near  Iberia,  La.,  April  24,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I left  the  front  on  the 
morning  of  the  19th  instant,  pursuant  to  instructions  from  headquarters, 
collecting  horses,  mules,  cattle,  &c.  Have  collected  a large  number, 
but  most  of  the  cattle  are  light  and  thin  in  flesh.  There  will  be  a few 
hundred  that  will  do  for  beef.  It  is  impossible  to  separate  the  best 
from  the  others,  having  been  herded  together  and  wild. . We  are 
obliged  to  drive  all  together,  good,  bad,  and  indifferent.  We  shall 
have  several  hundred  horses  and  mules  fit  for  Government  service. 

The  One  hundred  and  fifty-ninth  New  York  Regiment  is  in  advance. 
The  large  amount  of  stock,  numbering  thousands,  and  the  open  condi- 
tion of  the  road  and  country  make  our  progress  necessarily  slow. 

I would  also  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  there  is  a large 
amount  of  cotton  in  the  parish  of  Saint  Martin,  amounting  to  thousands 
of  bales,  which  I have  seen  and  heard  of  being  drawn  back  from  the 
thoroughfares  to  prevent  its  being  burned  or  falling  into  our  hands.  If 
transportation  could  be  furnished  or  harness  procured  the  mules  and 
carts  in  the  country  would  soon  convey  a large  amount  to  the  several 
depots  along  the  line.  The  prestige  and  effect  at  home  and  abroad  you 
fully  understand. 

The  inhabitants  are  under  great  excitement  from  fear  of  insurrec- 
tions by  the  negroes  or  violence  from  straggling  soldiers.  I left  at  the 
village  of  Saint  Martinville  an  order  prohibiting  all  United  States 
soldiers  entering  the  premises  or  taking  the  property  of  citizens  unless 
in  obedience  to  orders.  The  provost-marshal,  Gaptain  Long,  lias  had 
it  printed  and  circulated,  and  is  vigilant  in  protecting  the  lawful  rights 
of  citizens.  I have  promulgated  the  policy  of  General  Banks,  as  I un- 
derstand it  to  be,  to  protect  the  citizens  in  all  their  citizenship  and 
property,  recommending  to  the  negroes  to  stay  upon  their  places  unless 
directed  otherwise  by  the  department,  those  claiming  protection  under 
the  Government  to  be  protected  and  their  property  preserved  for  adju- 
dication. 


710 


VV.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 

There  has  been  no  communication  from  the  depot  below  this  place  by 
boat  for  some  days.  The  Hart  is  not  yet  removed ; the  machinery  here 
is  not  strong  enough  for  the  purpose.  I have  received  169  prisoners 
from  the  provost  here.  I shall  bury  the  dead  and  destroy  the  enemy’s 
earthworks,  as  directed,  and  shall  not  again  report  unless  something  of 
importance  arises,  until  I go  into  camp  at  Brashear  City,  as  directed  by 
Brigadier-General  Andrews. 

I am,  my  dear  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ELISHA  B.  SMITH, 

Colonel , Comdg.  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  New  York. 


Headquarters,  Port  Hudson,  La., 

April  26,  1863. 

Commanding-  Officer  TJ.  S.  Steamer  Genesee, 

Mississippi  River  : 

Sir:  Your  note  of  yesterday’s  date  to  the  commanding  officer  of  my 
picket  opposite  Thompson’s  Point  has  been  forwarded  to  me. 

In  reply  I have  to  state  that  I look  upon  your  notice  for  families  to 
withdraw  from  the  vicinity  of  the  pickets  as  merely  indicating  an  in- 
tention of  destroying  houses  and  other  private  property  on  the  river, 
as  such  has  been  the  mode  of  warfare  adopted  by  the  United  States 
forces  when  they  have  failed  upon  an  attack  upon  batteries  or  stations 
of  troops. 

My  pickets  are  posted  without  reference  to  houses  in  their  vicinity, 
and  as  it  is  not  the  intention  to  consult  the  commander  of  the  United 
States  steamer  Genesee  as  to  their  position,  they  will  not  be  withdrawn 
upon  any  threats  from  him. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

• FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major- General , Commanding  C.  8.  Forces. 


General,  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  A.  C., 

No.  35.  f New  Orleans , April  27,  1863. 

Registered  enemies  of  the  United  States  are  hereby  ordered  to  leave 
this  department  on  or  before  the  15th  day  of  May  proximo.  The  pro- 
vost-marshal-general is  charged  with  the  peremptory  execution  of  this 
order. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  A.  C., 

No.  37.  f New  Orleans , April  29,  1863. 

Any  person  who  shall  be  convicted  before  the  commanding  general 
of  this  department  of  furnishing  supplies  to  the  enemies  of  the  United 
States  in  arms  shall  suffer  the  penalty  of  death. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General.  , 


Chap.  xxvn.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


711 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Brashear  City , April  30,  1863 — 6 a.  m. 

Major-General  Grant  : 

Dear  Sir  : I modify  my  dispatch  sent  by  the  admiral  * so  far  as  to 
recommend  the  union  of  our  forces  on  the  Bayou  Sara.  My  fear  was 
that  our  supplies  could  not  be  made  secure,  but  upon  further  reflection 
I am  satisfied  that  with  the  force  you  propose  to  send  and  my  own  we 
can  march  directly  to  the  rear  of  Port  Hudson  and  thus  open  communi- 
cation by  the  way  of  Baton  Rouge  for  all  supplies.  In  this  view  the 
Bayou  Sara  route  is  the  most  feasible.  We  are  anxious  to  hear  from 
you.  There  is  no  news  here. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

J ’ N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General,  Commanding. 


Atchafalaya  Riyer,  Steamer  Sykes, 

April  30,  1863. 

Major-General  Grant  : 

Dear  Sir:  It  is  of  the  utmost  possible  importance  that  you  should 
send  a force  to  the  Red  River  immediately  to  co-operate  with  Army  and 
Navy  now  here.  We  have  the  Atchafalaya  and  the  mouth  of  the  Red 
River.  An  addition  to  my  force  now  will  give  us  the  whole  country 
west  of  the  Mississippi. 

Please  give  me  all  information  of  your  movements  in  this  direction. 
Very  truly,  yours, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General,  Commanding. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps,  Maj.  Gen. 
N.  P.  Banks  commanding,  for  the  month  of  April,  1863  ( headquarters  Opelousas,  La.). 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

i Aggregate  present 
| and  absent  at  last 
i monthly  return. 

I 

i 

O 

i 

* 

Opelousas,  La.,  Mai.  Gen.  ST.  P.  Banks,  department  staff. . . . 
Baton  Rouge,  La.,  Maj  Gen.  C.  C.  Augur,  First  Division. . . . 

29 

9 

222 

70 

27 

30 

30 

9 

5, 724 
2,  252 
549 
679 

30 

9 

6, 769 
2, 338 
816 
797 

30 

9 

6, 769 
2, 338 
816 
797 

4,  365 
2, 022 
468 
609 

IS L,  0(1,  RUG  ‘rLIl  LUUioltUla  li  <H1V  O uutfiiu*  ------  ------  * * * * 

387 

7,  464 

9,243 

10, 759 

10, 759 

New  Orleans,  La.,  Brig.  Gen.  T.W.  Sherman,  Second  Division. 

7 

283 

1 ~ 

<r 

8,478 

9~ 

10,  024 

9 

10, 101 
328 
420 
3,  419 

5,974 

6 

62 

201 
2,  622 

256 
3, 143 

3,419 

Other  troops  in  this  command 

358 

8, 797 

11,  886 

13, 881 

| 14, 277 

Opelousas,  La.,  Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  Emory,  Third  Division 

JO 

293 

4 

1 

io~ 

8, 170 
124 

10,  045 
136 

j Toio 

10,  045 
136 

6,213 

106 

Total 

307 

6,  319 

| 8, 304 

1 10,191 

| 10, 191 

=1-  ■ - — 

1 

* See  Inclosure  No.  5 to  Banks’  report  of  April  23,  p 304. 


712  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps,  Maj.  Gen. 
N.  P.  Banks  commanding,  for  the  month  of  April,  1863  ( headquarters  Opelousas,  La.). 


Command. 

1 * 

! Officers.  g 

S.S 

t for 

ty- 

g 

£ 

j Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent  at  last 

j monthly  return.  | 

Opelousas,  La.,  Brig.  Gen.  C.  Grover,  Fourth  Division 

Infantry 

5 

235 

4,  73i 

5 

5,511  ! 

5 

9,  387 

5 

9,  598 

Artillery - 

9 

322  ! 

352  j 

418 

406 

Total - - 

249 

5,053  1 

5,868  i 

9,810 

10,009 

Opelousas,  La.,  Brig’  Gen.  G.  Weitzel,  Second  Brigade, 

10 

10 

10 

10 

First  Division. 

; 

Infantry 

157 

4,014 

4,  933 

! 5, 721 

5,  721 

6 

229 

266 

297 

297 

Artillery 

7 

272 

301 

371 

371 

Total 

180 

4,  515  . 

5,510 

! 6, 399 

6,  399 

District  of  Pensacola,  Fla.,  Col.  W.  C.  Holbrook’ s command. . 

80 

1,437 

1,  872 

1,  945 

2,  025 

Ship  Island,  Miss.,  Col.  N.  W.  Daniels,  2d  Louisiana  Native 

22 

502~ 

637 

679~ 

679 

Guards. 

I 

Key  West  and  Tortugas,  Brig.  Gen.  D.  P.  Woodbury’s  com- 



1,512 

1,  565 

mand. 



Total  infantry 

i,42r 

"317880 

42,  252" 

| 51,892 

Ta+qI  pjj.viilrv  ... 

33 

697 

815 

1,113 

Total  o rti  11  or\r  ...... 

56 

1,510 

1,  712 

2,151 

Grand  total 

1,  583 

34,  087 

44,  832 

55,229 

54,  339 

Remarks. — Headquarters  moved  from  New  Orleans  on  the  8th  of  April  en  route  for  Brashear  City ; 
moved  from  Brashear  City  en  route  for  Opelousas ; arrived  at  Opelousas  April  20. 


Organization  of  the  troops  in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf  ( Nineteenth  Army 
Corps),  Maj'.  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks , U.  tS.  Army , commanding,  April 
30,  1863  ; headquarters  Opelousas , La. 

FIRST  DIVISION.* 

Maj.  Gen.  Christopher  C.  Augur. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  Edward  P.  Chapin. 

21st  Maine,  Col.  Elijah  D.  Johnson. 

48th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Eben  F.  Stone. 
49th  Massachusetts,  Col. Win.  F.  Bartlett. 
116th  New  York,  Maj.  George  M.  Love. 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Godfrey  Weitzel. 

12th  Connecticut,  Lieut.  Col.  Frank  H. 
Peck. 

75th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  Willoughby 
Babcock. 

114th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  R. 

per  Jj00 

160th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  John  B.  Van 
Petten. 

8th  Vermont,  Col.  Stephen  Thomas. 


*The  divisions  were  numbered  as  herein 
teries  were  assigned  January  17,  1863. 


Attached  to  Second  Brigade. 

1st  Louisiana  Cavalry,  Companies  A and 
B,  Capt.,  H.  F.  Williamson. 

2d  Massachusetts  Cavalry  Battalion, Com- 
pany B,  Capt.  F.  Williamson. 

1st  Maine  Battery,  Lieut.  John  E.  Morton. 
6th  Massachusetts  Battery,  Lieut.  John  F. 
Phelps; 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  A,  Capt.  E.  C. 
Bainbridge. 

Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Nathan  A.  M.  Dudley. 

2d  Louisiana,  Col.  Charles  I.  Paine.  * 
30th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  William 
W.  Bullock. 

50th  Massachusetts,  Col.  C.  P.  Messer. 
161st  New  York,  Col.  GabrielT.  Harrower. 
174th  New  York,  Maj.  George  Keating. 


indicated  January  14,  1863,  and  the  bat-  ' 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


713 


Unattached. 

1st  Louisiana  Native  Guards,  Col.  Spencer  H.  Stafford. 

3d  Louisiana  Native  Guards. 

4tli  Louisiana  Native  Guards. 

1st  Louisiana  Cavalry,  Companies  C and  E,  Capt.  J.  F.  Godfrey. 

2d  Rhode  Island  Cavalry  (battalion). 

1st  Indiana  Heavy  Artillery,  Col.  John  A.  Keith. 

12th  Massachusetts  Battery,  Lieut.  Edwin  M.  Chamberlin. 

SECOND  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman. 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Alpha  B.  Farr. 

9th  Connecticut,  Lieut.  Col.  Richard  Fitz 
Gibbons. 

28th  Maine,  Col.  Ephraim  W.  Woodman. 
26th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  Josiah  A. 
Sawtell. 

42d  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph 
Stedman. 

47th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Lucius  B.  Marsh. 


mrsi  ungaae. 

Brig.  Gen.  Neal  Dow. 

26th  Connecticut,  Col.  Thomas  G.  Kings- 
ley. 

6th  Michigan,  Col.  Thomas  S.  Clark. 
15th  New  Hampshire, Col.  John  W.  King- 
man. 

128th  New  York,  Col.  David  S.  Cowles. 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Frank  S.  Nickerson. 


14th  Maine,  Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  W.  Porter. 

24th  Maine,  Col.  George  M.  Atwood. 

165th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  Abel  Smith,  jr. 

177th  New  York,  Col.  Ira  W.  Ainsworth. 

Artillery. 

18th  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  Albert  G.  Mack. 

5th  United  States,  Battery  G,  Lieut.  Jacob  B.  Rawles. 

1st  Vermont  Battery,  Capt.  George  T.  Hebard. 

DEFENSES  OF  NEW  ORLEANS.* 

2d  Louisiana  Native  Guards  (detachment). 

12th  Maine,  Company  D,  Capt.  Elisha  Winter. 

13th  Maine,  Col.  Henry  Rust,  jr. 

31st  Massachusetts  (detachment). 

4th  Wisconsin,  Company  G,  Capt.  James  Keefe. 

2d  Massachusetts  Cavalry  Battalion,  Company  A. 

14th  New  York  Cavalry  (detachment). 

1st  Texas  Cavalry,  Col.  Edmund  J.  Davis. 

1st  Louisiana  Native  Guards,  Heavy  Artillery,  Company  B. 
13th  Massachusetts  Battery,  Capt.  Charles  H.  J.  Hamlen. 

21st  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  James  Barnes. 

25th  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  John  A.  Grow. 

26th  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  George  W.  Fox. 


THIRD  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  H.  Emory. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  Timothy  IngrahamJ 

4th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  Eben  T. 
Colby. 

16th  New  Hampshire,  Lieut.  Col.  Henry 
^ W.  Fuller. 

- 110th  New  York,  Col.  Clinton  H.  Sage. 
162d  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  Justus  W. 
Blanchard. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Halbert  E.  Paine. 

8th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  Hawkes  Fear- 
ing, jr. 

133d  New  York,  Col.  Leonard  D.  H.  Cur- 
rie. 

173d  New  York,  Maj.  A.  Power  Gallway. 
4th  Wisconsin,  Lieut.  Col.  Sidney  A. 
Bean. 


* Brigadier-General  Sherman  assumed  command  of  these  defenses  January  10, 1863. 
t Succeeded  Brig.  Gen.  George  L.  Andrews  (assigned  to  command  February  21), 
who  was  appointed  chief  of  staff  at  department  headquarters  March  6. 


714 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  AXYIL 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Oliver  P.  Gooding. 

31st  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  W.  S.  B.  Hopkins. 
38th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  William  L.  Rodman. 
53d  Massachusetts,  Col.  John  W.  Kimball. 

156th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  Jacob  Sharpe. 

175th  New  York. 

Artillery. 

Capt.  Richard  C.  Duryea. 

4th  Massachusetts  Battery,  Lieut.  Joseph  B.  Briggs. 

1st  United  States,  Battery  F,  Capt.  Richard  C.  Duryea. 
2d  Vermont  Battery,  Capt.  Pythagoras  E.  Holcomb. 

Cavalry. 

2d  Rhode  Island  (detachment). 


First  Brigade. 


FOURTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Cuvier  Grover. 

Second  Brigade. 


Brig.  Gen.  William  Dwight,  Ji\* 

1st  Louisiana,  Col.  R.  E.  Holcomb. 

22d  Maine,  Lieut.  Col.  O.  G.  Putnam. 
6th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  M.  Cassidy. 
91st  New  York,  Col.  Jacob  Van  Zandt. 
131st  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  N.  W.  Day. 


Col.  William  K.  Kimball. 

24th  Connecticut,  Col.  S.  M.  Mansfield. 
12th  Maine,  Lieut.  Col.  Edward  Ilsley. 
41st  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  Lorenzo 
D.  Sargent. 

52d  Massachusetts,  Col.  H.  S.  Greenleaf. 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Henry  W.  Birge. 


13th  Connecticut,  Lieut.  Col.  Alexander  Warner. 
25th  Connecticut,  Col.  George  P.  Bissell. 

26th  Maine,  Col.  Nathaniel  H.  Hubbard. 

159th  New  York,  Col.  Edward  L.  Molineux. 


Artillery. 

Capt.  Henry  W.  Closson. 

2d  Massachusetts  Battery,  Capt.  Orrnand  F.  Nims. 

1st  United  States,  Battery  L,  Capt.  Henry  W.  Closson. 
2d  United  States,  Battery  C,  Lieut.  John  I.  Rodgers. 

BRASHEAR  CITY,  LA.t 


Col.  Charles  E.  L.  Holmes. 


23d  Connecticut,  Col.  Charles  E.  L.  Holmes. 
176th  New  York,  Col.  Charles  C.  Nott. 


SHIP  ISLAND,  MISS. 

2d  Louisiana  Native  Guards  (detachment),  Col.  Nathan  W.  Daniels. 
DISTRICT  OP  KEY  WEST  AND  TORTUGAS.  } 

Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  P.  Woodbury. 

90th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  Louis  W.  Tinelli. 

47th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Tilghman  H.  Good. 

DISTRICT  OF  WEST  FLORIDA.  § 

Col.  William  C.  Holbrook. 


28th  Connecticut,  Col.  Samuel  P.  Ferris. 

15th  Maine,  Lieut.  Col.  Beniamin  B.  Murray,  jr. 

7th  Vermont,  Lieut.  Col.  David  B.  Peck. 

2d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  H,  Capt.  Frank  H.  Larned. 
2d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  K,  Capt.  Harvey  A.  Allen. 


* Assigned  February  12.  „ j 

t Detachments  at  La  Fourche  Crossing  and  Tigerville. 

1 Transferred  to  Department  of  the  Gulf,  and  General  Woodbury  assigned  to  com- 
mand by  General  Orders,  No.  66,  Adjutant-General’s  Office,  March  16,  1863. 

$ Known  also  as  the  District  of  Pensacola. 


hap.  xxvn.3 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


715 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  F.  Mex .,  May  1,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  E.  West, 

Comdg.  District  of  Arizona , Hart’s  Mill , Tex. : 

General:  While  you  were  absent  at  Fort  West  recently  some  re- 
jorts  reached  me,  and  from  what  I hear  reached  you  as  well,  of  an 
dvance  of  rebel  forces  on  New  Mexico  from  the  direction  of  Texas.  It 
s possible  these  reports  had  some  foundation.  This  can  be  determined 
>y  trusty  spies.  A small  force  you  will  be  able  to  whip  by  falling  back 
,n  Las  Cruces  or  by  bringing  the  garrison  of  that  place  to  Hart’s  Mill, 
f you  are  menaced  by  a large  force  you  will  destroy  the  property  of  all 
ecessionists,  as  indicated  in  my  instructions  to  you  dated  November 
.8, 1862,  and  take  all  the  troops  with  you  to  Fort  Craig.  Of  course 
yhat  is  here  meant  by  a large  force  is  a force  so  considerable  that  you 
•ould  not  in  all  probability  maintain  yourself  successfully  against  it. 

It  will  be  well  for  you  to  send  by  express  for  the  companies  of  Bowie’s 
roops,  which  are  to  come  to  the  Eio  Grande,  to  have  no  delay. 

In  case  a large  force  comes  against  us  the  Fort  West  garrison  will 
all  back  on  Fort  Craig  by  Anderson’s  route.  The  Apache  Pass  will 
>e  held  by  the  troops  occupying  it.  Tucson,  if  menaced,  will  also  be 
leld  by  all  the  troops  that  may  be  there  or  in  the  neighborhood.  No 
arge  rebel  force,  in  my  opinion,  will  go  that  far  from  the  Eio  Grande. 
?ls  matters  then  become  further  developed,  after  all  this  is  done,  we 
shall  know  with  more  certainty  what  we  had  better  do. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ JAMES  H.  CAELETON, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Opelousas,  May  2,  1863. 

Irig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Defenses  of  Few  Orleams: 

General  : By  direction  of  the  commanding  general  I have  the  honor 
o send  you  the  following  statement  of  the  movements  which  have  taken 
dace  here  during  the  period  of  his  absence,  from  the  evening  of  April 
15  to  last  evening,  when  he  returned  to  this  place: 

Colonel  Paine,  with  his  brigade  and  one  section  of  artillery,  was  sent 
rnt  on  the  Plaquemine  Brule  road,  southwest  from  Opelousas,  April  26, 
so  disperse  a considerable  force  of  cavalry  reported  in  that  direction 
md  intending  to  attack  our  train.  The  enemy  was  found  to  have  left, 
md  is  reported  to  have  crossed  the  Mermenton  Eiver  en  route  for  Texas. 

April  27  a report  was  received  from  Colonel  Jerrard,  commanding  at 
Sew  Iberia,  of  a disturbance  at  Saint  Martinville,  caused  by  a few 
ivhite  men  and  a party  of  negroes,  but  which  was  promptly  quelled. 

April  28  General  Dwight,  with  his  brigade  and  two  sections  of  artil- 
•ery,  was  ordered  to  fall  back  to  Washington  from  his  position  about 
15  miles  in  advance  of  that  place  on  the  Bayou  Bceuff  road,  where  his 
ear  was  much  exposed  to  the  attacks  of  the  numerous  cavalry  of  the 
memy.  General  Dwight  made  several  partial  movements  with  success, 
greatly  alarming  and  puzzling  the  enemy. 

April  29  information  received  relative  to  Simmesport,  on  the  Atchaf- 
vlaya.  The  enemy  have  left  the  place  for  Alexandria.  Eoad  from 
pere  to  Simmesport  reported  good.  A reconnaissance  was  made  by 


716 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTX 


Lieutenant-Colonel  Corliss,  of  - the  Rhode  Island  Cavalry,  accompanied 
by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Abert,  which  was  pushed  out  on  the  road  through 
Chicotville  to  the  Bayou  Cocordie,  a distance  of  upward  of  50  miles. 
The  enemy  had  no  force  on  that  road  except  a small  picket,  the  whole 
of  which  was  captured.  The  enemy  has  a considerable  force  of  cavalry 
on  the  Bayou  Bceuff  road,  but  he  has  no  force  to  offer  any  strong  re- 
sistance to  our  advance  to  Alexandria.  The  collection  of  cotton  has 
been  very  successful,  about  3,500  bales  having  already  been  collected. 
Two  more  pieces  of  artillery  have  been  raised  from  the  wreck  of  a rebel 
boat  near  Leonville,  making  twenty-two  guns  in  all  captured  from  the 
enemy.  About  600  sabers  were  also  recovered.  One  soldier  has  been 
shot  to  death  for  plundering  and  pillaging,  and  some  others  are  being 
tried  for  the  same  offense,  who  will  doubtless  have  to  suffer  the  same 
penalty.  The  temptations  to  plunder  and  pillage  have  been  so  strong, 
and  the  disregard  of  reiterated  orders  forbidding  it  such,  that  severe 
measures  were  indispensable. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

[GEO.  L.  ANDREWS.] 
Brigadier -General  of  Volunteers , Chief  of  Staff . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Aemy  Corps, 

Opelousas,  May  4,  1863. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commander-in - Chief  &c. : 

General  : Since  the  date  of  my  last  dispatch  I have  visited  New 
Orleans  for  a couple  of  days.  General  Ullman  was  then  at  Baton 
Rouge,  with  his  officers.  Failing  to  meet  him  at  New  Orleans,  and 
unable  to  remain  longer,  I addressed  a letter  to  him  on  the  29th  of 
April,  inviting  him  to  meet  me  at  Opelousas.  I have  not  yet  heard 
from  him,  and  fear,  as  I am  likely  to  advance  immediately  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Alexandria,  that  I may  not  be  able  to  confer  with  him  for  some 
days.  But  I believe  that  I have  the  men  at  hand,  part  of  them  already 
partially  organized,  for  his  entire  brigade.  I shall  turn  them  over  to 
him  at  once.  My  belief  is  that  Brashear  City,  on  Berwick  Bay,  is  in  all 
respects  the  best  position  for  the  organization  of  his  troops.  There  is 
no  material  at  Baton  Rouge,  and  New  Orleans  is  in  many  respects  ob- 
jectionable. He  can  organize  his  regiments  in  one  week  after  establish- 
ing his  headquarters  from  the  men  I have  collected.  I shall  authorize 
him,  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  to 
recruit  ad  libitmn  from  the  districts  about  New  Orleans. 

Inclosed  is  a copy  of  an  order  upon  the  subject  of  colored  troops,  to 
which  reference  was  made  in  my  last  dispatch,  embodying  the  ideas 
then  referred  to. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure.  J 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  A.  C., 

No.  40.  ( Opelousas , May  1,  1863. 

The  major-general  commanding  the  department  proposes  the  organi- 
zation of  a corps  dlarmee  of  colored  troops,  to  be  designated  as  the 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


717 


Corps  d’Afrique.  It  will  consist  ultimately  of  eighteen  regiments, 
representing  all  arms — infantry,  artillery,  cavalry — making  three  bri- 
gades of  two  regiments  each,  and  three  divisions  of  three  brigades  each, 
with  appropriate  corps  of  engineers,  and  flying  hospitals  for  each  divis- 
ion, appropriate  uniforms,  and  the  graduation  of  pay  to  correspond  with 
value  of  services  will  be  hereafter  awarded. 

In  the  field  the  efficiency  of  every  corps  depends  upon  the  influence 
of  its  officers  upon  the  troops  engaged,  and  the  practicable  limits  of  one 
direct  command  is  generally  estimated  at  1,000  men.  The  most  emi- 
nent military  historians  and  commanders,  among  others  Thiers  and 
Chambray,  express  the  opinion,  upon  a full  review  of  the  elements  of 
military  power,  that  the  valor  of  the  soldier  is  rather  acquired  than 
natural.  Nations  whose  individual  heroism  is  undisputed  have  failed 
as  soldiers  in  the  field.  The  European  and  American  continents  exhibit 
instances  of  this  character,  and  the  military  prowess  of  every  nation 
may  be  estimated  by  the  centuries  it  has  devoted  to  military  contest 
or  the  traditional  passion  of  its  people  for  military  glory.  With  a race 
unaccustomed  to  military  service  much  more  depends  on  the  immediate 
influence  of  officers  upon  individual  members  than  with  those  that  have 
acquired  more  or  less  warlike  habits  and  spirit  by  centuries  of  contest. 
It  is  deemed  best,  therefore,  in  the  organization  of  the  Corps  dAfrique 
to  limit  the  regiments  to  the  smallest  number  of  men  consistent  with 
efficient  service  in  the  field  in  order  to  secure  the  most  thorough  instruc- 
tion and  discipline  aud  the  largest  influence  of  the  officers  over  the 
troops.  At  first  they  will  be  limited  to  500  men.  The  average  of 
American  regiments  is  less  than  that  number. 

The  commanding  general  desires  to  detail,  for  temporary  or  perma- 
nent duty,  the  best  officers  of  the  army  for  the  organization,  instruction, 
and  discipline  of  this  corps.  With  their  aid  he  is  confident  that  the 
corps  will  render  important  service  to  the  Government.  It  is  not  estab- 
lished upon  any  dogma  of  equality  or  other  theory,  but  as  a practical 
and  sensible  matter  of  business.  The  Government  makes  use  of  mules, 
horses,  uneducated  and  educated  white  men,  in  the  defense  of  its  insti- 
tutions. Why  should  not  the  negro  contribute  whatever  is  in  his  power 
for  the  cause  in  which  he  is  as  deeply  interested  as  other  men?  We 
may  properly  demand  from  him  whatever  service  he  can  render. 

The  chief  defect  in  organizations  of  this  character  has  arisen  from 
incorrect  ideas  of  the  officers  in  command.  Their  discipline  has  been 
lax,  and  in  some  cases  the  conduct  of  their  regiments  unsatisfactory 
and  discreditable.  Controversies  unnecessary  and  injurious  to  the 
service  have  arisen  between  them  and  other  troops.  The  organization 
proposed  will  reconcile  and  avoid  many  of  these  troubles. 

Officers  and  soldiers  will  consider  the  exigencies  of  the  service  in  this 
department  and  the  absolute  necessity  of  appropriating  every  element 
of  power  to  the  support  of  the  Government.  The  prejudices  or  opinions 
of  men  are  in  nowise  involved.  The  co  operation  and  active  support  of 
all  officers  and  men,  and  the  nomination  of  fit  men  from  the  ranks  and 
from  the  lists  of  non-commissioned  and  commissioned  officers,  are  re- 
spectfully solicited  from  the  generals  commanding  the  respective  di- 
visions. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


718 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


United  States  Flag-Ship  Hartford, 
Off  Red  River , May  4,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

Dear  General  : The  ram  Switzerland  returned  last  night,  accom- 
panied by  Admiral  Porter  and  four  iron-clads,  and  he  will  be  at  Alex-, 
andria  before  you  can  possibly  get  there.  He  took  Grand  Gulf  after  a 
hard  fight  of  five  hours ; found  there  heavy  preparations  for  fortifying 
that  place. 

I trust  you  will  be  able  to  reach  Alexandria  as  nearly  as  possible  at 
the  same  time  with  Porter.  I send  you  the  dispatches  of  General  Grant. 

As  soon  as  Alexandria  falls  I wish  to  be  at  work  below  Port  Hudson. 
Porter  above  and  my  fleet  below  and  a moderate  army  force  in  the  rear, 
and  Port  Hudson  must  fall.  I do  not  think  there  are  12,000  men  there;: 
they  sent  5,000  men  to  Grand  Gulf.  We  captured  400  soldiers  at  Grand 


Gulf. 


I am  told  that  the  iron-clads  are  on  their  way  down  to  me,  and  it  will 
rest  with  me  to  decide  whether  I shall  attack  Port  Hudson  or  Mobile 
first.  I will  consult  with  you  when  I go  down.  I have  been  waiting 
for  the  return  of  my  gunboats,  which  I sent  up  to  Fort  De  Fussy,  so  as 
to  give  you  correct  information  on  the  subject  of  their  defenses,  and 
also  in  relation  to  Kirby  Smith’s  troops  from  Arkansas.  Porter  does 
not  believe  he  will  get  them. 

Later. — While  writing  the  above  your  aide-de-camp,  Lieutenant  Sar- 
gent, arrived  with  a dispatch  for  General  Grant  and  one  for  myself.  I 
shall  not  need  the  Sachem  or  Calhoun  up  here,  now  that  Admiral  Por- 
ter takes  the  expedition  in  charge;  and  he  will  also  take  charge  of  the 
river  between  Port  Hudson  and  Vicksburg,  while  I shall  proceed  down 
the  river  as  soon  as  circumstances  will  admit  and  look  to  my  squadron 
below,  which  I have  so  long  neglected ; but  I think  it  will  be  to  the 
advantage  of  the  country  in  the  general  result.  As  Admiral  Porter 
has  concluded  to  go  up  this  evening  I shall  not  detain  your  aide  any 
longer  to  await  the  result  of  my  reconnaissance,  but  will  dispatch  him 
at  once. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly, 


D.  G.  FA  EE  AG  UT, 


Rear-Admiral. 


It  may  occasion  some  surprise,  general,  that  my  representations  of 
the  condition  of  affairs  in  this  department  should  differ  so  entirely  from 
those  presented  by  Colonel  Shaffer.  My  statement  nevertheless  is  far 
short  of  the  truth.  When  I came  here  it  was  as  bare  of  military  sup- 
j>lies  as  it  was  at  the  date  of  the  creation  of  the  world.  We  have  suf- 
fered much  anxiety  and  performed  much  labor  to  remove  the  embar- 
rassments resting  upon  us.  They  are  in  a great  degree  overcome.  The 
campaign  upon  which  we  entered  on  the  1st  of  April  has  resulted  in 
supplying  our  wants  to  a very  great  extent.  We  have  plenty  of  cattle, 
mules,  and  horses,  and  shall  not  ask  any  assistance  from  the  Govern- 
ment in  these  respects.  W e have  also  plenty  of  land  transportation,  a nd 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


719 


the  means  for  supplying  at  nominal  expense  to  the  Government  a suffi- 
cient water  transportation,  which  we  never  yet  have  had.  The  number 
of  steamers  suitable  for  the  navigation  of  this  department,  all  told,  em- 
ployed in  public  and  private  service,  does  not  exceed  twelve  or  fourteen 
at  furthest.  I need  not  say  that  fifty  would  not  suffice  the  demand  of 
the  Government  alone  if  we  had  them  in  our  possession. 

One  of  the  gratifying  results  of  this  expedition  is  that  it  places  within 
our  control  all  the  materials  for  building  steamers  of  the  character 
necessary  for  our  use.  We  have  lumber,  mechanics,  and  machinery,  a 
careful  examination  of  the  different  establishments  in  the  neighborhood 
of  New  Orleans  having  revealed  something  like  twenty  steam-engines 
in  good  condition,  which  can  with  little  labor  be  adapted  to  the  pur- 
poses of  steamboat  navigation.  I shall  ask  of  your  department  the 
privilege  of  putting  these  things  together,  declaring  to  you  that  it  is  in- 
dispensable to  the  public  service  and  the  movement  of  my  troops.  The 
singular  formation  of  this  country  makes  water  and  land  transportation 
in  equal  strength  necessary  in  all  expeditions.  It  is  impossible  to  move 
by  land  in  such  a manner  that  the  enemy  cannot  cut  off  our  communi- 
cations by  water,  and  to  move  by  water  that  they  cannot  do  the  same 
by  land.  We  have  thus  to  guard  ourselves  and  to  support  ourselves 
by  supplying  in  equal  degree  land  and  water  transportation. 

I am  reluctant  to  call  upon  the  Government,  as  I know  the  extent  of 
the  demands  made  upon  it,  and  hope  I may  be  privileged  to  relieve 
myself  of  the  almost  unconquerable  difficulties  which  have  rested  upon 
me  from  the  moment  of  reaching  New  Orleans  until  now,  by  supplying 
at  the  lowest  possible  expense  to  the  Government  these  pressing  and 
imperative  demands.  The  boats  in  our  possession,  both  for  transport 
and  war  purposes,  are  sadly  out  of  repair.  I shall  during  the  summer 
put  them  in  good  condition  and  relieve  all  our  wants. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office., 

No.  206.  ) Washington , May  7,  1863. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  0.  P.  Stone,  United  States  Volunteers,  will  report  in 
person  without  delay  to  Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks,  United  States  Volun- 
teers, New  Orleans,  La.,  for  asssignment  to  duty  in  the  Department  of 
the  Gulf. 

******* 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck. 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Alexandria , May  8,  1863 — 2 p.  m. 

Colonel  Holabird  : 

Sir:  Admiral  Porter  informs  me  that  he  shall  be  obliged  to  suspend 
operations  in  this  quarter  for  want  of  coal.  Let  all  coal  for  which 
transportation  can  be  obtained  be  sent  forward  for  the  two  fleets.  Soft 
coal  is  necessary  for  Admiral  Porter’s  fleet. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding. 
(Copy  sent  to  Colonel  Chandler,  Brashear.) 


720  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Alexandria , May  8,  1863. 

Commodore  Farragut  : 

Dear  Sir  I shall  remain  here  a few  days  until  communication  can 
be  opened  with  General  Grant  and  the  chances  of  co-operation  with 
him  be  ascertained.  In  the  mean  time  we  desire  to  be  active,  and  shall 
move  toward  Shreveport,  giving  the  enemy  impression  that  we  advance 
to  that  point.  Cannot  the  lighter  gunboats  now  with  you,  such  as  the 
Clifton,  Reliance,  or  Sachem,  be  sent  to  us,  for  the  purpose  of  moving 
up  the  Bed  River  as  far  as  may  be  safe  and  practicable  ? Without  los- 
ing time,  this  may  give  us  important  results,  possibly  to  drive  the  enemy 
from  the  road  to  Shreveport,  in  the  direction  of  NibletPs  Bluff,  on  the 
Sabine  River.  I commend  this  to  your  consideration. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Alexandria , May  8,  1863-^8  a.  m. 

Major-General  Grant: 

Dear  Sir  : My  command  reached  Alexandria  yesterday  without  op- 
position, the  advance  entering  the  town  early  in  the  afternoon.  Ad- 
miral Porter,  with  his  fleet  and  several  of  Admiral  Farragut’s  boats, 
took  possession  of  the  town  yesterday  morning  without  resistance.* 

I have  stated  to  him  that  1 can  furnish  his  fleet,  that  of  Admiral  Far- 
ragut, and  your  transports  with  coal,  and  your  army  partially  with  pro- 
visions, by  the  Atchafalaya  and  Red  River;  but  it  will  be  difficult.  If 
Port  Hudson  is  reduced  all  this  can  be  done  direct  from  New  Orleans, 
and  our  future  operations  will  proceed  without  interruption  from  want 
of  supplies  and  certain  success. 

In  answer  to  your  dispatch  received  in  cipher  I replied  I could  co-  j 
operate  with  you  on  the  25th  instant  or  the  1st  of  June.  Our  success- 
ful march  here  enables  me  to  do  this  on  the  25th  May.  I shall  have 
15,000  good  men,  all  told.  We  can  move  by  the  Bayou  Sara  to  the  rear . 
of  Port  Hudson,  get  our  supplies  from  Baton  Rouge,  where  Major- 1 
General  Augur  can  join  us  with  4,000  men. 

The  fleet  of  Admiral  Porter  above,  that  of  Admiral  Farragut  below, 
and  our  forces  in  the  rear,  or  so  many  of  yours  as  you  can  spare,  the 
fall  of  the  post  will  be  instant  and  certain. 

I beg  your  most  favorable  consideration  to  this  matter. 

Lieutenant -Colonel  Irwin,  my  adjutant,  will  explain  my  views  more 
in  detail.  i 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  general,  your  obedient 
servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  Arizona, 

Hart’s  Mill , Tex.,  May  8, 1863. 

Capt.  John  C.  McFerran, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Santa  Fe: 

Captain  : The  instructions  contained  in  a communication  from  the 


See  p.  313. 


Chap.  XXVIL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


72 1 


commanding  general,  dated  the  1st  instant,  as  to  what  it  is  to  be  done 
by  me  in  ease  I am  threatened  by  either  a small  or  large  force  of  the 
enemy,  have  my  careful  attention.  To  guard  against  surprise  I shall 
push  the  force  named  in  the  inclosed  Special  Orders,  No.  26,  down  to 
Fort  Quitman.  From  Captain  Shirland’s  acquaintance  with  that 
locality  I am  induced  to  order  him  down  there  to  locate  this  outpost 
and  to  assist  the  company  commander  to  become  acquainted  with  the 
surrounding  country.  A copy  of  my  instructions  to  Captain  Shirland 
will  be  forwarded  to  department  headquarters.  Upon  completing  this 
duty  he  will  rejoin  his  company. 

I wish  to  put  a picket  at  the  Waco  Tanks  also,  but  an  examination 
of  the  tanks  yesterday  showed  that  the  water  failed  there.  The  weather 
has  the  appearance  of  soon  obviating  this  objection.  Otherwise  I shall 
resort  to  the  first  watering-place  beyoud. 

My  force  is  now  as  follows : At  Las  Cruces,  Company  A,  First,  and 
I,  Fifth  Infantry,  C (dismounted),  First  Cavalry,  California  Volunteers. 
At  Franklin,  Companies  H,  C,  and  G,  First  Infantry,  California  Volun- 
teers, and  Company  G,  First  New  Mexico  Volunteers.  This  will  be 
increased  by  the  arrival  at  Las  Cruces  on  the  10th  instant  of  Company 
E,  Fifth  Infantry,  California  Volunteers,  and  F,  of  the  same  regiment, 
should  reach  that  post  by  the  20th  instant  ; in  all  nine  companies.  One 
other  company  of  the  Fifth  Infantry,  H,  now  relieving  F at  Apache 
Pass  and  in  its  turn  to  be  relieved,  remains  to  come  forward.  Com- 
panies D,  I,  and  K,  of  that  regiment,  will  form  the  infantry  force  for 
the  Territory  of  Arizona,  designated  in  the  letter  of  the  general  com- 
manding of  the  9th  April. 

I feel  quite  encouraged  at  my  increasing  strength,  and  hope  to  avoid 
ever  being  compelled  to  yield  one  foot  of  this  Territory.  The  instruc- 
tions about  the  command  at  Fort  West  falling  back  by  Anderson’s 
route  on  Fort  Craig  will  involve,  as  you  have  by  this  time  learned,  the 
destruction  of  all  property  that  cannot  be  carried  by  pack-mules. 
Cook’s  Springs  and  San  Diego  Crossing  is,  as  far  as  we  are  informed, 
the  most  direct  wagon  road  now  available.  I have  sent  a trusty  Mex- 
ican to  Presidio  del  Norte  to  ascertain  what  supplies  are  being  taken 
from  Chihuahua  to  Texas.  It  is  too  soon  yet  to  hear  from  the  scouts 
sent  out  by  Colonel  McMullen,  but  a messenger  from  Mr.  Creel,  at  Chi- 
huahua, should  have  arrived  again  by  this  time. 

Rumors  continue  rife.  As  a specimen,  I send  inclosed  a copy  of  a 
letter  to  me  from  a friend  of  the  cause  at  Mesilla.  The  actions  and 
the  sayings  of  the  now  few,  but  influential,  secessionists  in  El  Paso 
are  quite  a study.  My  facilities  for  watching  them  close  are  good,  and 
I shall  embody  in  another  letter  the  conclusions  that  I have  formed, 
from  innumerable  straws  indicating  the  current,  of  the  probabilities  of 
the  enemy’s  advancing  in  force  later  in  the  season. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  R.  WEST, 

Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


Hart’s  Mill,  Tex.,  May  8, 1863. 

Oapt.  John  C.  McFerran, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Santa  Fe  : 

Captain  : Observation  of  the  actions  and  sayings  of  a few  promi- 
nent and  influential  secessionists  in  El  Paso,  men  who  have  something 
46  r r — yol  xv 


722  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVI 

at  stake  and  command  some  means,  in  connection  with  what  you  hav 
already  been  advised  as  being  done  in  placing  considerable  supplie 
upon  the  Fort  Davis  road,  forces  me  to  believe  that  sooner  or  late: 
this  summer  a large  force  from  Texas  will  be  moved  against  this  Tei 
ritory.  This  conclusion,  you  will  observe,  is  formed  solely  upon  infoi 
mation  available  from  Texas  toward  this  direction.  I know  nothin 
about  movements  on  the  Gulf  side,  but  judging  from  the  scarcity  cl 
means  to  subsist  the  rebel  troops  within  that  State  it  does  not  seei 
improbable  to  anticipate  that  a portion  of  them  will  be  sent  in  thi 
direction,  to  be  maintained  upon  such  supplies  as  can  be  derived  froi 
Chihuahua  and  the  Mesilla  Yalley.  The  resources  of  the  latter  sectio 
will  be  very  considerable  the  coming  harvest.  As  the  enemy  mug 
look  for  his  supplies  en  route , having  little  to  start  with,  his  ad  vane:! 
by  the  Pecos  upon  the  northern  part  of  the  department  need  scarcel 
be  looked  for,  and  we  can  readily  learn  if  he  sends  a portion  of  hh 
force  that  way. 

To  abandon  the  Mesilla  Yalley  will  not  only  give  the  Confederac 
communication  with  the  Pacific,  but  it  will  help  the  enemy  on  to  Foi 
Craig  by  affording  him  subsistence.  Of  course  if  I fall  back  I will  d< 
stroy  all  I can,  but  the  work  will  not  be  thorough  among  green  cropi 
If  we  have  any  chances  of  success  at  all  in  making  a stand  right  lien 
permit  me  to  suggest  that  here  it  ought  to  be  done.  I have  shown  i 
another  letter  how  I shall  soon  have  ten  companies.  If  the  generd 
commanding  will  allow  me  to  bring  in  the  four  from  Fort  West  (the 
are  ineffective  now  to  pursue  Indians,  and  those  are  a secondar 
consideration  to  the  Texans  just  at  this  moment)  my  strength  will  b 
quite  formidable.  They  should  come  in  at  once  to  enable  the  cavalr' 
to  recruit  the  animals.  With  due  deference  to  the  better  judgment  oi 
the  general  commanding  the  department,  I venture  the  opinion  tbJ 
here,  with  2,000  men  and  a first-rate  battery  of  artillery,  is  the  place  tji 
make  a stand  and  destroy  any  force  up  to  4,000  men  that  the  enemy  ax 
likely  to  bring  against  us.  It  is  in  no  spirit  of  bravado  that  I offer  t 
stake  my  life  upon  the  result. 

From  communication  with  the  general  commanding  I consider  1 
quite  practicable  to  concentrate  this  force  here,  and  hence  the  sugge:; 
lion.  A regiment  called  from  Colorado  to  protect  the  northern  part  i 
the  Territory  while  the  troops  there  were  relieving  the  garrison  at  Foil 
Craig,  and  the  latter  being  united,  with  Shinn’s  battery,  to  my  con 
mand,  and  the  matter  would  be  accomplished,  and  all  I believe  in  goo 
time. 

If  the  enemy  gets  the  Mesilla  Yalley  he  will  be  the  more  ready  fo 
Fort  Craig  and  the  upper  country.  Cannot  he  be  met  here  and  be  d< 
feated,  or,  if  not  defeated,  badly  crippled,  without  endangering  any  sut 
sequent  plan  of  defense  % Though  I feel  warranted  in  thus  expressin 
my  views  as  to  the  plan  of  operations,  and  feel  a conviction  that  the 
would  be  successful,  I need  scarcely  add  that  the  more  mature  jud£ 
ment  of  the  commanding  general  will  find  me  ever  ready  and  zealou 
in  carrying  out  any  measures  he  may  see  proper  to  adopt. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfuily,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  WEST, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


723 


Hdqrs,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Alexandria , May  9, 1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commander -in- Chief,  Ac. : 


General:  In  view  of  movements  that  are  certain  to  be  made  fbr  the 
restoration  of  Louisiana  to  the  Union,  and  with  the  most  flattering  pros- 
pects of  success,  I would  respectfully  suggest  that  permission  be  given 
to  the  commander  of  this  department  to  allow  Mr.  Pierre  Souffi,  sr.,  to 
return  to  New  Orleans  for  one  month,  his  visit  to  be  prolonged  if  thought 
advisable.  I am  confident  that  Mr.  Soul6  is  not  a dangerous  man,  and 
I am  equally  sure  that  he  can  now  be  of  great  service.  As  no  person 
will  know  from  me  that  this  suggestion  is  made,  no  inconvenience  can 
arise  from  such  decision  as  shall, be  deemed  proper  in  this  case. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.}  May  10,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  TJ.  S.  Army , Washington , JD.  C.: 

General  : I am  aware  every  moment  of  your  time  is  of  value  to  the 
country,  and  I would  not  presume  to  ask  you  even  to  read  this  note 
did  I not  believe  that  what  is  herewith  inclosed  would  be  of  interest  to 
you  as  a general  and  therefore  as  a statesman. 

Among  all  my  endeavors  since  my  arrival  here  there  has  been  an 
effort  to  brush  back  the  Indians,  as  you  have  seen  from  official  corre- 
spondence, so  that  the  people  could  get  out  of  the  valley  of  the  Bio 
Grande,  and  not  only  possess  themselves  of  the  arable  lands  in  other 
parts  of  the  Territory,  but,  if  the  country  contained  veins  and  deposits 
©f  the  precious  metals,  that  they  might  be  found.  So  I re-established 
Port  Stanton,  and  at  least  a hundred  families  have  gone  to  that  vicinity 
to  open  farms,  and  they  are  commencing  to  find  gold  there. 

1 established  Fort  West,  and  have  driven  the  Indians  away  from  the 
head  of  the  Gila,  and  they  are  finding  gold,  silver,  and  cinnabar  there. 
There  is  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  one  of  the  richest  gold  countries  in 
the  world  is  along  the  affluents  to  the  Gila,  which  enter  it  from  the  north 
along  its  whole  course.  Thus  you  can  see  one  reason  why  the  rebels 
want,  and  why  we  may  not  jiermit  them  ever  to  have,  a country  evi- 
dently teeming  with  millions  on  millions  of  wealth. 

Last  winter  I asked  for  $100,000  to  make  a wagon  road  from  near 
Fort  Craig  to  the  Gila.  My  request  was  not  listened  to,  and  I endeav- 
ored to  open  the  road  without  help.  Strategically  you  will  see  its  value ; 
intrinsically,  as  I then  anticipated,  it  would  be  beyond  price.  My  pre- 
liminary survey  has  been  unsuccessful,  as  you  observe  by  Captain  Ander- 
son’s letter,  herewith  inclosed.  But  I do  not  despair  of  success.  You 
will  also  see  by  the  inclosed  notes  what  signs  of  mineral  wealth  are 
already  discovered.  If  I only  had  one  more  good  regiment  of  California 
infantry,  composed,  as  that  infantry  is,  of  practical  miners,  I would  place 
it  in  the  Gila  country.  While  it  would  exterminate  the  Indians,  who 
are  a scourge  to  New  Mexico,  it  would  protect  people  who  might  wish 
to  go  there  to  open  up  the  country,  and  would  virtually  be  a military 

. 


724 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX  , N.  Ml?*,  f^Ar.  XXvn 


colony  when  the  war  ended,  whose  interests  would  lead  the  officers  am 
soldiers  to  remain  in  the  new  El  Dorado. 

Pray  give  all  this  a thought.  It  is  not  a chimera,  but  a subject  tha 
is  worthy  of  the  attention  of  the  Government  now.  California,  you  re 
member,  was  not  considered  so  valuable  an  acquisition  until  its  gob 
startled  the  whole  world.  Do  not  despise  New  Mexico  as  a drain  upo] 
the  General  Government.  The  money  will  all  come  back  again. 

The  report  of  Captain  McCleave  I allowed  to  be  printed  to  make  other 
emulous  of  the  self-denial,  fixedness  of  purpose,  and  hard  work  of  thes 
Californians.  This  McCleave  is  the  officer  I wrote  to  you  about  as  on 
who  would  not  draw  his  pay  while  he  was  a prisoner  with  the  rebels 
As  a soldier  you  will  see  he  has  tolerably  fair  qualities. 

I am,  general,  very  sincerely,  yours, 

’ ’ JAMBS  H.  CABLETON, 

Brigadier - General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 
Santa  Ft,  N.  Mex.,  May  10,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  TJ.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C. : 

General:  I am  officially  informed  by  the  superintendent  of  India 
affairs  for  New  Mexico,  under  date  of  the  9th  instant,  that  persons  wh 
have  just  crossed  the  plains  to  this  Territory  from  Missouri  state  thai 
there  is  evidence  of  hostile  intentions  toward  the  whites  among  th 
Indians  of  the  great  prairies  lying  between  New  Mexico  and  the  frontier 
of  Kansas,  Missouri,  &c.  This  feeling,  it  seems,  has  manifested  itsel 
so  far  that  the  agent  in  charge  of  some  of  these  Indians  has  written  tj 
traders  and  expressed  the  belief  that  there  would  be  a general  uprk 
ing  among  those  tribes  unless  steps  are  taken  to  prevent  it.  If  the  Wa 
Department  will  station  one  good  regiment  of  cavalry  at  old  Fort  Atkii 
sou,  below  the  lower  crossing  of  the  Arkansas  at  the  Lower  Cimarro 
Springs,  and  on  the  headwaters  of  the  Cimarron,  near  Cold  Spring,  o 
the  old  Cimarron  route,  say  four  companies  at  each  point,  it  would  b 
a timely  precaution  so  far  as  these  Indians  are  concerned. 

This  year  the  merchants  of  New  Mexico  have  sent  larger  and  moi 
trains  to  the  States  for  goods  than  ever  before.  Indeed  nearly  all  c 
the  available  capital  in  this  country  is  invested  in  means  of  transpoi 
tation,  and  goods  will  in  six  weeks  be  afloat,  as  it  were,  on  the  grea 
plains.  Besides,  all  of  the  army  supplies  for  the  troops  in  this  Territor 
wiil  shortly  be  on  the  way  out.  The  danger  from  attacks  by  Indians  i 
not  the  least  danger  to  provide  against.  The  rebels  in  Arkansas  unde, 
Price  and  the  rebels  in  Texas  know  as  well  as  we  do  just  what  will  b 
upon  the  road;  just  bow  vital  all  those  supplies  are  to  us;  just  ho' 
poorly  they  may  be  guarded;  and  if  they  have  the  enterprise,  which 
believe  they  have,  they  will  give  us  a good  deal  of  trouble  by  cavalr 
raids  after  the  grass  has  grown.  Therefore  I beg  the  Department  t 
send  the  force  indicated  and  keep  the  garrisons  at  Forts  Larned  an 
Wise  in  good  strength  in  the  number  and  quality  of  the  troops.  Ibi 
should  in  my  opinion  be  done  without  delay. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

7 * 7 JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Chap,  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  725 


Abstract  from  Tri-Monthly  Return  of  the  Department  of  New  Mexico , Brig.  Gen.  James  H. 
Carleton  commanding,  for  May  10,  1863  ( headquarters  Santa  F6,.N.  Me x.). 

/ 


Present  for 
duty. 

a 

© 

43 

<V 

00 

Command. 

Officers. 

! Men. 

© 

U 

ft 

© 

* 

bO 

© 

u 

bo 

bo 

Aggregate  pri 

and  absent 

9 

9 

9 

Headquarters  Department  of  N ew  Mexico,  Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Carleton . 
Fort  Marcy,  N.  Mex.,  Capt.  H.  It.  Selden,  5th  Infantry,  TJ.  S.  Army : 

3 

3 

4 

6 

68 

104 

114 

Companies  D and  F,  5th  Infantry. 

Fort  Union,  N.  Mex.,  Capt.  P.  W.  L.  Plympton,  7th  IT.  S.  Infantry : 

12 

227 

409 

461 

Companies  C,  F,  H,  7th  Infantry ; I,  K,  L,  M,  1st  New  Mexico 
Volunteers. 

Fort  Union  Depot,  N.  Mex.,  Capt.  W.  B.  Shoemaker.  M.  S.  K. : 

15 

15 

15 

Company  of  ordnance. 

Fort  Sumner,  N.  Mex., Capt.  Jos.  Updegraff,  5th  U.  S.  Infantry: 
Companies  A 5th  Infantry;  B,  2d  Cavaky,  California  Volunteers ; 
G,  1st  Cavalry,  U.  S.  Army. 

Fort  Stanton,  N.  Mex.,Maj.  Jos.  Smith,  5th  Infantry,  California 

4 

47 

112 

144 

5 

75 

100 

156 

Volunteers:  Companies  A,  5th  Infantry,  California  Volunteers; 
A,  1st  New  Mexico  Volunteers. 

Fort  Wingate,  N.  Mex.,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  F.  Chaves,  1st  New  Mexico 

9 

210 

315 

346 

Volunteers:  Companies  B,  C,  E,  F,  1st  New  Mexico  Volunteers. 
Albuquerque,  N.  Mex.,  Capt.  W.  H.  Lewis,  5th  Infantry,  U.  S. 

Army:  Companies  B,  G,  K,  5th  Infantry ; A,  3d  U.  S.  Artillery. 
Los  Pinos,  N.  Mex.,  Capt.  Samuel  Archer,  5th  Infantry,  U.  S.  Army : 

7 

110 

165 

182 

6 

50 

83 

99 

Companies  E and  1, 5th  Infantry. 

Camp  Easton,  N.  Mex.,  First  Lieut.  David  Perry,  1st  U.  S.  Cavalry : 

1 

33 

38 

46 

Company  D,  1st  U.  S.  Cavalry 

Fort  Craig,  N.  Mex.,  Col.  Edwin  A.  Bigg,  1st  Infantry,  California 

14 

392 

458 

518 

Volunteers:  1st  and  5th  Infantry  and  1st  Cavalry,  California  Vol- 

Hart’s  Mill,  Tex.,  Lieut.  Col.  William  McMullen,  1st  Infantry, 

6 

188 

228 

243 

California  Volunteers : Companies  C,  G,  H,  1st  Infantry,  California 
Volunteers 

Fort  West,  N.  Mex.,  Maj.  William  McCleave,  1st  Cavalry,  Cali- 

11 

260 

301 

801 

fornia  Volunteers : Companies  D,  B,  1st  Infantry,  and  A,  B,  C,  1st 
Cavalry,  California  Volunteers. 

Fort  Bowie,  Ariz.,  Lieut.  John  F.  Qualey,  5th  Infantry,  California 

2 

49 

74 

84 

Voluuteers:  Company  E,  5th  Infantry,  California  Volunteers. 
Tucson,  Ariz.,  Col.  David  Fergusson,  1st  Cavalry,  California  Vol- 

8 

109 

166 

218 

unteers:  Companies  C,  F,  H,  5th  Infantry,  California  Volunteers. 
Las  Cruces,  N.  Mex.,  Maj.  E.  B.  Willis,  1st  Infantry,  California 

6 

67 

97 

168 

Volunteers  : Companies  A,  1st  infantry,  and  E,  1st  Cavalry. 

En  route, : Companies  G andH,  1st  New  Mexico  Volunteers.. . 

7 

182 

189 

189 

Total 

116 

2,  082 

2,  866 

3, 297 

Washington,  D.  C.,  May  11,  1863. 
Major-General  Banks,  Gomdg.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf : 

General  : The  President  and  Secretary  of  War  have  read  your  dis- 
patch No.  11,  of  April  23,  with  great  satisfaction.  The  operations  of 
your  army  have  been  truly  brilliant  and  merit  high  praise. 

The  Quartermaster-General  has  sent  you  additional  steam  transporta- 
tion to  supply  your  present  wants,  and  it  is  hoped  you  will  unite  with 
General  Grant  so  as  to  attack  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson  separately. 

If  within  your  power  to  operate  between  the  two  places,  and  with 
your  combined  strength  to  attack  a divided  enemy,  your  success  will  be 
ilmost  certain.  By  attacking  Port  Hudson  from  below  or  Vicksburg 
from  above  you  enable  the  enemy  to  unite  his  forces  upon  the  point 
Attacked. 

General  Hooker  failed  to  accomplish  his  object  south  of  the  Rappa- 
hannock through  the  bad  conduct  of  one  of  his  corps  and  crossed  to 
rhe  north  side  without  any  disaster.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  was  very 
much  greater  than  ours. 


726  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  X"SYn. 

In  regard  to  your  frequent  demands  for  re -enforcements  I can  only 
answer  that  it  is  utterly  impossible  at  present  to  give  you  any.  The 
Charleston  operation  was  not  by  my  advice.  It  was  entirely  a Navy 
plan.  The  troops  sent  there  were  mere  auxiliaries,  to  assist  in  car- 
rying out  the  plans  of  the  Navy.  They  were  virtually  under  Ad- 
miral DuPont’s  direction,  that  is,  they  were  merely  to  assist  in  carry- 
ing out  his  plans.  As  the  Navy  was  expected  to  renew  the  attack,  the 
President  directed  that  none  of  the  troops  be  withdrawn.  When  any 
portion  of  these  troops  will  be  available  I am  unable  to  say.  I agree 
with  you,  however,  that  the  Mississippi  River  is  the  all-important  ob-  j. 
ject  of  the  present  campaign.  It  is  worth  to  us  forty  Richmonds. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


i 

Washington,  D.  C.,  May  11,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : j1 

General:  Just  after  I had  written  my  letter  of  this  morning  in  : 
reply  to  yours  of  the  23d  ultimo  I received  your  dispatches  of  the  29th.  I 
They  were  immediately  sent  to  the  Secretary  of  War  and  the  President  ‘ 
for  their  perusal. 

If  your  requisitions  on  the  different  Departments  have  not  already 
been  filled  they  will  be  without  delay.  In  regard  to  light- draught 
steamers,  it  is  very  difficult,  as  you  are  aware,  to  send  them  to  New 
Orleans  from  the  North  by  sea.  The  risk  is  very  great.  It  is  hoped 
therefore  that  you  will  immediately  carry  out  your  plan  of  building 
them  there.  £ou  have  full  authority  to  purchase,  seize,  build,  or  re- 
pair any  vessels  you  may  want.  You  have  the  full  confidence  of  the 
Government  and  all  the  authority  it  can  give  you. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General- in-  Chief. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Alexandria , May  11,  1863. 

Maj.  D.  C.  Houston,  Chief  Engineer  : 

Sir  : By  direction  of  the  commanding  general  I have  to  inform  you 
that  a dispatch  was  received  from  Admiral  Farragut  last  evening,  from  1 
which  it  appears  that  he  is  informed  that  there  are  only  9,000  men  at  Port 
Hudson.  Also  a statement  was  made  on  board  the  Sykes  by  an  officer 
that  four  transports  filled  with  troops  from  Charleston  and  with  some  j 
iron  clads  were  on  the  way  to  Baton  Rouge  from  New  Orleans.  The  i 
commanding  general  contemplates  moving  as  soon  as  practicable  to  , 
Simmesport,  thence  to  Bayou  Sara,  should  Grant  send  a force  to  co- 
operate, which  he  has  promised  to  do,  on  moving  down  the  Atchaf'a- 
laya,  &c.,  to  Baton  Rouge.  If  he  cannot  be  assisted  by  Grant’s  force 
and  can  be  by  troops  from  Charleston  you  will  see  the  importance  of  a 
speedy  report  from  yourself,  as  well  as  that  of  a speedy  reply  from 
General  Grant. 

You  are  authorized  to  use  the  Sykes  if  necessary  for  the  purpose  of 
hastening  the  accomplishment  of  the  two  objects  just  mentioned.  It  is,, 


727 


hap.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

iowever,  desirable  to  have  the  Sykes  return  here  as  speedily  as  pos- 
ible. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

RICH’D  R.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 
Alexandria,  May  11,  1863 — 10.30  a.  m. 

5rig.  Gen.  G.  Weitzel,  Commanding , &c. : 

General:  By  direction  of  the  commanding  general  I have  the  honor 
o inform  you  that  it  is  now  contemplated  to  move  as  soon  as  practica- 
ile  to  Simmesport  with  the  whole  of  the  command.  It  is  expected  that 
General  Grant  will  send  a force  to  Bayou  Sara  to  co-operate  with  us, 
,nd  we  have  a report  that  four  transports  loaded  with  troops  from 
Charleston,  with  a number  of  iron-clads,  have  arrived,  and  are  on  the 
ray  from  New  Orleans  to  Baton  Rouge.  It  is  expected  that  your  com- 
land  will  act  as  rear  guard  in  our  movement. 

In  regard  to  the  orders  sent  you  this  morning,  the  commanding-gen- 
ral  desires  that  you  will,  before  returning,  disperse  any  force  the  enemy 
lay  have  at  or  near  Ootile,  and  to  get  all  the  information  obtainable 
especting  the  position  of  the  enemy  at  Grand  Ecore,  about  4 miles 
rom  Natchitoches,  or  elsewhere  in  that  direction. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

Duplicate  sent  3 p.  m.  with  the  following  postscript: 

P.  s. — Your  dispatch  of  12  m.  to-day  has  been  received  and  highly 
pproved  by  the  commanding-general,  who  desires  you  to  continue  your 
lovement  as  far  as  you  deem  it  prudent  to  do  so.  We  have  no  gun- 
•oat  here  that  could  go  up  the  river. 

RICUD  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Alexandria , May  12,  1863 — 8 a.  m. 

lol.  S.  B.  Holabird, 

Chief  Quartermaster , New  Orleans : 

Colonel:.  Dispatches  received  at  7 this  morning  inform  me  that  he- 
jGjeneral  Grant]  is  moving  against  Vicksburg  and  requires  me  to  join. 

! dm.  It  is  out  of  human  power  to  do  this,  and  I am  left  to  move  against; 
>ort  Hudson  alone. 

The  stores  at  Barre’s  Landing  and  the  animals  and  negroes  at  Berwick. 
Jay  should  be  crossed  at  once  and  the  transportation  collected  to  cross 
ay  copamand.  The  disabled  men  must  be  put  on  transports  at  Barre’s 
sanding  and  at  New  Iberia,  on  the  Teche,  on  our  march.  Bring  every - 
hing  from  New  Orleans  that  can  float  on  these  waters.  There  has  been 
-riminal  delay  in  doing  this,  which  I have  repeatedly  ordered  in  the  last 
pur  weeks,  even  since  our  advance  from  Franklin.  Let  it  be  done  now. 
£it  has  not  been  done,  schooners,  flats,  and  steamers  will  serve  us.  My 


728 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIX 


surplus  train  will  move  back  to-day.  My  advance  is  60  miles  above 
Alexandria.  We  shall  fight  the  enemy  if  we  can  find  him,  but  can- 
not pursue  him  farther  unless  we  have  a chance  to  overtake  or 
meet  him.  I want  the  fruits  of  this  campaign — wagons,  mules,  cattle, 
horses,  and  negroes — saved.  Let  them  all  be  crossed  to  Brashear  and 
kept  there  as  well  as  possible.  The  army  will  cover  everything.  It 
will  move  in  two  or  three  days  slowly,  giving  you  time. 

For  your  convenience  I subjoin  the  directions  given  above : 

1st.  Bemove  the  sick,  the  negroes,  and  cotton  from  Barre’s  Landing. 
The  troops  will  join  us  on  the  march.  Place  at  hand  one  transport 
there  for  disabled  men. 

2d.  Bring  up  flat-boats  and  transports  to  New  Iberia  for  disabled 
men,  who  will  leave  our  column  at  that  point.  Bemove  all  stores,  &c. 

3d.  Cross  cattle,  mules,  horses,  and  negroes  to  Brashear  City,  to  be 
kept  there. 

4th.  Have  transports  there  sufficient  to  cross  our  troops  and  trans- 
portation. 

5th.  Expedite  as  much  as  possible  the  opening  of  Bayou  Plaque- 
mine  or  Bayou  Sorrel.  The  work  should  be  pressed  night  and  day. 

6th.  Save  the  guns  on  board  the  Diana  at  Franklin. 

The  admiral,  after  having  periled  his  fleet  and  the  army  to  get  above 
Port  Hudson,  now  has  ordered  Captain  Palmer  to  run  the  batteries  back 
again.  I shall  protest  against  it  and  hope  it  will  not  be  done  at  present. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Camp  on  Merritt’s  Plantation , May  12,  1863 — 5 p.  m. 

Captain  Halsted, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  major-general 
commanding,  that  I left  camp  at  Baton  Bouge  with  the  forces  assigned 
me,  in  orders  of  yesterday’s  date,  twenty  minutes  before  5 o’clock  a.  m. 
this  morning,  and  proceeded  along  the  Clinton  road  unmolested  until  my 
advance  cavalry  picket,  under  command  of  Captain  Godfrey,  reached  a 
point  near  Cypress  Bayou,  near  the  saw-mill,  when  an  advance  mounted 
picket  of  the  enemy,  some  30  strong,  developed  themselves  in  front  by 
a volley,  discharged  at  a distance  of  some  400  yards  at  Captain  Godfrey’s 
cavalry,  which  was  returned  and  kept  up  at  distances  varying  from  300 
to  500  yards  for  nearly  4 miles.  From  information  gained  from  residents 
on  the  road  and  comparatively  intelligent  blacks,  together  by  the  in- 
dications of  horses  having  been  picketed  during  the  night,  I think  the 
cavalry  force  west  of  White’s  Bayou  could  not  have  been  less  than 
about  200.  I pursued  them  some  distance  beyond  the  bridge  which 
crosses  White’s  Bayou  with  the  small  cavalry  force  at  my  disposal 
and  one  piece  of  Arnold’s  battery.  Not  wishing  to  develop  my  strength 
to  the  enemy  until  Colonel  Grierson  had  passed,  I deemed  it  prudent 
to  return  and  proceed  to  the  point  I originally  intended  to  occupy  to- 
night. On  recrossing  White’s  Bayou  Bridge  I left  Colonel  Messer,  with 
the  whole  of  the  Fiftieth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  one  section  of 
Arnold’s  battery,  and  20  cavalry,  strongly  posted,  with  instructions  to 
hold  the  same ; if  assailed  by  too  strong  a party  to  destroy  the  bridge, 
which  would  only  inconvenience  cavalry  and  retard  artillery  for  a short 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


729 


time.  I find  my  maps  very  incorrect.  There  is  no  road  crossing  the 
one  running  from  near  White’s  (Black’s  Creek,  called  by  some)  Bayou 
to  Bayou  Sara.  With  the  exception  of  a small  quantity  of  water  in  this 
latter  bayou,  there  is  no  water  on  the  route  up  to  this  point  for  a com- 
mand one-eighth  the  size  of  this.  I expected  to  find  abundance  of 
water  in  the  bayou  crossing  the  road  between  this  point  and  the  Clinton 
road,  but  it  was  entirely  dry.  This  necessity  compelled  me  to  come  to 
this  place,  which  made  my  march  to-day  17  miles.  My  advance  regi- 
ment, notwithstanding  the  delay  caused  by  a cautious  march  in  the 
forenoon,  got  into  camp  at  1 o’clock. 

Mr.  Merritt,  a party  who  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  a few  days  since 
at  Baton  Rouge,  informs  me  that  the  enemy  has  a brigade  on  this  road 
beyond  the  Port  Hudson  road.  He  got  his  information  from  the  en- 
emy’s pickets  that  came  out  this  morning. 

I am  bivouacked  in  a belt  of  timber  with  an  open  area  on  all  sides  of 
my  forces,  a deep  gully  running  through  the  center,  which  can  be  used 
as"  a cover  for  my  infantry  if  pushed.  I feel  confident  I can  hold  my 
position  against  twice  my  own  force  if  attacked. 

Since  crossing  Cypress  Bayou  our  advance  guard  has  hardly  been 
out  of  sight  of  the  enemy’s  scouts.  They  are  evidently  on  the  wide- 
awake lookout  for  the  Illinois  cavalry. 

The  only  casualty  during  the  day  has  been  the  wounding  of  one  horse 
of  Godfrey’s  cavalry.  One  prisoner,  belonging  to  the  Tennessee  cav- 
alry, was  captured  by  Lieutenant  Carlton  in  a hand -to  hand  conflict. 

The  men  of  the  several  corps  have  nobly  stood  the  day’s  march, 
especially  the  last  two  hours,  with  the  hot  sun  on  their  backs,  no  shade 
for  some  5 miles  and  the  dust  almost  intolerable.  Not  over  10  men 
fell  to  the  rear  during  the  march.  No  information  of  Colonel  Grierson’s 
command  up  to  this  hour. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

[N.  A.  M.  DUDLEY,  I] 

Colonel  and  Acting  Brigadier -General,  Commanding, 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Alexandria , May  12,  1863. 

Col.  S.  B.  Holabird, 

Chief  Quartermaster , Brashear  or  New  Orleans  : 

Colonel  : The  commanding  general  directs  me  to  inclose  to  you  a 
copy  of  his  order  of  this  morning  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Chandler. 

General  Grant  having  decided  to  move  alone  against  Vicksburg,  the 
commanding  general  decides  to  return,  via  Opelousas,  New  Iberia,  and 
Brashear,  to  Baton  Rouge,  and  thence  operate  alone  upon  Port  Hudson. 
You  will  regard  this  as  strictly  confidential. 

The  general  desires  you  to  come  down  to  Brashear  immediately  and 
see  that  everything  is  pushed  to  secure  the  accomplishment  of  his  ob- 
jects as  speedily  as  possible. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

[Inclosnre.] 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Alexandria , May  12,  1863 — 8 a.  m. 

Col.  J.  G.  Chandler,  Assistant  Quartermaster  : 

There  must  be  preparations  for  the  immediate  removal  of  the  sick, 


730 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


the  cotton,  and  negroes  at  Barrels  Landing  and  at  New  Iberia,  and 
transports,  flats,  steamers,  &c.,  to  take  disabled  men  from  these  points 
on  our  march.  Everything  should  be  accumulated  at  Brashear  to  cross 
our  transportation  and  troops  across  the  bay.  The  cattle,  mules,  horses, 
and  negroes  should  be  crossed  at  once. 

Let  every  possible  exertion  be  made  to  open  Bayous  Plaquemine  and 
Sorrel.  We  want  to  reach  Port  Hudson  early  and  cover  everything. 
The  army  will  march  in  a day  or  two. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Alexandria , May  12,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  G.  Chandler, 

Assistant  Quartermaster , Brasliear : 

Sir  : The  commanding  general  directs  me  to  inform  you  that  in  con- 
sequence of  information  received  from  General  Grant  of  his  movements 
he  has  decided  to  march  viar  Opelousas  and  New  Iberia  to  Brashear 
City.  The  command  will  probably  take  up  the  line  of  march  in  two 
days. 

By  the  Union,  which  is  to  take  this,  will  be  sent  an  order  to  turn  back 
to  Barrels  Landing  all  boats  which  she  may  meet  above  the  Gourtableau, 
and  to  order  all  boats  that  she  may  meet  below  the  Gourtableau  to  go 
also  to  Barre’s  Landing.  There  they  are  to  take  on  board  the  sick  and 
disabled,  the  negroes,  cotton,  and  other  supplies,  and  take  them  to 
Brashear  City.  You  will  send  all  your  disposable  boats  to  Barre’s 
Landing  for  the  same  purpose  except  those  hereinafter  directed  to  be 
sent  to  New  Iberia. 

We  shall  expect  to  find  150,000  partial  rations  at  Barre’s  Landing. 
If  the  orders  which  have  been  given  have  been  executed  100,000  of 
these  rations  will  be  on  the  boats  which  the  Union  meets,  and  you  will 
in  that  case  only  have  to  send  up  the  remaining  50,000  $ but  you  will 
please  be  sure  that  the  whole  supply  reaches  Barre’s  Landing  in  time. 
We  shall  expect  to  find  75,000  partial  rations  at  New  Iberia. 

You  will  seud  one  or  two  boats  to  New  Iberia  to  take  the  sick  and 
the  negroes,  cotton,  and  other  supplies,  and  the  Diana’s  guns  to  Bra- 
shear. 

You  will  use  every  possible  exertion  to  get  all  the  property  collected 
on  the  Berwick  City  side  across  Berwick  Bay. 

You  will  retain  all  negroes,  horses,  mules,  and  cattle  at  Brashear 
City  for  the  present.  All  other  property,  guns,  lumber,  cotton,  sugar, 
you  will  send  at  once  to  Algiers.  You  will  push  forward  the  work 
of  clearing  out  Bayou  Sorrel. 

The  foregoing  is  communicated  by  direction  of  the  general  command- 
ing. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

BIOH’D  B.  IRWIN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General., 


Chap.  XXV33.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


731 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Alexandria , May  13,  1863. 

Admiral  D.  G.  Farragut: 

In  my  note  of  yesterday  the  word  “insanity”  was  written.  It  should 
have  been  “unwise.”  Nevertheless,  do  not  withdraw  the  fleet  from 
above  Port  Hudson $ it  is  of  vital  consequence  to  us  for  the  present. 
Its  withdrawal  would  lose  to  us  all  that  has  been  gained  in  this  cam- 
paign from  the  passage  of  the  fleet  to  this  day,  as  it  would  reopen  to 
Port  Hudson  the  now  closed  avenue  of  supplies. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Alexandria , May  13, 1863. 

Admiral  D.  G.  Farragut, 

Commanding  Fleet  at  New  Orleans  : 

Our  reconnaissances  since  my  dispatch  of  yesterday  show  that  it  is 
practicable  for  us  to  join  General  Grant  at  Vicksburg.  I shall  make 
every  sacrifice  and  hazard  everything  to  eflect  this  junction.  My  com- 
mand will  move  to  Simraesport  to-day,  making  that  the  base  of  our 
operations,  and  transport  the  army  to  Grand  Gulf  by  transports  and  by 
such  naval  vessels  as  can  assist  us.  Unless  its  place  can  be  supplied 
by  an  equally  efficient  force  it  will  be  impossible  to  withdraw  the  Hart- 
ford and  the1  other  vessels  from  above  Port  Hudson. 

If  there  is  any  disposition  to  evacuate  Port  Hudson  our  movement 
will  compel  it,  until  which  it  is  indispensable  that  the  supplies  from  this 
side  of  Eed  River  should  be  cut  off  and  that  their  communication  with 
the  country  in  the  rear  of  their  fortifications  should  also  be  restricted. 
General  Augur  will  receive  instructions  to  this  end,  and  I most  earnestly 
protest  against  the  withdrawal  of  the  Hartford  until  this  is  accom- 
plished. I will  keep  you  informed  of  our  movements  daily. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major - General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Alexandria , La .,  May  13,  1863. 

General  Grant: 

More  complete  investigation  of  the  country  on  the  Red  and  Missis- 
sippi Rivers  leads  me  to  believe  that  it  is  possible  for  me  to  join  you.. 
I shall  make  every  sacrifice  and  hazard  everything  to  accomplish  this 
object.  My  advance  will  move  to  Simmesport,  Red  River,  to-day.  I 
hope  to  move  my  command  from  Simmesport  by  the  aid  of  transports 
and  naval  vessels  to  Grand  Gulf,  in  which  event  ten  or  twelve  days 
will  accomplish  the  movement. 

I am  now  350  miles  distant  from  you.  Nothing  will  be  allowed  to 
delay  our  movements.  I will  keep  you  advised  of  our  progress  from 
day  to  day.  I can  add  about  12,000  to  your  column. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


732 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Alexandria , La .,  May  13,  1863. 


Major-General  Grant, 

Commanding  Forces  at  Vicksburg : 

I have  sent,  subsequent  to  the  dispatch  of  yesterday,  transmitted  by 
Captain  Gibbs,  a note  of  this  date,  informing  you  of  my  determination 
to  join  you  at  all  hazards  with  as  little  delay  as  possible.  There  are 
great  difficulties  in  the  way  of  our  movement,  but  we  shall  overcome 
them  all.  My  belief  is  that  your  first  suggestion  of  sending  a force  to 
co-operate  with  us  against  Port  Hudson  is  best. 

Port  Hudson  can  be  reduced  without  delay  and  with  perfect  certainty 
if  you  can  assist  us  with  from  10,000  to  20,000  men.  We  can  then  aid 
you  by  a force  of  25,000,  and,  if  Hunter  joins  us,  with  still  stronger 
numbers,  and  furnish  supplies,  ammunition,  and  everything  necessary 
for  the  support  of  your  army  and  our  own  from  New  Orleans  without 
trouble  or  delay.  I earnestly  urge  upon  you  the  consideration  of  this 
subject  in  this  light,  but  should  it  be  impossible  for  you  to  conform  with 
it,  I shall  move  to  you  as  soon  as  possible  with  the  force  that  I have 
stated.  At  best  the  movement  against  Port  Hudson  can  delay  us  but 
a few  days,  and  will  not  only  give  you  our  co-operation,  but  will  free 
your  cavalry  from  the  difficulties  which  now  prevent  its  return. 

My  headquarters  will  be  at  Simmesport  to-morrow. 

The  moral  effect  of  the  reduction  of  Port  Hudson  upon  Vicksburg  and 
the  junction  of  our  forces  after  that  will  be  inappreciably  great. 


N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


[May  20,  1863.— For  Banks  to  Pemberton,  see  p.  740.  Misplaced.] 


Memoranda  upon  the  military  movements  of  May , 1863. 

Major-General  Grant, 

Commanding  Forces  at  Vicksburg : 

Let  me  again  earnestly  press  upon  your  consideration  these  advan- 
tages in  reducing  Port  Hudson : 

1st.  Enabling  me  to  aid  you  at  Vicksburg  with  25,000  men  at  least, 
instead  of  12,000. 

2d.  The  certain  and  immediate  reduction  of  Port  Hudson,  and  the 
immense  moral  effect  produced  thereby  both  on  our  troops  and  on  those 
of  the  enemy  at  Vicksburg. 

3d.  Perfect  security  for  my  communications  with  New  Orleans,  and 
for  procuring  ample  supplies  of  provisions  and  ammunition  for  both 
armies  from  New  Orleans  $ also  coal  for  both  fleets  and  transports. 

4th.  Should  Hunter’s  troops  join  me,  as  promised  and  expected,  the 
additional  aid  of  those  troops. 

5th.  A secure  line  of  retreat  for  all  these  forces  in  case  of  disaster. 

6th.  Facilitating  the  rejoining  your  command  — 1 


cavalry. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


733 


CONFEDERATE  CORRESPONDENCB,  ETC. 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1,  0.  S.  A., 

Camp  Moore , La.,  May  12,  1862. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore: 

Sir:  I have  received  your  note*  in  relation  to  the  protest  made  by 
me  relative  to  the  sending  the  arms  to  Corinth.  1 will  explain  more 
fully  my  expression  as  to  abandoning  the  State.  It  was  intended  to 
convey  my  idea  that  without  more  guns  I should  be  unable  to  hold  my 
present  position.  I have  here  but  2,000  guns  and  about  600  at  Jack- 
son.  In  lieu  of  the  regiment  from  this  State  sent  to  Vicksburg  I have 
retained  here  a Mississippi  regiment.  The  regiment  at  Jackson  with 
the  armed  troops  here  will  only  give  3,200  available  troops,  nearly  all 
of  which  are  new  levies,  and  I fear  that  with  this  number,  scarcely 
organized,  I shall  have  some  difficulty  in  holding  my  own. 

I am  well  aware  that  it  has  been  mainly  through  your  assistance  that 
the  troops  I have  are  armed,  but  I have  telegraphed  to  Richmond  for 
guns  and  they  inform  me  they  have  none. 

Under  these  circumstances  if  we  fail  to  get  those  sent  to  Corinth  it 
leaves  me  in  the  predicament  explained  above.  You  will  see  yourself 
that  if  the  enemy  acts  in  force  it  will  be  next  to  impossible  to  keep  him 
back  with  3,200  men. 

It  will  likewise  occur  to  you  that  the  remarks  as  to  arming  the  troops 
of  the  Confederacy  with  these  guns  are  equally  applicable  to  their  pres- 
ent destination.  They  are  in  the  hands  of  Confederate  troops  at  Cor- 
inth, the  same  as  they  would  have  been  here.  In  the  latter  case,  how- 
ever, they  would  have  been  retained  within  the  limits  of  the  State  for  a 
time  at  all  events. 

With  reference  to  your  want  of  knowledge  of  my  plans,  it  has  probably 
escaped  your  mind  that  I read  to  you  yesterday  that  part  of  my  letter  to 
General  Lee  which  related  to  my  future  course  of  action,  and  it  seemed 
to  meet  the  approval  of  Judge  Moise  and  yourself.  It  was  simply  to 
organize  a central  force  of  5,000  men,  which,  in  connection  with  corps 
of  Partisan  Rangers,  might  succeed  in  confining  the  enemy  to  New  Or- 
leans, and  thus  subject  him  to  the  diseases  incident  to  that  city  in  sum- 
mer. If  I cannot  organize  that  central  force  I fear  that  I shall  be  com- 
pelled to  abandon  that  plan  and  be  driven  from  the  State,  and  it  was 
the  possibility  of  this  result  which  induced  my  note  of  this  morning. 

Moreover,  you  had  already  given  me  an  order  for  the  820  guns,  and 
I had  sent  an  officer  for  them.  Expecting  to  get  them,  I withdrew  one 
regiment  to  Jackson  for  purposes  of  a better  encampment,  having  here 
about  800  unarmed  men,  which  will  be  of  no  assistance  to  me  in  holding 
this  position.  The  only  right  that  I had  to  expect  the  guns  from  you 
was  derived  from  your  own  written  order  to  that  effect. 

With  regard  to  the  arms  in  the  hands  of  the  troops  in  New  Orleans, 
they  were  State  property,  in  the  hands  of  State  troops,  where  they  still 
remain.  They  disbanded  contrary  to  my  orders,  which  were  expressly 
that  all  armed  men  should  rendezvous  at  this  point,  but  I learn  that  the 
order  was  given  by  Generals  [E.  L.]  Tracy  and  [B.]  Buisson  for  them  to 
disband. 

In  conclusion  I beg  to  say  that  my  note  was  not  intended  to  convey 
any  idea  that  you  were  not  doing  everything  in  your  power  for  the 
cause  but  to  object  to  the  sending  of  the  guns  to  Corinth,  thus  render- 


Not  found. 


734 


W.  ELA.,  S.  ALA.,  S MISS.,  LA.,  fEX.,  ft.  MEX.  [Chap.  xXVli. 


ing  it  more  than  probable  that  I should  not  be  able  long  to  hold  my 
position  within  the  limits  of  the  State. 

General  Beauregard  telegraphed  for  De  Clouet’s  regiment,  which  1 
declined  to  send  on  the  ground  that  I did  not  wish  it  to  quit  the  soil 
of  Louisiana. 

Respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  582.  f Tangipahoa , May  12,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  L.  Lewis,  commanding  State  Militia,  will  report  him- 
self at  Opelousas,  La.,  for  duty  as  soon  as  his  health  will  permit. 

By  order  of  Thos.  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

M.  GRIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Corinth, 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 


Miss.,  May  13,  1862. 


I send  following  dispatch,  received  from  Hon.  P.  Soule,  for  informa- 
tion and  consideration  of  War  Department: 


We  are  without  a word  of  intelligence  from  either  State  or  Confederate  States  Gov- 
ernment. Our  public  men,  our  officials,  have  all  left  in  shameful  haste  when  they 
heard  the  enemy  were  approaching.  They  took  away  with  them  such  remnants  of 
treasure  as  still  remained  in  their  possession  or  under  their  control,  and  left  us  noth- 
ing wherewith  to  give  bread  to  famished  soldiers  or  to  the  crews  of  the  boats  that 
had  shown  any  resistance  to  the  enemy.  Large  amounts  of  property  abandoned  by 
them  without  a word  of  instruction  to  anybody  might  have  been  saved,  had  some  of 
the  revenues  they  carried  out  been  left  in  the  hands  of  some  foreign  merchant  to  be 
disposed  as  the  necessities  which  were  so  likely  to  arise  might  demand.  Are  we  to 
be  left  thus  unattended  to,  even  thought  of,  with  an  increasing  crowd  of  supplicants 
asking  for  their  pay,  or  at  least  a portion  of  it,  and  actually  starving  with  their  fam- 
ilies ? The  crew  of  the  McRae  is  almost  entire 

We  cannot  hope  for  a change  in  our  deplorable  condition  unless  some  naval  scheme 
be  devised  to  rid  us  of  the  cannon  and  mortars  that  threaten  us  incessantly  from  the 
river;  and  if  any  such  scheme  is  to  be  attempted  the  necessity  of  retaining  such 
men  must  be  obvious.  Will  the  Government  at  Richmond  undertake  to  free  us  in 
the  river  ? That  is  all  we  ask  against  any  force.  On  land  we  would  ask  no  as- 
sistance from  without.  But  let  us  have  some  token  of  recognition  from  our  rulers,  for 
otherwise  we  are  left  adrift,  and  we  will  now  look  to  what  energy  and  devotion  is 
being  fostered  up  in  every  true  breast.  Let  us  have  some  means  to  turn  chances,  pos- 
sible chances,  to  advantage,  and  at  the  same  time  the  wherewith  to  alford  assistance 
to  our  soldiers  and  crews,  otherwise  we  are  exposed  to  see  them  enlist  under  the  ex- 
actions of  starvation  in  the  ranks  of  the  enemy,  who  olfer  for  volunteers  a bounty  of 
$100,  besides  a liberal  pay.  In  God’s  name,  general,  let  this  go  to  Richmond,  and  at 
least  give  us  yourself,  if  you  cannot  obtain  from  the  Government,  a word  of  encour- 


agement. 


PIERRE  SOULE. 


G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


735 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

Camp  Moore , La .,  May  14,  1862. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Corinth , Mtss.  : 

Dear  General  : I received  your  dispatch  this  afternoon.*  As  you 
are  aware,  I have  sent  two  regiments  and  some  artillerists  to  Vicksburg, 
which  leaves  me  here  only  2,600  armed  men,  of  which  more  than  half 
are  new  levies.  This  body  of  men  which  you  dignify  with  the  title  of 
“my  army,”  would  add  little  or  nothing  to  the  efficient  force  of  your 
army,  but  if  withdrawn  from  here  would  necessarily  leave  the  railroad 
open  from  New  Orleans  to  Jackson  and  let  the  enemy  in  upon  you  from 
behind.  Besides  having  been  placed  in  command  in  this  department, 
I do  not  feel  authorized  in  abandoning  it  without  orders  from  Richmond, 
and  the  Governor  of  Louisiana  objects  strongly  to  my  leaving  the  State 
with  all  the  troops. 

You  ask  me  why  the  Mississippi  was  burned.  I should  like  to  know 
myself.  I rather  think  it  was  due  to  want  of  a little  foresight  and  pres- 
ence of  mind  on  the  part  of  those  whose  business  it  was  to  take  care 
of  her.  I had  no  control  over  anything  belonging  to  the  Navy,  as  they 
had  their  own  officers  and  agents  in  New  Orleans,  who  were  entirely  in- 
dependent of  me. 

I did  not  mean  to  say  in  my  last  letter  that  you  had  diverted  any- 
thing from  me  except  the  800  guns,  but  nearly  everybody  else  did. 
Scarcely  anything  that  started  for  New  Orleans  ever  got  there,  except 
by  means  of  special  agents,  who  would  not  give  up  what  they  had  in 
charge. 

I am  getting  my  recruits  into  some  sort  of  shape,  but  it  is  uphill  work. 
General  Smith  was  sent  to  Vicksburg  to  take  command,  but  finds  some 
one  there  who  claims  to  be  in  command  by  your  orders  or  Bragg’s.  If 
that  is  so  I had  better  recall  Smith,  as  I am  doing  his  work  in  his  ab- 
sence. 

Governor  Moore  left  to-day  for  Opelousas.  I am  trying  to  organize 
some  Partisan  Rangers  in  the  State  to  prevent  marauding  excursions 
of  small  parties  of  the  enemy. 

Yours,  truly, 

M.  LOVELL. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1, 

Camp  Moore,  La .,  May  14,  1862. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore  : 

Sir  : I have  just  received  with  great  surprise  your  note  of  this  date,* 
declaring  that  “if  this  camp  is  attacked  it  will  be  captured  or  routed 
in  confusion.”  I beg  leave  to  differ  with  you  entirely  on  that  point. 

This  camp  cannot  be  attacked  by  the  enemy  in  any  force  without  at 
least  twenty-four  hours’  notice.  The  men  are  in  large  part  armed  ; have 
plenty  of  ammunition,  and  are  in  as  good  order  and  discipline  as  I have 
ever  known  raw  new  levies  to  be  with  uninstructed  officers.  As  to  their 
courage  I have  no  question.  If  routed  at  all,  it  will  be  by  superior  forces 
and  hard  fighting.  Neither  has  the  enemy  the  means  to  attack  it  by 
land  at  present. 

My  information  shows  me  that  there  is  no  body  of  the  enemy  over  200 
in  number  nearer  than  Baton  Rouge,  and  abundant  measures  have  been 


Not  found. 


736 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL  ’ 

taken  to  meet  them  in  every  direction.  If  you  have  any  information  to 
the  contrary  I beg  you  will  send  it,  for  with  lines  of  couriers  to  Baton 
Rouge,  Bayou  Sara,  Madison ville,  and  Covington,  I hear  nothing  of  ; 
the  kind  from  any  reliable  source. 

I am  compelled  to  add,  in  justice  to  myself,  that  your  opinion  as  to 
the  enemy’s  certainty  of  attack  and  the  result  of  that  attack  is,  I fear, 
made  without  proper  examination  into  the  facts  of  the  case,  and  is  rather 
based  upon  rumors  than  actual  information. 

My  arrangements  to  meet  an  enemy  have  been  made  as  far  as  the  i 
means  at  my  command  will  permit,  and  I feel  confident  that  if  he  makes 
any  attempt  to  attack  he  will  be  fought  with  coolness  and  courage. 

In  evidence  of  the  discipline  of  my  troops  I have  to  adduce  that  on 
last  night  at  a late  hour  the  long  roll  was  beat;  in  less  than  thirty  min- 
utes the  whole  encampment  was  under  arms  and  in  complete  readiness 
for  action.  If  they  were  all  armed  I should  have  no  fear  of  any  force 
he  can  send  at  present. 

With  regard  to  that  part  of  your  note  relating  to  the  defenses  of  the 
other  portion  of  the  State,  I can  only  arrange  for  corps  of  Partisan 
Rangers  until  the  result  of  the  telegraphic  correspondence  between  your- 
self and  the  President  is  known.  As  to  dividing  the  department  into 
two  parts,  separated  by  the  river — I will,  however,  consult  with  you  in 
person  on  that  point. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major -General,  Commanding. 


Commandant’s  Office, 

Confederate  Post , Washington , Miss.,  May  17,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Corinth  : 

Sir  : It  becomes  my  duty  to  inform  you  of  the  facts  connected  with  , 
the  occupation  by  the  enemy  of  the  city  of  Natchez,  located  within  my 
command.  Their  gunboats  had  been  reported  for  several  days  previous 
having  passed  Bayou  Sara  on  their  way  up,  that  being  the  first  point 
of  telegraphic  communication  below  the  city.  On  Tuesday  night  they 
were  6 miles  below  Ellis’  Cliffs  and  23  miles  below  Natchez.  The 
rockets  and  other  signals  from  the  cliffs  arrested  their  progress  and 
they  returned  down  the  river.  They  remained  between  there  aud  Bayou 
Sara  until  Saturday  night  at  7 o’clock,  when  my  scouts  informed  me  of 
their  passing  Walche’s  plantation,  35  miles  below  Natchez,  to  the  num- 
ber of  five  gunboats.  No  further  information  of  their  movements  was 
received  until  12  o’clock  on  Monday,  when  intelligence  from  the  post  at 
the  cliffs  and  the  scouts  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  was  received 
simultaneously  with  the  fact  of  the  leading  boat  coming  in  sight  from  the 
bluffs  at  Natchez. 

In  a few  hours  five  of  them  anchored  in  line  of  battle  opposite  the 
city,  and  soon  after  a cutter,  commanded  by  an  officer  and  12  men,  with 
the  Federal  flag  flying  in  the  stern  sheets,  left  the  leading  vessel,  the 
Iroquois,  steering  for  the  usual  landing  of  the  city.  Just  before  this 
nearly  100  unarmed  recruits  for  Virginia,  who  were  to  have  been  taken 
by  the  ferry-boat  to  the  Vicksburg,  at  her  location  5 or  6 miles  above 
the  city,  were  ordered  off  the  ferry-boat,  with  directions  to  march  by 
and  to  Brookhaven,  knowing  that  by  that  mode  they  would  arrive 
safely,  though  not  so  speedily. 


Chap.  XXVII.  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


737 


Soon  after  the  steamboat  Vicksburg  came  in  sight,  rounding  the  point, 
intending  to  land  at  Natchez,  but  on  discovering  her  danger,  of  which 
1 apprised  her  by  firing  a musket,  she  promptly  put  about  to  escape  cap- 
ture, which  she  succeeded  in  doing,  though  after  two  ineffectual  shots 
fired  at  her  from  the  foremost  gunboat,  the  balls  from  which  I saw  dis- 
tinctly strike  the  water,  notwithstanding  we  were  all  aware,  as  no  doubt 
the  enemy  was,  that  her  cabin  was  occupied  by  women  and  children. 

I had  stationed  Adjutant  Lyle  at  the  landing  with  9 armed  men,  all 
tha  t could  be  procured  or  raised  for  the  defense  of  the  city  of  Natchez, 
with  orders  to  receive  the  communication  from  the  enemy  if  it  came  in 
the  usual  form,  viz,  under  a flag  of  truce.  As  the  boat  of  the  enemy 
exhibited  no  such  flag,  a letter  which  the  officer  of  the  boat  had  and 
endeavored  to  send  to  the  authorities  was  decidedly  refused  by  Adju- 
tant Lyle.  The  officer  of  the  boat,  in  a very  unusual  manner,  hailed 
for  some  person  to  carry  his  letter.  A man  from  among  the  crowd  of 
our  people  rushed  forth  to  receive  the  letter,  when  he  was  promptly 
arrested  and  is  now  in  jail  at  Fayette  awaiting  his  trial.  The  officer 
then,  finding  his  inability  in  that  manner  to  communicate  with  any  of 
the  authorities,  after  venting  sundry  expressions,  returned  to  the  Iro- 
quois. Soon  after,  perceiving  that  the  enemy  had  seized  the  steam 
ferry-boat,  with  a view  of  landing  a body  of  men,  I ordered  Adjutant 
Lyle,  if  the  force  of  the  enemy  was  overpowering,  to  commence  his  re- 
treat by  the  time  they  had  partly  crossed  the  river,  so  as  to  make  his 
movement  leisurely,  quietly,  and  orderly,  which  order  he  executed  in  a 
commendable  manner.  The  force  of  the  enemy,  represented  as  130 
strong,  well  armed  and  with  artillery,  being  too  powerful  for  any  re- 
sistance I could  make — for  after  repeated  exertions  by  every  means  I 
ould  only  procure  5 others  who  were  willing  to  defend  the  city,  making 
4 in  all,  coupled  with  the  fact  of  the  conscripts  positively  refusing  to 
do  duty — I notified  the  city  authorities  of  my  inability,  and  turned  the 
control  of  the  city  over  to  them. 

Meanwhile  the  enemy  had  rapidly  approached  the  shore,  without 
any  flag  of  truce,  with  the  view,  I presume,  of  landing  and  taking  forcible 
possession  of  the  city,  which  I stood  carefully  watching  and  observing, 
when,  to  my  surprise,  after  a few  moments’  delay,  they  pushed  off  and 
rejoined  their  squadron  without  landing  any  force. 

Some  time  afterward,  in  calling  on  the  mayor,  I learned  that  they 
had  delivered  a letter— the  same  no  doubt  that  I had  refused  in  the 
morning — to  a person  who  claimed  to  act  under  the  civil  authority  in 
receiving  the  letter  in  that  manner.  Next  morning  at  8 o’clock,  before 
the  civil  authorities  had  replied  to  that  letter,  which  it  appears  was  a 
formal  demand  for  the  surrender  of  the  city,  I visited  in  person  the 
city  council,  and  in  writing  protested  against  the  reception  of  any  com- 
munication from  the  enemy,  except  in  accordance  with  the  customary 
rules  and  regulations  of  war,  a copy  of  which  I inclose.  This  was, 
however,  unheeded  and  communication  opened  with  the  enemy,  after 
the  unusual  and  degrading  insult  had  been  offered  to  them ; the  object 
of  the  enemy  being  to  ignore  any  right  on  our  part  to  be  considered 
belligerents,  but  only  illegal  and  unauthorized  combatants,  and  as  such 
not  entitled  to  the  usages  of  civilized  warfare. 

On  Tuesday  morning  I left  the  city,  after  it  had  been  surrendered  to 
the  enemy,  and  have  not  been  inside  of  it  since ; conceiving  it  undig- 
nified on  the  part  of  a Confederate  officer  to  visit  a place  in  the  posses- 
sion of  the  enemy  although  not  occupied  in  force.  I still  watch  their 
movements  very  assiduously  and  carefully,  and  after  they  had  been 
joined  by  several  transports  and  landed  a thousand  troops  on  the  Lou- 

47  r r — yol  xv 


738 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA  , TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap. XXVII. 

isiana  shore  I ordered  all  the  cotton  burned  within  the  distance  of  5 
miles  of  the  city  of  Natchez,  and  after  some  of  their  men  had  entered 
the  city  I ordered  all  cotton  within  10  miles  of  same  place  to  be  burned, 
modifying  the  order  so  far  as  to  authorize  the  removal  beyond  that 
limit  by  any  who  chose  to  do  so ; nor  would  I perhaps  have  burned  this 
had  I any  force  to  have  checked  them  with,  but  only  burned  as  I fell  . 
back,  if  compelled  to  do  so ; but  with  only  7 men  seizure  of  the  cotton  de- 
pended solely  upon  the  volition  of  the  enemy,  which  of  course  demanded 
reasonable  prudence  to  prevent  his  possessing.  I had  also  given  orders 
for  all  drays,  wagons,  horses,  mules,  and  means  of  transportation  to  be 
removed  beyond  the  city  and  its  environs,  as  the  large  number  there 
afforded  great  facilities  to  the  raids  of  the  enemy.  This  last  order  I 
have  waived  for  the  present,  as  upon  the  arrival  of  the  flag-ship  all  of 
the  squadron  except  three  gunboats  promptly  departed,  bound  upward. 

Our  condition  here  is  a matter  of  deep  regret  and  solicitude  to  me, 
and  I have  no  doubt  would  be  to  yourself,  were  you  as  informed  of  our 
situation  as  I am.  Without  any  organized  military  power,  with  con- 
scripts who  refuse  to  serve,  and  probably  will  not  unless  under  the  i 
visible  effect  of  a sufficient  military  force;  without  arms,  without  sup- 
plies, equipage,  munitions,  or  commissary  stores  of  any  description ; 
with  a population  the  strength  of  which  has  already  joined  the  army, 
aud  many  of  the  residue,  if  not  disaffected,  at  least  wavering  and  in 
trepidation  for  their  property  or  personal  security  from  the  appearance 
of  the  power  of  the  enemy,  as  evidence  of  which  it  is  stated  on  good 
authority  that  one  of  the  persons  who  had  been  authorized  to  receive 
the  letter  from  the  enemy  for  the  civil  authorities  in  their  second  visit 
apologized  to  the  Federal  officer  for  the  fancied  insult  given  him  by  Adju- 
tant Lyle  iu  refusing  the  first  proffered  communication,  which  he  had 
done  by  my  positive  orders,  and  still  further  open  manifestations  of 
treason  have  shown  themselves,  three  of  which  cases  are  nowin  the  Fay- 
ette County  jail  awaiting  trial,  and  many  others  no  doubt  that  are 
liable,  amongst  which  is  the  telegraph  operator  before  reported  to  you 
by  telegraph,  as  well  as  a minister  of  the  Gospel,  who,  on  the  fast  day 
on  Friday,  as  ordered  by  President  Davis,  refused  or  omitted  to  pray 
for  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States.  Added  to  which  the  dan- 
gers from  our  discontented  servile  population,  arising  partly  from  nat- 
ural insubordination,  partly  from  the  presence  of  the  enemy,  partly  from  i 
difficulty  of  obtaining  their  usual  supplies  of  food  and  clothing,  partly 
from  the  instigations  of  evil-minded  men,  but  more  than  all  from  the 
absence  of  a decided  military  strength  to  warn  them  of  the  futility  of 
any  hostile  attempts  ; all  these  are  matters  that  I desire  to  lay  before 
you  for  your  decision  and  direction,  believing  as  I do  that  they  call  for 
prompt  and  decided  action. 

Please  therefore  to  give  me  orders  in  relation  to  the  aforementioned 
-cases  of  treason,  and  if  possible  send  an  officer  for  the  purpose  of  con- 
ducting such  trial.  I desire  also  your  opinion  in  relation  to  the  correct- 
ness of  my  position  in  refusing  any  communication  with  the  enemy 
except  by  a flag  of  truce,  as  before  stated. 

I desire  to  commend  to  your  consideration  Adjt.  William  J.  Lyle, 
whose  conduct  on  the  occasion  referred  to  was  cool,  judicious,  and 
praiseworthy  in  every  respect,  and  I make  no  question  but  that  in  a 
more  elevated  and  responsible  position  the  same  result  would  attend 
his  efforts. 

Respectfully,  your  servant, 

C.  G.  DAHLGREN, 

Commandant 


Chap.  XXVH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  739 

Headquarters  Department  No.  1,  0.  S.  A., 

Gamp  Moore , La .,  May  17,  1862. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Opelousas : 

Sir  : From  what  I can  learn  of  the  state  of  things  over  on  the  line 
of  the  Opelousas  Railroad  I think  it  would  be  advisable  to  call  out  all 
the  militia  in  that  section  of  the  country,  destroy  that  railroad,  and 
clear  out  the  small  parties  of  the  enemy  who  are  roving  through  that 
portion  of  the  State  with  a careless  impudence  that  is  astonishing. 

In  order  to  create  something  of  a nucleus  to  rally  upon  I have  or- 
dered Lieutenant-Colonel  Shields,  with  one  good  company,  to  proceed  to 
Thibodeaux,  if  they  can  get  across  the  river,  and  thence  communicate 
with  Mr.  Goode,  Major  Fournet,  and  Captain  Ker,  the  two  last  of  whom 
should  have  400  or  500  armed  men  west  of  Berwick  Bay.  Mr.  Goode 
left  here  to  raise  a company  of  rangers.  I have  telegraphed  to  Rich- 
mond for  authority  to  raise  these  guerrilla  companies  at  once,  as  every 
day’s  delay  gives  the  enemy  a stronger  foothold  in  the  country.  No 
answer  has  been  received  as  yet. 

If  any  plan  can  be  devised  by  which  it  can  be  safely  sent  I will  order 
to  the  west  side  of  the  river  100,000  rounds  of  shot-gun  cartridges  for 
service  of  rangers  and  militia,  but  until  the  river  falls  so  as  to  leave  the 
railroad  free  opposite  Vicksburg  I do  not  well  see  how  it  can  be  got 
across.  The  enemy  holds  most  of  the  ferries.  I hope  to  hear  from  you 
when  you  reach  your  destination. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-General , Commanding. 

There  are  several  experienced  officers  here  who  were  in  Louisiana 
regiments  in  Virginia  and  were  not  re-elected.  If  commissioned  in  the 
State  service  they  would  prove  of  valuable  assistance  to  you  in  this 
juncture. 

M.  L. 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  589.  f Opelousas , May  19,  1862. 

I.  In  view  of  the  troubles  now  existing  in  the  parish  of  Avoyelles 
3ol.  W.  W.  Johnson  will  remain  with  his  command,  Johnson’s  Special 
lattalion,  in  the  parish  until  further  orders. 

******* 

By  order  of  Thos.  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief : 

M.  GRIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Headquarters  Department  No.  1,  O.  S.  A., 

Gamp  Moore , La .,  May  20,  1862. 

lov.  Thomas  O.  Moore: 

Dear  Sir  : At  the  urgent  request  of  Beauregard,  backed  by  Gov- 
rnor  Pettus,  I send  two  regiments  (the  Third  Mississippi  and  Twenty  - 
ighlh  Louisiana)  to  Vicksburg  to-day,  and  shall  run  up  myself  for  a 
ay  or  two  to  help  push  matters  along.  I leave  in  an  hour. 


740 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTt. 

My  headquarters  remain  here,  and  Colonel  Fuller  is  in  command. 
The  main  force  of  the  enemy  has  gone  to  Vicksburg. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  LOVELL, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 


Hdors.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Orleans , May  20,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Mississippi , Vicksburg: 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  13th  of  March  by  mischance  has  been 
unanswered,  much  to  my  regret.  In  reference  to  the  cargo  of  cotton  I 
seized  by  some  of  the  troops  of  my  command  at  or  near  Ponchatoula  I 
have  only  to  sav  the  seizure  was  made  under  such  circumstances  that  | 
did  not  leave  me  at  liberty  to  release  it  from  the  custody  of  the  mar-  i 
shal.  It  will  be  referred  to  the  courts  for  consideration,  when  such  judg- 
ment  as  may  be  given  will  be  followed  in  its  final  disposition.  Under 
different  circumstances  I should  be  glad  to  comply  with  your  request. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Opelousas,  La.,  May  21, 1862. 

President  Davis  : 

Dear  Sir:  Orders  have  already  been  issued  by  my  adjutant-general 
for  the  enrollment  of  conscripts,  and  notice  has  been  given  that  the  two 
camps  will  be  at  Monroe  and  this  place ; but,  as  I have  already  informed 
you  there  will  be  no  tents  or  provisions  at  either  of  them  until  you  send 
them.  Should  any  conscripts  reach  the  camps  before  these  things  are 
provided  they  will  have  to  return  home.  I am  stripped  of  everything 
I have— guns,  munitions,  forces,  and  commissary  stores. 

I must  express  my  great  regret  that  martial  law  could  not  be  declared 
in  the  parishes  indicated  to  you.  If  it  had  been  done,  and  the  provost- 
marshals  appointed  by  you,  much,  very  much,  serious  trouble  would 
have  been  avoided.  It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  I would  ever  again 
consent  to  the  proclamation  of  martial  law  by  General  Lovell  after  the 
urgent  and  persistent  complaints  I made  to  you  of  the  action  of  his  pro- 
vost-marshals, which  received  his  silent  acquiescence,  if  not  his  open 
approval.  A part  of  my  State  is  now  in  possession  of  our  ruthless 
enemy  ; the  remainder  is  a prey  to  internal  dissension  and  the  perils  ot 
demoralization  produced  by  the  disorganized  condition  of  the  Conted- 
erate  forces,  while  there  is  not  a Confederate  officer  m the  whole  State, 
except  a single  parish  (Saint  Helena)  bordering  the  State  line.  I have 
sent  more  than  30T;000  men  into  the  field,  every  one  fully  armed  and 
equipped,  besides  emptying  the  arsenal  I seized  for  the  benefit  of  the 
neighboring  States  with  my  own  ; have  clothed  them  since  they  have 
been  there;  have  given  all  the  arms  I bought  to  Confederate  troops, 
and  have  now,  in  this  our  calamity,  not  an  officer  Jo  advise  rnthorj 


man  tu  0 — ~~  - 0 — - . 

whatever  department  Louisiana  may  be  placed  m very  soon. 


LI  civ  C I1UVY,  1U  tuio  J , “ - . , , _ 

to  execute  an  order.  I beg  that  a general  may  be  assigned  to 


* That  portion  of  Governor  Moore’s  letter  here  omitted  relates  to  the  evacuation, 
April  27,  1862,  of  Fort  Quitman,  Bayou  Grand  Caillou,  La.,  and  will  be  found  with 
Maj  Gen.  ManBfield  Lovell’s  report  on  that  event,  Series  I,  Vol.  VI,  p.  (>57. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  741 

It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  some  steps  should  be  taken  to  stop 
the  incursions  of  the  enemy  in  the  lower  part  of  the  State.  The  only 
means  I now  have  is  to  organize  bands  of  Partisan  Eangers.  If  I wait 
for  captains  to  apply  through  General  Lovell  to  the  Secretary  of  War 
the  delays  will  be  ruinous,  and  I therefore  have  given  to-day  authority 
to  Captain  Goode  to  raise  a company  of  rangers  for  operation  in  Terre 
Bonne.  I shall  grant  similar  privileges  to  such  others  as  circum- 
stances may  suggest,  and  shall  rejiort  all  of  them  to  the  Secretary  of 
War,  who  I hope  will  confirm  these  authorizations. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

THO.  O.  MOORE, 

Governor. 

[Indorsement.] 

Secretary  of  War  for  special  attention.  Call  on  General  Lovell  for 
report  as  to  fort  at  Grand  Caillou. 

J.  D. 


Richmond,  Va.,  May  21, 1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell,  Camp  Moore , La. : 

I am  informed  that  you  do  not  consider  yourself  instructed  as  to  the 
destruction  of  the  cotton  on  the  Mississippi,  and  to  avoid  misconcep- 
tion or  mistake  I now  instruct  you  to  destroy  cotton,  tobacco,  military 
and  naval  stores,  or  other  property  of  any  kind  whatever  which  may 
aid  the  enemy  in  the  prosecution  of  the  war  whenever  and  wherever 
in  your  judgment  it  is  necessary  to  prevent  such  property  from  falling 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  22, 1862. 

General  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War: 

You  were  misinformed.  I have  already  given  full  instructions  for 
destruction  of  the  property  named. 

M.  LOVELL. 


Vicksburg,  May  23, 1862. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Corinth , Miss.  : 

My  Dear  General:  I came  up  here  a day  or  two  since  with  several 
additional  regiments,  with  the  view  of  strengthening  this  point  in  such 
a manner  as  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  getting  possession  of  this  rail- 
road. Yesterday,  to  my  great  astonishment,  General  Ruggles  presented 
himself  here  with  an  order,  taking  command  of  several  places  heretofore 
always  considered  as  belonging  to  Department  No.  1.  There  never  was 
any  definite  line  of  demarcation  between  the  departments,  but  it  was 
generally  understood  that  my  department  embraced  the  State  of  Missis- 
sippi up  to  the  line  of  North  Louisiana. 

Orders  relative  to  matters  in  Jackson  or  Vicksburg  have  always  been 


742 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  JST.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 


sent  from  Richmond  through  me,  and  the  troops  at  these  points  have 
reported  to  or  been  raised  in  my  department.  Now,  I have  not  the 
slightest  objection  to  your  sending  away  General  Ruggles,  but  for: 
Heaven’s  sake  don’t  send  him  into  my  department,  where  he  will  raise! 
a row  in  a week.  When  I sent  him  to  you  I sent  six  or  eight  good 
regiments  with  him.  It  is  hardly  fair  to  send  him  back  without  any; 
soldiers,  to  take  command  of  me  and  my  troops.  The  bulk  of  supplies,! 
ordnance,  commissary,  and  quartermaster,  at  Jackson  belong  to  my  de- 
partment, and  I certainly  don’t  want  General  Ruggles  to  meddle  with 
them. 

Please  alter  your  orders  so  as  to  confine  his  operations  to  the  northern 
half  of  the  State.  He  stepped  in  here  to  take  command  of  Smith,  my- 
self, and  all  our  troops  with  a wonderful  degree  of  gravity,  and  it  was 
only  when  I asked  him  what  he  would  do  if  I withdrew  all  of  my  troops 
that  he  seemed  to  appreciate  the  case.  I think  I shall  probably  be 
about  Jackson  myself,  oscillating  between  Camp  Moore  and  Vicksburg. 
The  destruction  of  cotton  and  the  raising  of  corps  of  Partisan  Rangers 
require  a good  deal  of  attention  just  at  present,  but  unless  I can  get 
some  small-arms  I shall  be  unable  to  put  men  enough  in  the  field  to 
prevent  the  enemy  from  seizing  all  our  railroads  and  river  ports.  If 
we  can  confine  them  to  the  river  until  it  falls  so  low  that  their  gunboats 
cannot  operate  we  shall  be  able  to  make  a clean  sweep  of  them  before 
the  summer  is  over. 

Yours,  truly, 

M.  LOVELL. 


• Headquarters, 

Jackson , Miss.,  May  23,  1862. 

General  Beauregard,  Corinth , Miss. : 

General  Lovell  reached  Vicksburg  before  me,  and  claims  the  com- 
mand and  refuses  to  yield  it. 

Prompt  and  energetic  action  is  necessary.  I have  returned  to  myi 
headquarters  and  await  your  orders. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 
Brigadier -General,  C.  S.  Army. 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  610.  J Opelousas , May  23,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Pratt,  commanding  the  Ninth  Brigade,  Louisi- 
ana Militia,  is  called  into  active  service,  dating  from  the  8th  of  May, 
1862,  according  to  section  75,  militia  act  of  23d  January,  1862. 

II.  The  militia  forces  from  his  brigade  and  from  , the  Sixth  Brigade, 
called  by  him  into  active  service,  are  retained  in  service,  dating  from 
the  date  when  they  report  themselves  for  duty,  and  until  further  orders. 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

M.  GRIVOT, 
Adjutant  and  Inspector. 


Corinth,  May  24,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles: 

The  forces  at  Vicksburg  belong  to  General  Lovell’s  command ; hence 
he  must  command  them.  Jackson,  I am  informed,  is  in  his  military 
district.  You  will  therefore  establish  your  headquarters  at  Grenada. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  743 

PROCLAMATION. 

Executive  Office, 
Opelousas,  La.,  May  24,  1862. 

To  the  People  of  Louisiana  : 

The  general  commanding  the  troops  of  the  United  States  now  hold- 
ing possession  of  New  Orleans  issued  the  following  order  on  the  15th 
instant : 

As  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  United  States  have  been  subject  to  repeated  in- 
sults from  the  women  (calling  themselves  ladies)  of  New  Orleans,  in  return  for  the 
most  scrupulous  non-interference  and  courtesy  on  our  part,  it  is  ordered  that  here- 
after, when  any  female  shall,  by  word,  gesture,  or  movement,  insult  or  show  contempt 
for  any  officer  or  soldier  of  the  United  States,  she  shall  be  regarded  and  held  liable  to 
be  treated  as  a woman  of  the  town  plying  her  avocation. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Butler. 

The  annals  of  warfare  between  civilized  nations  afford  ho  similar  in- 
stance of  infamy  to  this  order.  It  is  thus  proclaimed  to  the  world  that 
the  exhibition  of  any  disgust  or  repulsiveness  by  the  women  of  New 
Orleans  to  the  hated  invaders  of  their  home  and  the  slayers  of  their 
fathers,  brothers,  and  husbands  shall  constitute  a justification  to  a 
brutal  soldiery  for  the  indulgence  of  their  lust.  The  commanding  gen- 
eral, from  his  headquarters,  announces  to  his  insolent  followers  that 
they  are  at  liberty  to  treat  as  women  of  the  town  the  wives,  the  mothers, 
the  daughters  of  our  citizens,  if  by  word,  gesture,  or  movement  any 
contempt  is  indicated  for  their  persons  or  insult  offered  to  their  pres- 
ence. Of  the  nature  of  the  movement  and  the  meaning  of  the  look 
these  vagabond  refuse  of  the  Northern  States  are  to  be  the  judges. 

What  else  than  contempt  and  abhorrence  can  the  women  of  New  Or- 
leans feel  or  exhibit  for  these  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  United  States? 
The  spontaneous  impulse  of  their  hearts  must  appear  involuntary  upon 
their  countenances  and  thus  constitute  the  crime  for  which  the  general 
of  those  soldiers  adjudges  the  punishment  of  rape  and  brutalized  pas- 
sion. 

History  records  instances  of  cities  sacked  and  inhuman  atrocities 
committed  upon  the  women  of  a conquered  town,  but  in  no  instance  in 
modern  times,  at  least  without  the  brutal  ravishers  suffering  condign 
'punishment  from  the  hands  of  their  own  commanders.  It  was  reserved 
for  a Federal  general  to  invite  his  soldiers  to  the  perpetration  of  out- 
rages at  the  mention  of  which  the  blood  recoils  in  horror — to  quicken 
the  impulses  of  their  sensual  instincts  by  the  suggestion  of  transparent 
excuses  for  their  gratification,  and  to  add  to  an  infamy  already  well 
merited  these  crowning  titles  of  a panderer  to  lust  and  a desecrator  of 
virtue. 

Maddened  by  the  noble  loyalty  of  our  people  to  the  Government  of 
their  affections,  and  at  their  disgust  and  execration  of  their  invaders $ 
stung  into  obliviousness  of  the  world's  censure  by  the  grand  offering 
made  of  our  property  upon  the  altar  of  our  liberties ; his  passions  in- 
flamed by  the  sight  of  burning  cotton  illumining  the  river  upon  whose 
waters  floats  the  powerful  fleet  that  effected  the  downfall  of  our  chief 
city ) disappointed,  chafed,  and  chagrined  that  our  people,  unlike  his 
own,  do  not  measure  liberty,  truth,  or  honor  by  a pecuniary  standard, 
he  sees  the  fruits  of  a victory  he  did  not  help  to  win  eluding  his  grasp, 
and  nothing  left  upon  which  to  gloat  his  vengeance  but  unarmed  men 
and  helpless  women. 

Louisianians ! will  you  suffer  such  foul  conduct  of  your  oppressors  to 
pass  unpunished?  Will  you  permit  such  indignities  to  remain  uu- 


744  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

avenged  ? A mind  so  debased  As  to  be  capable  of  conceiving  the  alter- 
native presented  in  this  order  must  be  fruitful  of  inventions  wherewith 
to  pollute  humanity.  Shameless  enough  to  allow  their  publication  in 
the  city,  by  the  countenance  of  such  atrocities  they  will  be  multiplied 
in  the  country.  Its  inhabitants  must  arm  and  strike,  or  the  insolent 
victors  will  offer  this  outrage  to  your  wives,  your  sisters,  and  your 
daughters.  Possessed  of  New  Orleans  by  means  of  his  superior  naval 
force,  he  cannot  penetrate  the  interior  if  you  resolve  to  prevent  it.  It 
does  not  require  a force  of  imposing  magnitude  to  impede  his  progress. 
Companies  of  experienced  woodsmen  in  every  exposed  locality,  with 
their  trusty  rifles  and  shot-guns,  will  harass  his  invading  columns,  de- 
prive him  of  his  pilots,  and  assure  him  he  is  in  the  country  of  an  enemy. 
At  proper  points  larger  forces  will  be  collected,  but  every  man  can  be 
a soldier  to  guard  the  approaches  to  his  home.  Organize,  then,  quickly 
and  efficiently.  If  your  enemy  attempt  to  proceed  into  the  interior  let 
his  pathway  be  marked  by  his  blood.  It  is  your  homes  that  you  have 
to  defend.  It  is  the  jewel  of  your  hearths — the  chastity  of  your  women — 
you  have  to  guard.  Let  that  thought  animate  your  breasts,  nerve 
your  arms,  quicken  your  energies,  and  inspire  your  resolution.  Strike 
home  to  the  heart  of  your  foe  the  blow  that  rids  your  country  of  his 
presence.  If  need  be  let  his  blood  moisten  your  own  grave.  It  will 
rise  up  before  your  children  as  a perpetual  memento  of  a race  whom  it 
will  teach  to  hate  now  and  evermore. 

THOS.  O.  MOOBE. 


Headquarters  Western  Department, 

Corinth , Miss .,  May  25, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  C.  G.  Dahlgren, 

Commanding , Fayette , Miss. : 

Sir  : Your  communications  of  the  17th  and  20th*  instant  have  been 
received,  and  I answer  them  at  the  earliest  leisure  moment.  The  ques- 
tions propounded  are  replied  to  as  directly  as  possible: 

1st.  In  regard  to  the  man  who  offered  to  bear  a letter  from  the  enemy’s 
cutter,  have  him  kept  in  jail  for  thirty  days. 

2d.  I must  express  my  utter  surprise  and  amazement  at  the  reception 
of  the  enemy.  To  say  the  least  it  was  very  irregular  and  strange, 
ignoring  the  customs  of  civilized  warfare  and  ill-becoming  Southerners 
fighting  for  their  homes  and  independence. 

3d.  Your  course  in  leaving  the  city  after  what  had  happened  and  in 
burning  all  cotton  liable  to  fall  into  the  enemy’s  hands  is  duly  ap- 
proved. You  could  not  be  expected  to  hold  and  successfully  defend  a 
place  without  an  adequate  force  of  infantry  and  heavy  guns.  Should 
the  enemy  occupy  the  city  hereafter  it  would  be  well  to  remove  all 
transportation  (except  what  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  wants  of 
the  citizens)  into  the  country,  and  if  it  is  not  safe  there  have  the  wagonsr 
drays,  &c.,  permanently  disabled  or  burned  up. 

4th.  You  speak  with  regret  and  solicitude  of  the  condition  of  affairs  in 
Natchez  and  the  surrounding  country,  both  as  to  their  military  and 
political  condition.  The  absence  of  a sufficient  force  to  guard  our  im- 
portant cities  from  occupation  by  the  enemy  is  to  be  deplored,  but  our 
only  success  lies  in  throwing  all  our  forces  into  large  armies,  with  which 
to  meet  and  successfully  overthrow  our  adversary.  The  result  of  one 

* Of  20th  not  found.  For  that  of  17th,  see  p.  736. 


Ciiap.  Iivn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


745 


such  victory  would  be  worth  more  to  us  than  the  occupation  of  all  our 
important  cities  to  our  enemies.  The  political  condition  of  your  section 
of  country  is  astonishing.  In  the  very  heart  of  the  Confederacy,  with 
an  immense  slave  population,  it  illy  behooves  the  citizens  of  Mississippi 
at  this  trying  juncture  to  quail  or  waver  before  our  insidious  foe.  I 
would  point  them  to  the  condition  of  their  sister  States  Missouri  and 
Virginia  as  illustrating  bright  examples  of  patriotism  and  love  of  prin- 
ciple. The  enemy  have  never  entered  an  important  city  in  either  of 
the  last-named  States  that  they  have  not  been  received  with  scorn  and 
abhorrence. 

5th.  I duly  approve  and  commend  your  course  in  arresting  disloyal 
citizens.  The  three  cases  mentioned  by  you  must  be  kept  confined  at 
your  discretion. 

6th.  As  to  the  minister  of  the  Gospel,  I would  not  interfere  with  him 
so  long  as  he  does  not  preach  obedience  to  Northern  rule  and  does 
nothing  contrary  to  Confederate  laws.  You  must  arrest  and  confine 
the  telegraph  operator  referred  to  by  you  whenever  your  suspicions  shall 
be  confirmed. 

7th.  Your  course,  as  reported  by  you  throughout  the  trying  scenes 
through  which  you  have  lately  passed,  as  well  as  the  cool  and  soldier- 
like behavior  of  Adjt.  W.  J.  Lyle,  are  highly  approved.  I am  rejoiced 
to  hear  of  the  conduct  of  the  latter  with  only  a handful  of  men  in  pres- 
ence of  an  overpowering  adversary. 

8th.  The  location  of  a camp  at  Fayette,  suggested  and  recommended 
in  your  letter  of  the  20th,  meets  with  my  sanction,  but  I have  no  troops 
of  any  description  to  send  there,  for  all  you  refer  to  are  required  here 
and  at  Vicksburg. 

9th.  At  present  the  wants  and  necessities  of  your  post  cannot  be  sup- 
plied, but  I hope  to  be  able  to  do  so  in  case  of  a victory  here.  As  re- 
spects the  burning  of  cotton,  the  law  is  that  all  cotton  in  danger  of  fall- 
ing into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  shall  be  destroyed,  without  regard  to 
whom  it  belongs.  I repeat  the  order  given  in  a former  part  of  this  let- 
ter, that  all  animals  and  means  of  transportation,  such  as  wagons,  drays, 
&c.,  must  be  moved  to  a place  of  safety  and  not  allowed  to  fall  into  the 
enemy’s  hands. 

10th.  In  regard  to  persons  guilty  of  treason  and  other  crimes  of  a 
kindred  nature,  they  should  be  turned  over  to  the  nearest  civil  magis- 
trates for  trial  and  punished,  if  practicable ; but  in  grave  cases,  when  the 
civil  power  is  inadequate  to  reach  the  evil  and  the  public  exigency  should 
demand  it,  you  might  resort  to  a military  commission  to  try  the  offend- 
ers. But  this  is  a delicate  power  and  should  only  be  resorted  to  in  ex- 
treme cases.  All  other  offenses  committed  against  the  Articles  of  War 
should  be  tried  by  courts-martial,  in  conformity  with  the  Army  Regula- 
tions. When  you  deem  it  necessary  that  a general  court-martial  should 
be  convened  you  can  apply  to  these  headquarters  for  authority  to  order  it. 

11th.  Your  suggestions  as  to  points  where  batteries  might  be  advan- 
tageously placed  are  appreciated,  but  unfortunately  we  have  no  guns 
and  no  artillerists  for  this  purpose. 

In  closing  this  letter  I again  commend  your  zeal  and  patriotism  and 
the  course  pursued  in  all  your  late  duties  and  actions,  as  reported  in 
your  communications  ; but  whilst  strictly  performing  your  duty  I must 
counsel  you  to  endeavor  to  persuade  and  conciliate  our  people  in  pref- 
I erence  to  adopting  harsh  measures,  which  at  present  we  have  not  the 
| means  of  carrying  into  effect. 

With  high  respedt,  vour  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


746  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII.! 

General  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  39.  j Richmond , May  26,  1862. 

# # * * * 

II.  The  limits  of  Department  No.  1,  under  command  of  Major-Gen- 
eral Lovell,  will  hereafter  embrace  that  portion  of  the  State  of  Missis- 
sippi south  of  the  thirty-third  parallel  and  west  of  Pascagoula  and, 
Ohickasawha  Eivers,  including  also  that  part  of  the  State  of  Louisiana 
east  of  the  Mississippi  River. 

III.  Department  No.  2,  under  command  of  General  Beauregard,  is 
extended  south  to  the  thirty-third  parallel  east  of  the  Mississippi  River, 
and  extending  on  that  parallel  to  the  eastern  boundary  of  Alabama. 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Headquarters  Western  Department, 

Corinth , May  28,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Loyell,  Vicksburg,  Miss. : 

General  : Your  favors  of  25th  and  26th  instant  have  just  been  re- 
ceived. I telegraphed  you  yesterday  relative  to  General  Ruggles’ 
position,  which  I hope  is  settled  for  the  present.  The  great  point  is  to 
defend  the  river  at  Vicksburg.  The  question  of  who  does  it  must  be 
of  a secondary  consideration.  The  troops  of  your  command  are  there, 
and  I think  it  but  fair  that  you  should  direct  the  operations  at  that 
point,  and  you  have  my  warmest  wishes  for  your  success.  By  the  copy 
of  War  Department  order  which  I ordered  to  be  inclosed  to  you  a few 
days  ago  you  will  perceive  that  Vicksburg  is  in  my  department  and 
Jackson  in  yours  ; but  I attach  only  little  importance  to  this  matter  ; 
all  that  I desire  is  success  to  our  arms  and  to  our  cause. 

With  regard  to  your  appeal  for  small-arms,  I should  be  most  happy 
to  send  them  to  you  if  they  could  be  spared  from  here  at  this  critical 
moment;  but  being  on  the  eve  of  a battle,  with  a powerful  enemy  close 
in  my  front,  it  becomes  impossible  to  grant  your  request,  for  a defeat 
here  would  result  in  the  loss  of  the  whole  Mississippi  Valley,  including 
your  force  and  the  points  you  are  now  holding. 

With  regard  to  the  defense  of  the  railroads  you  refer  to,  the  best  way 
of  accomplishing  it  is  to  remove  the  cars  and  engines  and  to  destroy  a 
few  bridges;  they  could  not  then  be  used  by  the  enemy.  As  soon,  how- 
ever, as  I can  return  you  some  arms  it  shall  be  done.  I can  only  ex- 
press again  my  regret  at  not  having  here  the  available  force  at  present 
with  you,  for  I care  more  about  my  front  at  this  moment  than  1 do  for 
my  rear. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Greenwood,  May  29, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Daniel  Rugoles,  C.  S.  A., 

Commanding , &c.,  Grenada , Miss.  : 

Sir  : I beg  leave  to  state,  for  your  information  (and  as  you  requested), 
that  I reached  here  to-day  to  find  things  much  less  advanced  with  the 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


747 


Arkansas  than  I had  hoped.  Ten  days  is  spoken  of  as  the  time  within 
which  it  may  be  possible  to  raise  steam.  The  armament  is  quite  out  of 
the  question,  as  to  getting  it  ready  within  that  time.  Workmen  are 
needed  ; 25  carpenters,  5 machinists  immediately.  Difficulty  seems  to 
exist  as  to  men  working  or  submitting  to  proper  control.  If  you  could 
send  me  20  armed  volunteers,  with  a lieutenant,  to  Yazoo  City,  to  act 
under  my  orders,  it  might  be  well.  I will  move  the  vessel  to  Yazoo 
City  to-morrow,  where  greater  facilities  exist  for  getting  work  done. 
The  iron  lost  in  the  barge  is  being  recovered  by  the  help  of  the  diving- 
bell. 

Captain  Shirley  told  me  that  the  machinery  upon  which  he  de- 
pended for  fitting  the  iron  at  Memphis  had  been  ordered  away  from 
there  by  the  Government.  Will  it  be  well  to  take  up  the  Arkansas  to 
Memphis  under  the  circumstances  or  to  risk  the  vessel  on  the  river 
without  steam  ? 

I am  detaining  the  boat  while  writing  these  unsatisfactory  details. 
I foresee  that  I too  will  come  in  in  due  time  for  blame  when  the  Ar- 
kansas shall  still  remain  unready.  I will  do  all  that  I can  in  the  mean 
time. 

I remain,  very  respectfully, 

ISAAC  NT.  BROWN, 
Lieutenant , C.  S.  Navy. 


Vicksburg,  June  1,  1862.  (Deceived  June  2.) 

General  Ruggles: 

Can’t  send  troops  away  from  here  just  now.  Organize  spies  and  keep 
me  advised. 

Act  for  the  best  until  I can  come  to  you  with  aid. 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major- General. 


Executive  Office, 

Opelousas , June  2,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis,' 

President  of  the  Confederate  States  : 

Dear  Sir:  Owing  to  the  delay,  difficulty,  and  risk  of  communication 
between  the  War  Department  and  those  living  on  this  side  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi, I have  authorized  suitable  persons  to  enroll  companies  of  Par- 
tisan Rangers,  in  accordance  with  the  act  of  Congress,  hoping  thereby 
to  get  several  companies  promptly  into  service,  and  confidently  believing 
that  my  action  will  be  ratified  wffien  the  officers  who  form  companies 
under  my  order  are  reported  to  Your  Excellency.  I inclose  herewith  a 
copy  of  that  order. 

The  urgent  need  of  a defensive  force  admitted  of  no  delay.  For  an 
applicant  to  forward  a request  to  the  general  commanding  this  depart- 
ment, to  be  sent  thence  to  the  Secretary  of  War  and  a permission  to  be 
returned,  would  consume  more  than  a month.  When  the  head  of  the 
proposed  department  west  of  the  Mississippi  shall  enter  upon  his  com- 
mand I shall  only  recommend  applicants  to  him,  to  be  reported  to  the 
Secretary  of  War. 

These  partisan  corps,  although  destined  chiefly  for  State  defense,  will 
be  subject  to  the  control  and  entitled  to  the  support  of  the  Confederate 


748 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 


States.  I shall  consider  them  as  forming  part  of  the  Army  of  the  Con- 
federacy, and  direct  their  officers  to  look  to  the  War  Department  for 
subsistence,  pay,  and  quarters  from  the  time  of  their  entry  upon  ac- 
tive service.  There  will  consequently  be  needed  in  this  State  an  officer 
of  the  Quartermaster-GeneraPs  Department,  as  well  for  the  corps  of 
Eangers  as  for  the  proposed  camps  of  instruction  for  conscripts. 

I have  neither  the  authority  nor  the  means  to  organize,  equip,  and 
subsist  an  army  in  Louisiana.  Our  Legislature  did  not  anticipate  nor 
provide  for  the  stupendous  calamity  that  has  deprived  us  ofvour  metrop- 
olis, severed  the  State,  and  rendered  all  the  banks  of  our  navigable  rivers 
for  an  aggregate  extent  of  more  than  2,000  miles  vulnerable  by  the 
enemy’s  armed  vessels.  With  a voting  population  of  about  50,000  in 
the  State  thirty  regiments  have  been  raised  for  Confederate  service  and? 
are  now  employed  outside  of  this  State.  We  have  no  arms  left  us  but 
shot-guns,  and  no  ammunition  for  them  except  small  quantities  in  pri- 
vate hands.  All  means  of  subsistence  except  such  as  are  produced 
here  are  only  obtained  at  an  enormous  cost  by  land  carriage  or  at  great 
risk  by  water.  The  State  penitentiary  and  the  manufactories  at  New 
Orleans  have  hitherto  furnished  clothing  for  army  and  plantation  use. 
These  sources  of  supply  are  cut  off.  We  have  nothing  to  depend  on  but 
hand-looms,  and  the  cards  for  them  cannot  be  supplied  at  any  cost,  the 
few  that  are  to  be  had  selling  at  thirty  times  their  old  price.  Louisiana, 
that  has  contributed  so  generously  in  men  and  means  to  our  great  cause, 
is  made  to  feel  the  burdens  and  calamities  of  war  in  the  same  large  pro- 
portion. Cumulated  to  these  is  a disastrous  inundation,  that  brings 
suffering  to  thousands  who  cannot  be  relieved. 

These  distresses  have  disheartened  some  of  our  citizens  and  demoral- 
ized others.  Our  people,  seeing  no  adequate  provisions  for  defense,  feel 
insecure  in  their  persons  and  property  wherever  a gunboat  can  be 
brought  to  their  vicinity.  Dormant  disloyalty  has  awakened  with  the 
disaster  that  brings  our  eDemy  so  near,  and  the  murmurs  of  the  suffer- 
ing mingle  with  the  complaints  of  the  mercenary,  the  taunts  of  disor- 
ganizers,  and  the  whispered  tones  of  treason.  To  check  these  manifes- 
tations, though  not  numerous,  requires  sleepless  vigilance  and  some 
severity.  As  they  are  probably  made  known  to  the  enemy,  they  will 
induce  the  unscrupulous  and  despotic  commander  of  the  Federal  troops 
in  New  Orleans  to  send  expeditions  in  all  directions  as  soon  as  his  re- 
enforcements  arrive. 

Knowing  the  paramount  necessity  of  massing  the  Confederate  troops 
at  vital  points,  I do  not  ask  or  expect  soldiers  to  be  withdrawn  from 
our  great  armies  to  defend  the  western  part  of  Louisiana.  A command- 
ing general  for  this  department,  a few  experienced  officers  to  aid  him 
and  assist  in  organizing  and  drilling  conscripts,  rangers,  and  militia; 
money  to  pay  and  subsist  troops  who  may  enter  the  Confederate  serv- 
ice; ammunition  for  small-arms  and  for  field  artillery  ; a limited  supply 
of  tents  and  camp  equipage,  all  of  which  Your  Excellency  may  be  able 
to  furnish  without  appreciable  inconvenience  to  the  army  in  Tennessee 
or  that  in  Virginia,  would  be  of  great  benefit  to  us. 

With  no  other  assistance  than  what  I have  mentioned  we  may  be 
able  to  organize  such  a force  as  to  preserve  our  cattle  and  corn  from  the 
enemy;  to  resist  any  incursion  in  places  not  within  the  reach  of  armed 
vessels;  to  put  our  bayous  and  river  banks  under  the  protection  of  par- 
tisan bands;  to  secure  the  growing  crops  for  the  use  of  the  Confeder- 
acy ; to  restore  the  confidence  of  the  doubting ; to  crush  the  wicked 
hopes  of  secret  enemies;  to  facilitate  the  transportation  of  provisions; 
to  prepare  to  aid  in  the  expulsion  of  Curtis  and  his  marauders  from 


Jhap.  XXVII.].  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  749 

Arkansas,  and  eventually  to  sustain  and  second  our  Western  Army 
when  its  conquering  columns  shall  be  pushed  across  the  Ohio. 

The  officer  whom  General  Beauregard  was  to  designate  as  command- 
int  of  conscripts  at  Opelousas  has  not  arrived.  If  he  does  not  bring 
tents,  camp  equipments,  &c.,  he  will  be  greatly  embarrassed,  for  noth- 
ng  of  the  kind  can  be  obtained  in  this  isolated  section.  I shall  afford 
him  all  possible  aid,  and  I expect  much  assistance  from  his  professional 
skill  and  experience. 

In  relation  to  conscripts,  I would  respectfully  suggest  to  Your  Excel- 
lency that  in  your  instructions  to  the  commandant  of  the  Western  De- 
partment you  give  him  the  authority  to  modify  the  operation  of  the 
conscription  law  to  the  extent  of  retaining  conscripts  in  his  department 
and  forming  them  (temporarily)  into  new  companies,  instead  of  reserv- 
ing them  as  recruits  to  regiments  east  of  the  Mississippi.  With  such  a 
modification  I have  some  reason  to  hope  that  conscripts  will  repair  to 
camp  with  alacrity  ; without  it,  I have  some  apprehension  that  the  law 
cannot  be  enforced  except  with  much  difficulty.  Moreover,  the  Louis- 
iana troops  now  in  the  field  and  far  removed  from  their  homes  will 
certainly  render  more  efficient,  because  more  cheerful,  service  when  they 
know  that  the  defense  of  their  families  and  property  is  provided  for. 

The  feeling  prevails  throughout  the  State  that  no  more  men  or  arms 
should  be  spared  for  distant  service  till  the  yet  uninvaded  part  of  the 
State  is  guarded  against  marauders.  Many  plantations  have  but  a 
single  white  man  to  superintend  them,  while  others  have  not  even  one. 
Had  not  one-third  part  of  our  State  gone  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy 
our  quota  would  have  been  kept  full  without  conscription.  Our  re- 
sources having  been  so  much  reduced  by  conquest,  equity  demands  that 
the  requirements  of  the  Confederate  Government  should  be  reduced  in 
the  same  proportion.  Conscripts  cannot  be  expected  from  Yew  Orleans 
nor  from  the  neighboring  parishes,  which  are  virtually  under  the  influ- 
ence of  the  enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THO.  O.  MOORE, 

Governor. 


Yazoo  City,  Miss.,  June  4, 1862. 

General  Daniel  Ruggles,  C.  S.  A., 

Commanding , Grenada,  Miss. : 

Sir:  I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  31st 
ultimo.  The  Arkansas  gunboat  has  been  removed  to  this  place  and  the 
work  of  fitting  the  vessel  for  service  is  now  actively  begun.  In  begin- 
ning, however,  I have  had  to  assume  extraordinary  powers,  both  with 
workmen  and  officers.  The  lukewarmness  or  inefficiency  of  the  com- 
mander whom  I relieved  amounted  to  practical  treason,  though  he 
meant  nothing  of  the  kind.  1 have  got  rid  of  him,  but  in  doing  so  have 
placed  myself  inside  the  mutiny  act.  I came  near  shooting  him,  and 
must  have  done  so  if  he  had  not  consented  and  got  out  of  my  way. 
He  has  gone  to  Richmond  to  denounce  me,  no  doubt,  but  I care  not 
what  they  say  of  me  there  so  long  as  it  is  evident  here  that  I am  trying 
my  best  to  get  ready  to  strike  the  enemies  of  my  country  and  of  man- 
kind. That  I will  hit  them  hard  when  ready,  if  possible,  I promise  you. 
It  will  be  twenty  days  yet  before  we  are  ready. 

Great  deception  has  been  practiced  by  some  party  or  other  regarding 
the  forwardness  of  the  Arkansas  equipment,  or  else  the  Department  of 


?50 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXYli. 


the  Navy,  as  well  as  the  public,  have  gratuitously  coucluded  that  the 
vessel  was  much  more  nearly  ready  than  it  is.  1 blame  no  one,  but  the 
thing  is  unaccountable  in  any  honest  or  patriotic  view.  Thanks  to  the 
patriotism  of  the  noble  people  of  Yazoo  City  1 shall  not  need  the 
guard  that  I asked  for.  The  citizens  here,  though  but  a handful  are  at 
home  from  the  Army,  will  sustain  me  so  long  as  I shall  deserve  their 


support. 

There  is  a raft  across  the  Yazoo  River  22  miles  below  this  point.  Two 
heavy  and  two  light  guns  are  there  in  position,  I understand,  but  no 
men  to  work  them.  I have  sent  the  Mobile  gunboat  to  the  raft  to  make 
the  best  defense  possible  should  the  enemy  there  appear. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

ISAAC  N.  BROWN, 
Lieutenant , C.  8.  Navy. 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  638.  ) Opelousas , June  4,  1862. 

I.  It  having  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Governor,  commander-in- 
chief,  that  the  sum  of  six  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  dollars  in  specie, 
said  to  belong  to  the  Bank  of  America  or  other  banks  of  New  Orleans, 
is  now  under  the  charge  of  A.  Fortier,  esq.,  cashier,  on  its  way  from 
Alexandria  or  Marksville  to  New  Orleans  by  steamboat,  Lieut.  Col.  W. 
F.  Cheney,  of  the  parish  of  Avoyelles,  will  cause  the  seizure  of  said 
specie  on  board  of  any  boat  or  in  whatever  place  it  may  be  found,  and 
prohibit  the  same  from  being  taken  to  New  Orleans.  He  will  place  a 
guard  over  it  and  order  it  to  be  taken  to  the  place  from  whence  it  came 
or  to  some  safe  place  in  the  interior. 

II.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Cheney  will  not  permit  the  shipment  of  any 
specie  whatever  from  any  point  in  the  parish  of  Avoyelles  to  New  Or- 
leans, except  by  special  permit  from  the  Governor,  commander-in-chief. 

By  order  of  Thos.  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief : 

M.  GRIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

(Similar  orders  (No.  637)  to  Col.  T.  D.  Martin  and  Lieut.  Col.  M.  R, 
Ariail,  of  the  parish  of  Rapides.) 


Richmond,  Y a.,  June  5,  1862. 
Major-General  Lovell,  Jackson , Miss. : 

You  will  send  a flag  of  truce  to  General  Butler  and  inform  him  that 
you  have  heard  that  he  has  put  prominent  citizens  of  New  Orleans  to 
labor  with  ball  and  chain.  Say  to  him  that  we  shall  retaliate  if  such 
be  the  fact,  but  will  wait  for  a contradiction  if  he  thinks  fit  to  make  it. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  6,  1862. 
Major-General  Lovell,  Jackson , Miss.  : 

When  you  send  the  flag  of  truce  to  General  Butler,  for  the  purpose 
indicated  in  my  telegram  of  yesterday,  you  will  also  inquire  of  him  it 


Uhap.  XXViL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  75i 

the  statement  purporting  to  come  from  citizens  of  New  Orleans  that 
tie  had  appropriated  for  the  use  of  his  army  a portion  of  the  provisions 
illowed  to  pass  through  our  lines  for  the  citizens  of  New  Orleans  be 
brue. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  643.  1 Opelousas , June  8,  1862. 

The  Governor  and  commander-in-chief  is  informed  that  specie  is 
being  taken  from  Alexandria  or  other  points  in  the  parish  of  Rapides 
to  the  city  of  New  Orleans,  and  that  said  specie  belougs  to  the  Bank 
)f  America  or  other  banks  in  the  city  of  New  Orleans,  and  being  con- 
vinced of  the  bad  policy  of  permitting  this  or  other  specie  to  be  taken 
within  the  lines  of  the  enemy,  Ralph  Smith,  esq.,  chairman  of  the 
Committee  of  Public  Safety,  will,  in  the  name  and  by  virtue  of  the 
xuthority  of  the  State  of  Louisiana,  prohibit  the  transportation  or  con- 
veying of  specie  by  steamboats  or  other  vessels  or  by  land  route  to  the 
3ity  of  New  Orleans  from  any  point  or  points  in  the  parish  of  Rapides, 
or  the  transportation  of  specie  from  any  point  in  the  parish  of  Rapides 
bo  any  parish  in  the  State,  intended  to  be  conveyed  to  the  city  of  New 
Orleans  or  within  the  enemy’s  lines. 

He  is  further  authorized  by  the  authority  of  the  State  to  seize  the 
specie  now  in  transitu  and  in  or  about  Alexandria,  and  belonging  to 
my  of  the  banks  of  the  city  of  New  Orleans,  and  about  to  be  conveyed 
to  the  city  of  New  Orleans  or  within  the  enemy’s  lines,  to  take  charge  of 
the  same,  and  to  order  it  to  be  taken  at  once  into  the  interior  to  a place 
3f  safety  and  out  of  the  reach  of  the  enemy  ; and  he  is  further  authorized 
bo  seize  any  specie  whatever  intended  to  be  conveyed  to  any  parish 
from  the  parish  of  Rapides  intended  for  New  Orleans  or  the  enemy’s 
lines  and  to  place  the  same  in  safety  out  of  the  enemy’s  reach ; and  he 
will  make  a report  of  his  actions  in  virtue  of  this  order.  This  order  to 
be  in  force  until  countermanded. 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

M.  GR1YOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Louisiana. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  9,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell,  Jackson , Miss.: 

I am  informed  that  General  Smith  has  ordered  Capt.  W.  H.  Johnson, 
if  Colonel  Starke’s  regiment,  stationed  on  the  Big  Black  River,  to  burn 
ill  the  cotton  in  his  reach,  whether  liable  to  fall  into  the  enemy’s  hands 
)r  not.  This  order,  if  issued,  is  illegal,  and  must  be  countermanded. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Yazoo  City,  Miss.,  June  9,  1862. 
General  Daniel  Ruooles,  &c.,  Grenada , Miss. : 

General  : I have  received  to-day  your  telegram  from  Hernando, 
md  also  Captain  Whitfield’s  note  of  yesterday.  It  would  have  been 
inpossible  properly  to  have  moved  the  Arkansas,  as  with  all  our  efforts 


752 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


we  cannot  yet  raise  steam  or  use  the  engines.  There  is  a raft  across 
the  Yazoo  River  25  miles  below  here,  but  no  force  to  prevent  an  enemy 
from  opening  it.  Two  42s  have  been  mounted  on  a hill  overlooking  the 
raft,  but  a few  infantry  could  take  this  battery  and  turn  it  against  the 
only  gunboat  that  I have  above  to  defend  the  raft.  Two  of  the  Con- 
federate States  gunboats  came  to  the  raft  day  before  yesterday,  but  it 
was  not,  under  the  possible  condition  of  things,  thought  prudent  to 
break  the  obstructions  to  let  them  through.  They  are  now  transferring 
their  stores  and  armament  to  be  used  on  this  side  and  are  then  to  be 
sent  up  the  Sunflower  River.  The  commissary  stores  brought  on  the 
Paul  Jones  are  also  to  be  crossed  over  the  raft  and  brought  to  Yazoo 

Cl,The  ram  Van  Dorn  had  not  made  its  appearance  at  the  raft  this 

morning.  . . 

I have  written  to  General  Lovell  at  Jackson  that  a regiment  ot  rifle- 
men would  be  necessary,  with  a company  of  heavy  artillery,  to  defend 
the  raft.  A battery  of  light  guns  would  also  be  of  use. 

I am  trying  all  I can  to  get  the  Arkansas  ready,  and  I will  try  to 
have  three  more  guns  mounted  at  the  raft  if  I can  in  time. 

I am,  respectfully,  yours, 

’ F 7 ISAAC  N".  BROWil, 

Lieutenant , C.  S.  Navy. 


Headquarters  Western  Department, 

Tupelo , Miss.,  June  10,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Commanding  Department  No.  1,  Jackson , Miss. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  6th  instant  has  just  been  received  and 
referred  to  Dr.  A.  J.  Foard,  chief  surgeon  of  the  Western  Department, 

for  his  further  guidance*  __  . . . . ... 

With  regard  to  the  complaint  of  Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith,  m which 
you  concur,  relative  to  the  intended  evacuation  of  Fort  Pillow  not  hav- 
ing been  communicated  to  you  both,  I have  to  state  that  this  movement 
was  the  natural  consequence  of  the  retreat  from  Corinth,  as  will  be  the 
loss  of  all  the  Mississippi  Valley ; a fact  long  since  communicated  to  you. 
That  retreat  was  made  when  compelled  to  do  so  by  the  overpowering 
numbers  of  the  enemy  in  our  front,  having  but  little  time  to  communi- 
cate the  information  even  to  those  around  me.  I might  as  well  complain 
of  your  not  having  communicated  to  me  your  intention  to  evacuate  New 
Orleans  and  surrender  the  forts  guarding  the  river,  by  which  we  lost 
all  the  cattle  in  Texas  and  Western  Louisiana  intended  for  this  army. 
Moreover,  it  was  to  be  supposed  that  after  the  retreat  from  Corinth  you 
would  have  ample  time  to  make  whatever  arrangements  you  thought 
necessary  to  suit  the  new  order  of  things.! 

With  regard  to  Vicksburg,  as  already  stated  I regard  its  late  as 
sealed.  You  may  defend  it  for  a while  to  hold  the  enemy  at  bay,  but 
it  must  follow  ere  long  the  fate  ot  Fort  Pillow.  The  ordnance  and 
materials  received  from  the  latter  place,  and  not  required  at  Vicksburg 
or  Grenada,  I desire  should  be  sent  to  Meridian,  or,  if  practicable  at  this 
moment,  to  Columbus,  Miss. 


* Some  matters  of  detail  here  omitted. 

t Paragraph  here  omitted  refers  to  Beauregard’s  own  plans,  and  is  printed  in  Senes 
I,  Vol.  XVII,  Part  II,  p.  591,  covering  operations  in  Western  Tennessee,  Northern 
Mississippi,  &c.,  J une  10,  1862-January  20,  1863. 


753 


Chat.  XXYII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

How  is  the  steam -ram  Arkansas  progressing?  Will  it  also  be  just 
one  week  too  late,  like  the  Mississippi  ? I fear  the  Navy  Department 
has  many  sins  of  omission  and  commission  to  answer  for  in  this  war. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Orders,  1 Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office. 

No.  651.  j Opelousas , June  10,  1862. 

I.  Capt.  S.  M.  Todd  will  proceed  with  his  detachment  to  Prescott’s 
Springs,  near  Bayou  Chicot,  in  the  parish  of  Saint  Landry,  and  will 
arrest  a Mr.  Harris,  whose  Christian  name  is  unknown,  but  who  is  said 
to  be  a commission  merchant  from  New  Orleans,  and  will  forward  him 
forthwith,  under  a guard,  to  these  headquarters,  to  answer  the  charge 
of  giving  aid  and  comfort  to  the  enemy. 

II.  Captain  Todd  will,  after  arresting  Mr.  Harris,  proceed  to  Ever- 
green town  and  there  make  diligent  search  and  inquiry  for  a large 
amount  of  specie  said  to  belong  to  the  banks  of  New  Orleans  or  to  resi- 
dents of  New  Orleans,  and  secreted  at  the  house  of  a Mr.  Bassett,  in 
Evergreen,  or  in  some  other  place,  or  in  the  neighborhood,  to  be  shipped 
to  New  Orleans,  and  when  said  specie  is  found  Captain  Todd  will  take 
charge  of  said  specie  and  consult  with  Mr.  Alanson  Pearce,  of  Ever- 
green, as  to  the  best  place  of  security  to  put  said  specie,  or  will  bring 
the  same  to  Opelousas. 

III.  Captain  Todd  will  arrest  Mr.  Bassett  if  the  specie  is  found  on 
his  place  or  under  his  charge  and  care,  or  he  will  ^arrest  the  person  or 
persons  on  whose  place  or  in  whose  custody  and  charge  the  said  specie 
may  be  and  bring  them  to  these  headquarters,  to  answer  the  charge  of 
aiding  and  comforting  the  enemy. 

IV.  Captain  Todd  will  consult  with  Mr.  A.  Pearce  and  obtain  his  aid 
and  assistance  to  effect  the  search  for  this  money,  and  he  will  report  his 
action  in  executing  these  orders  to  these  headquarters. 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander  in-chief : 

M.  GRIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 


President  Davis: 


Executive  Office, 
Opelousas , La .,  June  12,  1862. 


Sir  : The  New  Orleans  Delta,  now  published  under  Federal  auspices, 
of  the  7th instant,  announces  that  William  B.  Mumford  has  been  con- 
demned to  be  hung  for  tearing  down  the  United  States  flag  from  the 
Mint  on  its  first  display  on  that  building,  and  that  the  sentence  was  to 
be  executed  on  that  day,  in  the  streets  of  New  Orleans,  near  the  Mint. 
If  I am  correctly  informed  the  act  was  committed  on  the  first  landing 
of  the  Federal  Navy  officers,  who  hoisted  their  flag,  or  had  it  hoisted 
by  a detachment  of  marines,  a day  or  two  after  their  arrival  before  the 
city,  and  before  its  occupation  by  General  Butler.  I do  not  doubt  the 
sentence  was  executed. 

We  have  four  prisoners  in  this  town  (two  lieutenants  and  two  x>ri- 
vates),  captured  by  Captain  Fuller,  of  the  Militia,  in  his  gallant  expe- 


48  R R — VOL  XV 


754 


W.  FLA.,  S,  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

ditiou  on  the  Opelousas  Bailroad,  in  which  he  succeeded  in  burning  the 
bridges  of  that  road  and  capturing  three  trains,  with  their  locomotives, 
cars,  &c.  One  of  these  lieutenants,  [James  W.]  Connelly  by  name,  has 
been  conspicuous  in  burning  the  property  of  our  citizens  in  Terre  Bonne 
Parish,  and  has  exhibited  a fiendish  alacrity  in  executing  the  atrocious 
orders  of  Butler  and  his  subordinate  officers.  In  retaliating  for  this 
brutal  murder  of  Mum  ford,  which  I take  for  granted  will  be  done,  it 
occurs  to  me  that  no  more  propitiatory  sacrifice  to  his  memory  can  be 
made  than  the  condemnation  of  Connelly  to  the  same  death.  Among  the 
first  orders  to  be  executed  by  the  new  general  whom  you  will  send  to 
us  will,  I hope,  be  this  necessary  severity.  ^ 

I am  awaiting  with  some  anxiety  the  arrival  of  General  Magruder, 
whom  I will  welcome  to  his  new  sphere  with  cordiality.  We  need  the 
presence  of  a Confederate  officer  here  more  than  you  can  well  appreciate. 
The  shock  experienced  by  the  fall  of  New  Orleans  was  deadening.  Our 
people  were  appalled.  As  usual  on  such  occasions  our  people  demanded 
a victim,  and  the  industry  and  energy  displayed  by  General  Lovell  pre- 
vious to  the  fatal  day  were  forgotten  in  the  panic  and  terror  inspired 
by  an  event  as  unexpected  to  the  community  as  it  was  unfortunately 
unprovided  for  by  him. 

Louisiana  west  of  the  Mississippi  Biver  has  resources  and  men,  it 
they  are  not  taken  from  us  by  a too  literal  enforcement  of  the  conscript 
law.  An  organization  of  our  conscripts,  or  a portion  of  them,  into  new 
regiments,  with  officers  appointed  by  you  and  selected  mainly  from  the 
officers-  lately  returned  from  service  who  failed  in  their  re  election 
because  of  their  [non-]performance  of  duty,  will  furnish  a corps  for  our 
protection,  without  interfering  with  the  main  features  ot  the  campaign 
that  the  two  grand  armies  in  Virginia  and  at  Corinth  will  soon  trace  in 
the  battle-fields  soon  to  be  made  memorable. 

The  armv  of  Butler  is  insignificant  in  numbers,  and  that  fact  makes 
our  situation  the  more  humiliating.  He  has  possession  of  New  Orleans 
with  troops  not  equaling  in  number  an  ordinary  city  mob.  He  has 
Baton  Bouge,  and  until  Fuller’s  exploit  used  the  Opelousas  Bailroad 
to  transport  small  parties  to  various  places  in  the  interior,  who  intimi- 
dated our  people  and  perpetrated  the  most  appalling  incendiarisms 
and  brutality.  Our  people  were  demoralized,  and  no  wonder,  when 
our  forts  and  strong  places  had  been  the  scenes  ot  the  disgraceful  con- 
duct of  officers  who  had  charge  of  their  defense,  of  which  I have  given 
you  some  details  in  a previous  letter.  All  these  calamitous  results 
cannot  now  be  avoided,  but  any  further  evil  consequence  can  be  pre- 
vented. I augur  the  most  favorable  results  from  General  Magruder  s 
presence.  Let  us  have.it  as  soon  as  the  public  interests  will  permit. 

Very  truly,  &c„  [tho.  G.  MOORE, 

Governor , efic.j 


Bichmond,  Va.,  June  14,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith,  Vicksburg , Miss. : 

What  progress  is  being  made  toward  the  completion  of  the  Ark  an 
sas?  What  is  the  condition  of  your  defenses  at  Vicksburg?  Can  we 
do  anything  to  aid  you?  Disasters  above  and  below  increase  the  value 
of  your  position.  I hope  and  expect  much  j,AyIg_ 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


755 


Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  GGO.  J Opelousas , June  14,  1862. 

T.  Ralph  Smith,  esq.,  chairman  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety, 
will,  on  the  receipt  pf  this  order,  seize  and  take  in  custody  the  steam- 
boat Moro,  now  at  Alexandria,  and  detain  her  until  further  orders  from 
this  department. 

II.  R.  Smith,  esq.,  will  arrest  Captain  Sweeny,  of  the  Moro,  and  exam- 
ine him  touching  the  transportation  of  specie  from  Alexandria  to  New 
Orleans  said  to  belong  to  one  or  more  of  the  banks  of  New  Orleans,  take 
down  his  declarations  and  the  declarations  of  any  person  or  persons 
having  knowledge  of  the  facts  and  circumstances  attendant  upon  the 
transportation  and  removal  of  the  specie,  and  he  will  forward  to  this 
department  a full  and  complete  report  of  said  examination. 

III.  Captain  Sweeny,  of  the  Moro,  will  be  detained  in  custody  until 
released  by  orders  from  this  department. 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

M.  GRIYOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana . 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  663.  J Opelousas , June  14,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  R.  C.  Martin,  commanding  Fifth  Brigade,  Louisiana 
Militia,  will  proceed,  on  receipt  of  this  order,  to  put  into  active  service 
the  militia  of  parishes  within  the  limits  of  his  command,  and  organize 
them  into  companies,  battalions,  and  regiments,  as  the  case  may  be  or 
require,  and  will  take  every  necessary  measure  for  the  protection  and 
defense  of  that  portion  of  the  State  and  make  every  effort  to  drive  the 
enemy  from  the  soil. 

II.  Brigadier-General  Martin  will  cause  the  bridges  on  the  Opelousas 
Railroad  to  be  burned  and  destroyed.  He  will  cause  the  rails  to  be  torn 
up,  so  as  to  prevent  the  ingress  of  the  enemy  into  the  interior.  He  will 
place  such  force  as  he  may  deem  necessary  at  La  Fourche  Crossing  and 
at  other  points^  to  defend  the  same  from  the  approaches  of  the  enemy. 

III.  Brigadier- General  Martin  will  cause  the  arrest  of  each  and  every 
individual  who  gives  aid  and  assistance  and  comfort  to  the  enemy  or 
against  whom  good  grounds  of  suspicion  exists.  He  will  forbid  travel 
to  New  Orleans  by  any  route,  except  under  special  permits  from  these 
headquarters.  He  will  compel  obedience  to  his  orders,  and  sbpuld  any 
person  refuse,  decline,  or  neglect  to  obey  any  orders  he  will  cause  their 
arrest  and  imprisonment.  Should  the  offender  be  a commissioned  offi- 
cer, he  will  not  only  imprison  him,  but  destitute  him  of  his  commis- 
sion, appoint  another  in  his  place,  and  report  the  same  to  these  head 
quarters  for  a commission. 

IY.  Brigadier-General  Martin,  in  the  execution  of  his  orders,  will 
disregard  all  passes  or  paroles  taken  or  given  by  persons  who  have 
gone  to  the  city  of  New  Orleans  and  have  returned,  and  have  in  their 
possession  any  passport  or  parole  pledged  by  them  to  the  United  States 
authorities  which  forbids  them  to  give  aid  and  comfort  or  give  informa- 
tion to  the  Confederate  -States,  and  should  any  person  having  in  his 
possession  such  passport  or  parole  refuse  to  obey  his  orders,  he  will 
cause  his  arrest  and  forward  him  forthwith  under  guard  to  these  head- 
quarters, to  be  dealt  with  as  a traitor  to  the  Confederacy  and  to  the 
State  government.  This  is  not  to  include  paroles  taken  by  prisoners 
of  war. 


756  W.  FLA  , S.  ALA  , S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

Y.  Brigadier- General  Martin  will  not  delay  in  making  all  the  neces- 
sary arrangements  and  defenses,  and  report  from  time  to  time  his  ac- 

YI.  Maj.  Gen.  John  L.  Lewis,  commanding  State  Militia,  will  attend 

to  the  strict  execution  of  these  orders.  . . „ 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief : 

M.  GK1VU1, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Louisiana. 


Orders,  ) 
No.  665.  S 


Hdors.  Louisiana  Militia, 


Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 
Opelousas , June  14,  1862. 


I.  The  militia  of  the  parishes  of  Terre  Bonne,  Saint  Mary’s,  and  Saint 
Martin,  of  the  Sixth  Brigade,  Louisiana  Militia,  are  called  into  actual 

service.  * , , 

II.  Maj.  Gen.  John  L.  Lewis,  commanding  Louisiana  Militia,  wifi 

issue  orders  to  the  colonels  of  said  regiments  direct. 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  coimnandeiMn-chiet . 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Headquarters, 

Hear  Richmond , Ya.,  June  16,  1862. 

Mai.  Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell, 

Commanding  Department  No.  1,  Jackson , Miss. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  June  7 has  been  received, t and  in  reply 
General  Lee  directs  me  to  say  that  he  regrets  to  learn  the  smallness  of 
the  means  vou  have  at  your  command  to  defend  so  extensive  and  im- 
portant a district  of  country.  He  deems  your  department  of  too  much 
importance  to  be  thought  of  being  abandoned  and  has  every  confidence 
in  vour  ability  to  hold  it,  even  with  the  small  fdrce  you  have  at  jour 
command.  He  expects  great  results  from  your  small  means.  The  gen- 
eral desires  that  you  will  make  every  exertion  to  raise  all  the  force  you 
can  in  the  country  about  you,  and  he  will  endeavor  to  send  you  a^ 
arms  that  can  be  spared  with  as  little  delay  as  possible.  He  hopes  to 
be  able  to  have  you  furnished  with  arms  as  fast  as  you  can  raise  the 
men  One  thousand  stand  of  small-arms  have  already  been^rdered  to 
vou  which  you  may  possibly  have  received  by  this  time.  He  regTeis 
his  inability  to  send  you  re-enforcements.  He  knows  of  no  troops  that 
can  be  spared  at  any  point,  unless  General  Beauregard  can  send  you 
some  from  his  command.  Of  this  he  can  give  you  no  assurance.  A1 
though  vou  are  now  surrounded  by  many  difficulties,  the  general  hopes 
that  with  your  known  activity  and  energy  you  will  soon  be  able  to  sur- 

mount  them.  _ . 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ 

Colonel  and  Military  Secretary. 


~ . By  Orders,  No.  666,  of  same  dateTthese  parishes  were  temporarily  transferred  to 
the  Ninth  Brigade,  thi  colonels  being  ordered  to  report  to  Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Pratt. 
tNot  found. 


757 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

G74.  J Opelousas , June  1G,  1862. 

I.  The  Governor  and  commander-in-chief  being  informed  that  the 
steamer  Quarrier,  Capt.  Armand  Brossat,  has  been  announced  in  New 
Orleans  to  leave  that  port  for  the  port  of  Alexandria,  requiring  all 
passengers  to  obtain  their  passports  and  all  shippers  of  freight  their 
permits  from  the  military  authorities  of  the  United  States,  properly 
authenticated ; and  being  satisfied  that  this  course  is  in  violation  of  ail 
the  rules  of  law  relative  to  nations  at  war  with  each  other,  Ralph  Smith, 
esq.,  chairman  of  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  will,  upon  receipt  of  this 
order,  seize  and  take  charge  of  the  steamboat  Quarrier  and  detain  her 
in  custody  until  further  orders  from  this  department. 

II.  Ralph  Smith, esq.,  chairman,  will,  upon  receipt  of  this  order,  arrest 
Armand  Brossat,  captain  of  the  steamboat  Quarrier,  and  detain  him 
in  custody  until  a thorough  examination  has  been  made  by  him  of  the 
facts  and  circumstances  attendant  upon  the  course  of  conduct  of  said 
Brossat  in  publishing  such  an  advertisement  and  in  taking  freight  and 
passengers  from  the  city  of  New  Orleans  for  Alexandria  or  any  other 
ports  between  New  Orleans  and  Alexandria;  what  and  who  were  the 
passengers,  the  nature  of  their  business,  and  whether  they  were  loyal 
to  the  Confederate  States  or  not;  and,  further,  to  ascertain  under  and 
by  what  authority  the  said  captain  runs  the  steamer  Quarrier — by  what 
permits  and  papers  and  from  whom  obtained. 

III.  To  ascertain  these  facts  Ralph  Smith,  esq.,  is  authorized  to  com- 
pel the  attendance  of  witnesses.  After  a full  examination  he  will  make 
a full  report  and  forward  the  same  to  these  headquarters. 

IV.  Ralph  Smith,  esq.,  has  full  authority  and  power  to  examine  all 
strangers  arriving  in  the  town  of  Alexandria,  and  to  require  from  them 
an  account  of  their  business,  profession,  or  trade,  from  whence  they 
come  and  where  going,  and  to  satisfy  himself  of  their  loyalty  to  the 
Confederate  Government;  to  arrest  all  suspicious  persons  who  should 
fail  to  give  a good  account  of  themselves.  He  is  fully  authorized  not 
to  permit  strangers  to  pass  through  or  to  leave  the  town  of  Alexandria 
unless  first  obtaining  a passport;  but  to  give  no  passports  to  New 
Orleans  except  by  special  permission  of  the  Governor. 

V.  Passports  produced  by  passengers  or  others  from  Major-Genera? 
Butler  to  be  totally  disregarded. 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief : 

M.  GRIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana . 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

G7G.  j Opelousas , June  17,  1862. 

1.  Capt.  E.  W.  Fuller  will,  with  his  steamboat  and  command,  remain 
on  the  Atehafalaya,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  mouth  of  Red  River,  so  as 
to  keep  the  inside  of  the  river  free  from  the  enemy,  and  to  aid.  assist, 
and  facilitate  Majors  McKee  and  Howard,  C.  S.  Army,  in  transporting 
across  the  river  Mississippi  cattle  for  the  use  of  the  Confederate  Army 
He  will  use  every  means  to  prevent  the  enemy,  either  by  laud  or  water, 
to  come  in  or  about  the  mouth  of  Red  River. 

* * * * # # * 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief : 

M.  GRIVOT. 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana . 


758 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Richmond,  June  19, 1862. 

General  M.  L.  Smith,  Vicksburg,  Miss. : 

Your  dispatch  received.  * A blunder  frustrated  my  efforts  to  furnish 
you  with  long-range  rifles.  One  thousand,  intended  tor  your  opera- 
tions were  ordered  to  Governor  Pettus,  but  were  sent  to  Corinth. 
Since  that  became  known  1,000  muskets  have  been  sent,  and  to-morrow 
1,800  more  will  go,  also  about  100  long-range  rifles,  being  all  that  re- 

“ Complaint  is  made  to  me  that  your  agents  are  ordered  to  burn  cotton 
which  is  not  likely,  in  their  judgment,  to  fall  mto  the  bands  of  the 
enemy.  It  is  not  always  possible  to  decide;  but  if  the  probability  be 
in  favor  of  safety,  it  is  a public  duty  to  protect,  and  clearly  not  for  the 
public  interest  to  destroy.  A change  of  circumstances  require 

change  of  action.  For  information  I refer  to  ^Johnson.^ 


Jackson,  Miss.,  June  20, 1862. 

General  George  W.  Randolph: 

Lar<>'e  mortar  fleet  and  steamers  bound  up  the  river  for  Vicksburg. 
If  it  is  intended  to  hold  the  river  re-enforcements  should  be  sent 

there.  M NOVELL. 


Special  Orders, 
No.  88. 


Headquarters  Western  Department, 
Tupelo , Miss.,  June  20,  1862. 


III.  Major-General  Van  Dorn,  commanding  Department  of  Southern 

Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana,  is  authorized  at  Ins  discretion  to  older 
for  service  within  the  limits  of  his  department  the  troops  ot  this  depart- 
ment on  or  near  the  line  of  the  Mississippi  Central  Railroad. 

IV  Bidg.  Gen.  W.  N.  B.  Beall  is  hereby  relieved  from  duty  in  the 
Array  of  the.  West,  and  will  report  to  Major-General  Van  Dorn,  at  Jack- 
son.  Miss. 


By  command  of  General  Bragg 


[GEORGE  WM.  BRENT,] 

Acting  Chief  of  Staff. 


General  Orders,  \ 
No.  47.  ) 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  West, 

Priceville , June  20,  1862. 

Having  been  ordered  by  the  President  to  assume  command  of  the 
Department  of  Southern  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana,  the  undei- 
signed  relinquishes  command  temporarily 

Maior- General. 


Not  found. 


Dhap.  XXYn.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


759 


Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

JSTo.  681.  ] Opelousas , June  20,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  C.  N.  Bowley,  commanding  Sixth  Brigade,  Louisiana 
Militia,  will  proceed  forthwith,  on  receipt  of  this  order,  to  put  into  active 
service  the  militia  of  the  parishes  within  the  limits  of  his  command  (the 
parishes  of  Terre  Bonne,  Saint  Martin’s,  and  Saint  Mary’s  excepted,  they 
being  temporarily  attached  to  the  Ninth  Brigade,  Louisana  Militia),  and 
organize  them  into  companies,  battalions,  or  regiments,  as  the  case  may 
be  or  require,  and  will  adopt  every  necessary  measure  for  the  defense  of 
that  portion  of  the  State  and  make  every  effort  to  drive  the  enemy  from 
the  soil. 

II.  Brig.  Gen.  Bowley  will  place  such  force  as  he  may  deem  necessary 
at  exposed  points  to  defend  them  from  the  approach  of  the  enemy  and 
to  harass  them  wherever  they  may  be. 

III.  Brigadier-General  Bowley  will  cause  the  arrest  of  each  and  every 
individual  who  gives  aid  and  assistance  and  comfort  to  the  enemy  or 
against  whom  good  grounds  of  suspicion  exist.  He  will  forbid  travel  to 
New  Orleans  by  any  route,  except  under  special  permits  from  headquar- 
ters. He  will  compel  obedience  to  his  orders,  and  should  any  person  re- 
fuse or  neglect  to  obey  any  order,  he  will  cause  their  arrest  and  imprison- 
ment. Should  the  offender  be  a commissioned  officer,  he  will  not  only 
imprison  him,  but  destitute  him  of  his  commission,  appoint  another  in 
his  place,  and  report  the  same  to  these  headquarters  tor  a commission. 

IV.  Brigadier-General  Bowley,  in  the  execution  of  his  orders,  will  disre- 
gard all  passes  or  paroles  taken  or  given  by  persons  who  have  gone  to 
the  city  of  New  Orleans  and  have  returned,  and  have  in  their  possession 
any  passports  or  paroles  pledged  by  them  to  the  United  States  author- 
ities which  forbids  them  to  give  aid  and  comfort  or  give  information  to 
the  Confederate  States,  and  should  any  person  having  in  his  possession 
such  passport  or  parole  refuse  to  obey  his  orders  he  will  cause  his  arrest 
and  forward  him  forthwith  under  guard  to  these  headquarters,  to  be 
dealt  with  as  a traitor  to  the  Confederacy  and  to  the  State  of  Louisiana. 
This  does  not  apply  to  paroles  taken  by  prisoners  of  war. 

V.  Brigadier-General  Bowley  will  not  delay  in  making  all  the  necessary 
arrangements  and  defenses,  and  report  from  time  to  time  his  action. 

VI.  Maj.  Gen.  John  L.  Lewis,  commanding  Louisiana  Militia,  will 
attend  to  the  strict  execution  of  these  orders. 

By  order  of  Thomas  O..Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

M.  GBIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General, 


Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  682.  | Opelousas , June  20,  1862. 

I.  When  nations  are  at  war  with  each  other  trading  is  prohibited. 
Guided  by  this  universally  admitted  rule,  the  Governor  and  commander- 
in-chief  has  determined  to  prevent  any  traffic  or  trade  with  the  enemy 
or  with  any  one  for  the  enemy.  Therefore  no  one  will  be  permitted  to 
convey  to  New  Orleans,  or  to  any  towns  or  points  in  this  State  or  out 
of  it  occupied  by  the  enemy’s  forces,  any  goods,  wares,  or  the  products 
of  this  State.  Any  and  all  persons  thus  offending,  or  aiding  and  abetting, 
will  be  considered  enemies  to  the  cause,  and  will  be  arrested  and  dealt 
with  accordingly. 

II.  Traveling  to  and  from  New  Orleans  or  any  towns  or  places  oc* 


760 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


cupied  by  the  enemy  is  prohibited,  and  all  persons  who  go  to  New  Or- 
leans, or  other  plaees  in  the  possession  of  the  enemy  and  returning  i 
with  the  enemy’s  usual  passport,  will  be  arrested  and  held  in  custody. 

III.  Conscripts  aud  militia  men  having  in  possession  such  passports, 
and  seeking  to  shun  duty  under  pretext  of  a parole,  shall  be  treated  as 
enemies  to  the  Confederate  States.  No  such  passes  will  be  held  an 
excuse. 

IV.  Military  and  civil  officers  and  citizens  will  use  the  utmost  dili-  j 
gence  in  the  detection  of  spies  and  salaried  officers,  and  effect  their 
prompt  apprehension. 

V.  All  persons  opposed  to  the  cause  of  the  Confederate  States  must  i 
be  arrested. 

VI.  Confederate  notes  shall  be  received  and  used  as  the  currency  of 
the  country.  Any  one  refusing  to  receive  the  same  will  be  considered  an 
enemy  to  the  cause  and  dealt  with  accordingly. 

VI I.  River  steamboats  must  in  no  case  be  permitted  to  be  captured. 
Burn  them  when  they  cannot  be  saved. 

VIII.  Provisions  may  be  conveyed  to  New  Orleans  in  charge  of  offi- 
cers, and  only  under  certain  rules  governing  communication  between, 
belligerents,  by  permission  of  the  Governor  and  commander-in-chief. 

IX.  The  military  and  civil  authorities  of  this  State  will  execute  this 
order  strictly,  and  in  accordance  with  the  views  laid  down  in  the  an- 
nexed proclamation  of  the  Governor,  dated  Opelousas,  June  18,  1862.* 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

M.  GRIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  21,  1862. 
General  Mansfield  Lovell,  Jackson.  Miss.  : 

The  arms  sent  to  Jackson  were  by  direction  of  the  President  placed 
at  the  disposal  of  Governor  Pettus.  It  is  hoped  that  there  will  be  no 
difference  about  the  disposition  proper  to  be  made  of  them. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp?  General’s  Office, 

No.  143.  ) Richmond,  Va.,  June  21,  1862. 

* * * * * * * 

IV.  Brig.  Gen.  Albert  G.  Blanchard  is  assigned  to  the  command  of 
the  camps  of  instruction  in  Louisiana  west  of*  the  Mississippi  River,  and 
will  establish  his  headquarters  at  Monroe  until  otherwise  directed. 
*****  * * 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- Genera l. 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  683.  ] Opelousas,  June  21,  1862. 

The  Governor  and  commander-in  chief  has  information  that  the  enemy 
is  now  organizing  an  expedition  in  New  Orleans  destined  for  some  part 

*See  Inclosure  No.  1 to  But  ler  to  Stanton,  pp.  504-510. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


761 


of  this  State,  and  that  it  is  in  need  of  steamboats  to  carry  out  its  ob- 
ject, and  that  all  steamboats  going  to  New  Orleans  will  be  seized  and 
taken  possession  of  by  the  United  States  military  authorities. 

Ralph  Smith,  esq.,  will  immediately,  on  receipt  of  this  order,  forbid 
and  prevent  the  departure  of  any  steamboat  for  any  purpose  whatever 
for  the  port  of  New  Orleans  or  any  point  in  the  possession  of  the  enemy, 
unless  with  special  permit  of  the  Governor  and  commander-in-chief. 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  com  man  der-in -chief: 

M.  GRIYOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana . 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  684.  f Opelousas , June  21,  1862. 

I.  From  information  received  by  the  Governor  and  commander-in- 
chief cotton  has  been  shipped  to  the  port  of  New  Orleans,  and  an  at- 
tempt has  been  made  to  ship  more;  also  that  attempts  will  be  made  to 
supply  the  enemy  with  cotton. 

He  is  further  informed  that  on  the  Bayou  des  Glaise,  in  the  parish  of 
Avoyelles,  on  the  Black,  Washita,  Trinity,  and  Tensas  Rivers,  and  other 
tributaries,  large  quantities  of  cotton  are  placed  on  the  banks  of  said 
riversand  within  the  reach  of  the  enemy. 

The  several  colonels  of  the  parishes  of  Washita,  Catahoula,  Caldwell, 
Tensas,  and  Avoyelles  will,  on  receipt  of  this  order,  set  fire  or  cause  the 
cotton  now  upon  the  banks  of  the  said  rivers  and  within  the  reach  of 
the  enemy  to  be  burned.  This  must  be  done  immediately,  as  the  enemy 
is  now  preparing  an  expedition  destined  for  some  point  within  this 
State,  and  it  is  not  known  how  soon. 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

M.  GRIYOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana. 

N.  B. — Although  this  order  is  imperative  to  burn,  a sound  discretion 
will  be  allowed,  but  the  enemy  must  in  no  instance  be  permitted  to  get 
the  cotton.  Owners  can  remove  their  cotton  if  done  at  once. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  June  22,  1862. 

General  Ruggles: 

By  authority  from  General  Bragg  I have  ordered  6,000  men  from 
your  command  and  the  corps  of  General  Breckinridge  to  the  defense 
of  Yicksburg.  Have  them  in  readiness  to  take  the  cars  with  ten  days’ 
rations. 

EARL  YAN  DORN, 

Major- General. 


Grenada,  Miss.,  June  22,  1862—0  p.  m. 
General  Bragg,  Tupelo , Miss. : 

General  Yan  Dorn  orders  Breckinridge’s  corps  and  6,000  men  from 
my  command  forward  to  Yicksburg.  General  Yillepigne  telegraphs 
that  his  command  is  independent.  H<*  has  all  my  armed  troops,  and 
| calls  on  me  to  defend  the  Memphis  and  Tennessee  Railroad  route.  He 


762  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  M.  MEX.  IChap.  XXVH, 

says  Holly  Springs  is  reoccupied  by  the  enemy  and  that  General  Sher-  1 
man  has  25,000  men  at  Grand  Junction. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 
Brigadier -General , G.  S.  Army. 


Tupelo,  Miss.,  June  22,  1862. 

General  Ruggles  : 

General  Van  Dorn,  who  relieves  General  Lovell,  is  authorized  to  call 
for  assistance  from  the  force  sent  to  Oxford  to  defend  Vicksburg  or  j 
Canton.  You  will  clear  out  the  depots  at  Grenada  as  soon  as  possible. 

BRAXTON  BRAGG. 


Grenada,  Miss.,  June  22, 1862. 

Brigadier-General  Van  Dorn, 

Jackson , Miss.  : j 

Dispatch  received;  General  Breckinridge’s  corps  not  heard  from; 
cannot  hear  of  it ; transportation  and  rations  ordered.  My  armed  force,  \ 
2,000  men,  under  General  Villepigue,  at  Tallahatchie  Bridge;  one  uu-  I 
armed  and  one  half-armed  regiments,  by  orders  from  General  Bragg,  f 
The  enemy  advancing  on  Panola,  and  I am  trying  to  send  a force  to  ! 
meet  and  impede  him. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South.  Miss,  and  East  La., 

Jackson , Miss.,  June  22,  1862. 

Senior  Officer 

In  Command  of  Troops  in  vicinity  of  Grenada , Miss.  : 

Sir:  Just  before  leaving  Tupelo  I was  authorized  to  order  any  por- 
tion of  your  command,  including  the  corps  of  General  Breckinridge,  to 
the  department  for  temporary  service  should  circumstances  render  it 
necessary.  A powerful  fleet  with  transports  and  about  10,000  men  are 
now  under  sail  for  Vicksburg.  You  will  therefore  please  order  down 
without  delay  6,000  men,  under  a suitable  officer,  to  report  to  me  at 
Vicksburg.  Send  with  them  ten  days’  rations.  It  is  presumed  that 
the  enemy  will  reach  Vicksburg  on  Tuesday  next.  You  will  therefore 
take  measures  to  have  the  command  you  order  reach  me  at  Vicksburg 
at  the  earliest  possible  moment. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major-General . 


Yazoo  Riyer,  Yazoo  City,  Miss., 

June  22,  1862— a.  m. 

Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles,  C.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Special  Department , Grenada , Miss. : 

Sir:  I received  last  night  your  letter  of  the  20th,  with  copy  of  Gen- 
eral Thompson’s  report.  If  the  expedition  of  General  Wallace  ascends 
the  Yazoo  within  Che  next  few  days  I fear  that  the  Arkansas  may  not 


[ap.  XXYI1.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


763 


3 -reach7  for  a vigorous  opposition  to  it.  Our  armament  is  not  quite 
nnplete  and  we  cannot  get  a crew.  I sent  to  Grenada  some  days  ago 
> engage  men  from  the  Montgomery  fleet,  and  from  the  answer  given 
) the  officer  charged  with  the  duty  I was  led  by  Commodore  Mont- 
omery  to  believe  that  I could  obtain  men  from  his  late  command,  and 
further  supposed  that  they  came  here  from  Grenada  with  the  purpose 
f joining  the  Arkansas.  These  people  were  paid  off  and  discharged 
esterday  by  Montgomery,  and  I do  not  believe  1 will  get  one  of  them, 
lough  I have  tried  every  way  to  induce  them  to  join  the  Arkansas, 
hev  talk  among  themseives  of  going  to  New  Orleans.  Many  will,  I 
link,  attempt  to  reach  Memphis.  I think  that,  with  tew  exceptions, 
ley  intend  to  join  the  enemy.  I hope  that  you  will  cause  them  to  be 
rred  for  while  making  the  attempt.  I can  obtain  two-thirds  of  a crew 
•om  the  Confederate  States  vessels  now  in  the  Yazoo,  and  having  failed 
ith  Montgomery’s  men,  I will  apply  to  General  M.  L.  Smith,  at  Yicks- 
urg  who  can  give  me  40  or  50  more,  Efforts  to  ship  men  at  Mobile 
nd  Jackson  failed.  I can  do  nothing  just  now  to  aid  in  saving  boats 
long  the  Mississippi  Biver,  from  which,  by  the  Yazoo,  I am  90  miles 
istant.  My  attention  is  entirely  required  in  getting  the  Arkansas 
3ady.  Our  defenses  at  the  raft  on  Yazoo  Biver  will  prove  weak 
gainst  a land  force— two  42s  and  a few  militia.  The  gunboats  below 
lay  serve  as  fire-ships.  Three  guns  have  been  taken  for  the  Arkansas, 
he  ram  Yan  Dorn  has  been  ordered  to  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo  to  re- 
ort  the  enemy’s  proceedings.  No  intelligence  yet  of  the  enemy’s  ap- 
roach  from  above.  I congratulate  you  upon  the  prospect  of  a prompt 
ampaign.  I will  do  what  I can  to  injure  the  enemy. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

’ J ISAAC  N.  BROWN, 

Lieutenant , G.  S.  Navy * 


Grenada,  Miss.,  June  23, 1862. 
General  Yillepkhje,  Abbeville , Miss. : 

Copy  of  telegram  just  received: 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  23,  1862. 

General  Ruggles  : 

It  is  [of  the]  utmost  importance  those  troops  should  get  here  without  delay.  Dis- 
atch  for  them.  Fleet  here  now— twenty-seven  boats.  Answer. 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major-General. 


Dis- 


I have  orders  from  General  Bragg  to  send  all  troops  called  for  by 
leneral  Yan  Dorn  immediately.  Leave  Colonel  Jackson’s  cavalry, 
mless  you  have  been  instructed  by  higher  authority  to  take  it. 
>atches  sent  by  staff  officer.  Answer. 

DANIEL  BUGGLES, 

Brigadier- General. 


Grenada,  Miss.,  June  23, 1862 — 10  a.  m. 
Major-General  Yan  Dorn,  Vicksburg,  Miss.  ; 

The  troops  will  be  forwarded  as  fast  as  is  possible ; 4,000  to-night. 

DANIEL  BUGGLES, 

Brigadier - General . 


764 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  TEX.,  LA.,  N.  MEX.  [Chaf.  XXVn. 

Brookville,  Miss.,  June  23,  1862.-  I 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  S.  Army , Richmond , Va. : 

General:  When  I was  relieved  from  the  command  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  Alabama  and  West  Florida  and  ordered  by  General  Lee  to! 
report  to  General  Beauregard  at  Corinth  I supposed  it  was  becausei 
General  Beauregard  had  asked  it,  and  that  it  was  thought  at  the  Warj 
Department  that  the  services  of  an  additional  major-general  were  more 
needed  at  that  time  with  the  army  at  Corinth  than  to  command  the  De- 
partment of  Alabama  and  West  Florida.  It  lias  occurred  to  me,  how- 
ever, that  in  that  supposition  I may  have  been,  and  probably  was,  in 
error,  and  that  I was  relieved  from  the  command  of  the  department  be-i 
cause  of  some  complaints  made  against  me  for  the  manner  in  which  I 
had  administered  the  department  intrusted  to  my  command. 

I am  induced  to  think  that  this  may  have  been  the  case  from  the  fact 
that  on  the  11th  of  April  last  Commander  Farrand,  Confederate  States 
Navy,  reported  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  that  I had  ordered  two  unJ 
finished  gunboats  to  be  burned  in  Pensacola  Bay  on  the  11th  March,1 
and  that  he  could  not  discover  the  necessity  for  their  destruction, 
and  on  the  12th  of  April  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  communicated  this 
report  to  the  President,  with  the  remark  that,  so  far  as  he  was  advised, 
the  destruction  of  those  vessels  was  uncalled-for,  and  asked  that  I be 
called  on  to  report  why  it  was  done. 

My  duties  at  the  time  were  somewhat  delicate  and  responsible  and  the 
performance  of  them  calculated  to  give  offense  to  many  persons.  Among 
other  things  I had  to  destroy  much  valuable  private  property  near  Pen- 
sacola. 

I have  thought  it  not  improbable  that  besides  the  complaint  made  by 
Commander  Farrand  and  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  other  complaints 
may  have  been  made  against  me  on  account  of  the  destruction  of  prop- 
erty and  other  acts  I found  it  necessary  to  do. 

However  that  may  be,  a few  days  after  the  date  of  the  letter  from  the 
Secretary  of  the  Navy  to  the  President  in  regard  to  the  burning  of  the 
unfinished  gunboats  General  Lee  relieved  me  from  the  command  of 
the  Department  of  Alabama  and  West  Florida,  ordered  me  to  turn  it 
over  to  my  junior,  and  to  report  to  General  Beauregard  at  Corinth, 
where  1 was  assigned  to  the  command  of  a division,  smaller  in  the  num- 
ber present  for  duty  than  the  brigade  I had  commanded  for  several 
mouths  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  by  no  means  as  well  disci-j 
pliued  and  instructed  as  that  brigade. 

I have  heretofore  said  nothing  on  the  subject,  because  the  command 
to  which  I was  assigned  was  in  front  of  the  enemy  at  an  important  point, 
where  a general  battle  was  daily  expected.  Now,  however,  that  there 
is  no  immediate  prospect  of  a general  engagement  with  this  army,  I 
think  it  proper  to  bring  the  matter  to  the  notice  of  the  W ar  Department, 
and  ask  if  my  removal  from  the  command  of  the  Department  of  Alabama 
and  West  Florida  was  in  any  degree  caused  by  any  reports  or  complaints 
made  against  me  by  any  one,  or  if  any  such  complaints  or  reports  other 
than  that  made  by  Commander  Farrand  and  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy 
have  been  made  against  me.  I am  convinced  that  if  any  such  reports 
or  complaints  have  been  made  I can  easily  show  that  they  were  without 
foundation,  and  I desire  an  opportunity  to  do  so. 

May  I ask  that  you  will  favor  me  with  an  answer  as  soon  as  you  can 
conveniently  do  so? 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAM.  JONES, 

Major- General. 


iap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


765 


[Indorsement.] 


July  3,  1862. 

Respectfully  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

I am  not  aware  that  Maj.  Gen.  S.  Jones  was  transferred  to  General 
eauregard’s  army  on  account  of  any  complaints  to  his  prejudice,  but 
a the  contrary  I had  supposed  the  assignment  was  made  on  the  urgent 
pplication  of  both  General  Beauregard  and  General  Bragg. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Grenada,  June  23,  1862. 

eneral  Bragg,  Tupelo , Miss. : 

I shall  proceed  in  command  of  the  troops  to  Vicksburg  and  report 
) Major-General  Van  Dorn.  Col.  B.  Desha  Harmon  is  assigned  to  the 
am  man  d of  this  post. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 
Brigadier • General , Commanding . 


Grenada,  June  24,  1862. 
tajor-General  Van  Dorn,  Jackson , Miss.: 

Hope  to  send  General  Thompson’s  men  to  the  ram  Arkansas. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Grenada,  June  24,  1862. 

[ajor-General  Van  Dorn,  Jackson , Miss. : 

General  Bragg  orders  me  to  report  to  you. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding  Special  Department. 


Confederate  States  Gunboat  Arkansas, 

June  25,  1862. 

trig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles, 

Commanding  Special  Department , Grenada , Miss.  : 

Sir  : I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letters  of  yesterday, 
ith  the  copy  of  General  Van  Dorn’s  dispatches.*  I regret  to  find  that 
y implication  it  is  thought  I would  prefer  burning  the  Arkansas  in 
azoo  River  to  hurling  the  vessel  against  the  enemy.  I have  never 
squired  prompting  in  any  duties  that  I have  been  called  on  to  per- 
irm,  and  those  who  ha  ve  been  impatient  spectators  of  my  conduct  here 
ill  not  accuse  me  of  having  been  idle.  That  I am  not  yet  ready  is 
ecause  I could  not  perform  impossibilities.  The  Montgomery  fleet 
id  not  give  me  one  man.  They  went  from  here  paid  off  and  with 
onorable  discharges,  though  three  months  of  their  enlisted  time  had 


Not  found. 


766  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Cuap.  XXVIl.j 

yet  to  run.  This,  too,  when  Montgomery  knew  the  Arkansas,  armed 
and  with  provisions  and  ammunition,  was  waiting  for  men.  I hope 
you  will  catch  the  fellows  and  apply  the  conscript  law  to  them,  officers 
and  all.  Twenty-five  men  came  to-day  from  Vicksburg,  and  I shall  uowj 
soon  have  a crew.  I trust  we  shall  use  our  vessel  creditably,  and  il 
the  Army  will  attack  against  the  same  odds  as  that  which  awaits  me 
the  war  will  soon  be  over.  I thank  you  for  the  kind  assistance  offeree! 
and  rendered.  The  work  I have  had  to  do  would  have  been  left  undei 
ordinary  circumstances.  The  difficulties  are  only  known  to  those  enj 
gaged  in  it. 

I remain,  general,  with  respect,  very  truly,  yours, 

ISAAC  N.  BROWN, 
Lieutenant , G.  S.  Navy. 


Grenada,  June  25,  [1862]. 

General  Villepiglte,  Abbeville , Miss.  : 

You  will  suspend  the  movement  of  troops  from  your  brigade  to  Vicks 
burg  temporarily.  Execute  General  Bragg’s  orders. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier- General. 


Brookhaven,  Miss.,  June  25,  1862.  j 

Hon.  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

My  guns  have  been  seized  again  by  General  Van  Dorn.  Am  I nevel 
to  get  even  my  own  property  ? I hope  you  will  order  your  officers  tc 
return  at  once  the  material  of  war  they  have  taken  that  this  State  ha: 
paid  for  for  its  own  defense.  The  Confederacy  has  never  sent  me  J 
musket.  Let  it  not  take  what  I have  paid  for.  I have  not  one  in  thi? 
State.  General  Lovell  abandoned  Louisiana  and  took  all  I had.  It  is 
hard  to  bear  invasion  and  the  articles  of  Butler  and  at  the  same  tiimi 
receiving  no  aid,  but  to  have  taken  from  me  what  I had  provided  with' 
out  help.  I demand  the  return  of  2,720  rifles  and  ammunition  seizec 
by  General  Van  Dorn. 

Answer  care  of  Col.  Thomas  E.  Adams,  Brookhaven,  Miss. 

THO.  O.  MOORE, 
Governor  of  Louisiana. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  146.  ) Richmond , Fa.,  June  25,  1862.  j 

* # # # # * ' * 

XVI.  Paragraphs  II  and  III,  General  Orders,  No.  39,  current  series, 1 
are  so  modified  that  Department  No.  2 shall  now  embrace  that  portion 
of  its  former  limits  which  is  east  of  the  Mississippi  River,  and  in  addition 
thereto  shall  comprise  Department  No.  1,  and  have  its  eastern  bound 
ary  extended  to  the  line  of  railroad  from  Chattanooga  via  Atlanta  t< 
West  Point,  on  the  Chattahoochee  River,  and  thence  down  the  Chattai 
hoochee  and  Apalachicola  Rivers  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico. 

* * # # # # # 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Of  May  26,  see  p.  746. 


Jhap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


767 


Grders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  G90.  j Opelousas , June  25,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  R.  C.  Martin,  commanding  Fifth  Brigade,  Louisiana 
Militia,  will,  on  receipt  of  this  order,  put  into  active  service  the  militia 
)f  the  parish  of  La  Fourche  under  Col.  L.  C.  Aubert,  and  in  his  absence 
Lieut.  Col.  W.  D.  Burton. 

* *****  * 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

M.  GBIYOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Richmond,  June  26, 1862. 
General  Earl  Yan  Dorn,  Vicksburg , Miss. : 

Your  telegrams  of  22d  and  23d  received.  Had  previously  sent  to 
four  commaud  the  small-arms  disposable  here.  The  commander  of  the 
Arkansas  has  been  ordered  to  report  to  you.  Much  will  depend  upon 
pour  artillery.  The  foundery  can,  I suppose,  supply  you  with  the  im- 
proved form  of  shot  and  shell.  I will  endeavor  to  send  some  more  long- 
range  rifles  for  sharpshooters.  The  people  will  sustain  you  in  your 
leroic  determination,  and  may  God  bless  us  with  success. 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


Richmond,  Ju?ie  26, *1862. 
Grov.  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Opelousas , La. : 

Dear  Sir  : Your  letter  of  the  2d  instant  has  been  received  and  the 
points  presented  for  my  attention  carefully  considered. 

Some  delay  has  unavoidably  occurred  in  the  assignment  of  an  officer 
:o  the  command  of  the  Trans-Mississippi  Department,  but  the  general 
vho  has  been  heretofore  named  to  you  in  this  connection  is  soon  to 
issurne  the  charge,  and  his  presence  will,  I trust,  fulfill  the  more  impor- 
tant of  the  requirements  to  which  you  allude.  He  will  have  authority 
to  act  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  law  in  organizing  bodies 
)f  Partisan  Rangers.  Those  which  have  been  already  brought  into  serv-  . 
ce  by  yourself  m consequence  of  the  pressing  emergency  can  be  regu- 
arly  embodied  in  the  Confederate  service. 

In  all  parts  of  the  country  there  is  at  present  a scarcity  of  arms.  A 
jopy  of  your  letter  has,  however,  been  furnished  to  the  War  Depart- 
ment, and  such  arms  as  can  be  sent  will  from  time  to  time  be  furnished. 
The  attention  of  the  Department  will  also  be  given  to  your  request  for 
Ammunition,  tents,  and  camp  equipage. 

I The  disaffection  to  which  you  allude  will,  I trust,  prove  to  be  very 
imited  in  extent.  The  commanding  general  will  be  authorized  to  adopt 
ippropriate  measures  for  its  suppression. 

With  respect  to  conscripts,  the  law  of  Congress  does  not  allow  new 
regiments  to  be  formed  from  their  number.  They  will,  however,  be 
issembled  in  camps  of  instruction,  as  heretofore  agreed  upon.  They 
will  be  disciplined,  drilled,  and  formed  into  a temporary  organization, 
tvkich  may  be  available  to  some  extent  for  purposes  of  defense.  It  is 
my  intention,  as  soon  as  circumstances  will  permit,  to  send  the  now 
greatly  reduced  regiments  of  Louisiana  to  be  filled  up  from  these  camps, 


768 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N MEX.  [Chap.XXVIL 

and  thus  furnish  upon  the  spot  completely  organized  corps  ready  for  ; 
service.  In  the  mean  time  I trust  that  the  new  commanding  general, 
with  your  assistance  and  the  co-operation  of  the  patriotic  citizens  of 
Louisiana,  will  be  able  to  keep  the  enemy  in  check  and  afford  protection 
to  the  greater  portion  of  the  State  until  we  shall  be  able  to  drive  the 
invader  altogether  from  the  soil. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept.  South.  Miss,  and  East  La., 

No.  2.  I Jackson , Miss.,  June  26,  1862. 

That  part  of  Louisiana  east  of  the  Mississippi  River  and  the  counties 
of  Mississippi  lying  on  the  Gulf  will  constitute  the  First  District  of  this 
department,  and  will  be  commanded  until  further  orders  by  General 
Ruggles. 

All  the  counties  of  Mississippi  below  and  touching  the  thirty-second 
parallel  of  latitude,  except  at  the  three  Gulf  counties,  will  constitute  the 
Second  District,  and  will  be  under  the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  William 
N.  R.  Beall. 

All  the  counties  of  Mississippi  lying  between  the  thirty-second  and 
thirty-third  parallels  of  latitude  will  constitute  the  Third  District,  and 
will  be  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith. 

I.  The  general  officers  assigned  to  the  command  of  districts  will  pro- 
ceed to  establish  their  headquarters  within  the  limits  of  the  respective 
commands,  convenient  to  the  Mississippi  River  and  to  telegraphic  com- 
municafion  with  Jackson,  Miss.  They  will  also,  without  delay,  pro-  ; 
ceed  to  organize,  equip,  and  discipline  troops  which  are  or  may  be 
raised  within  their  respective  districts.  It  is  expected  that  they  will 
defend  to  the  utmost  every  foot  of  ground  invaded  by  the  enemy  and 
to  attack  him  whenever  it  is  possible  to  do  so. 

II.  No  organization  less  than  a regiment,  or  at  least  a battalion  of 
five  companies,  will  be  allowed  in  the  Partisan  Ranger  service  in  this 
department.  Companies  raised  in  this  service  will  be  organized  into 
regiments  or  battalions,  and  the  commanders  thereof  will  be  held  strictly 
accountable  for  the  good  order  and  proper  discipline  of  their  commands. 
An  undisciplined  rabble  is  not  dangerous  to  the  enemy,  is  extremely 
injurious  to  the  neighborhood  where  it  may  be  stationed,  and  is  a dis- 
grace to  any  country.  The  burning  of  fences,  killing  of  stock,  or  the 
destruction  of  property  of  any  kind  are  forbidden  by  orders  as  well  as 
by  common  honesty. 

III.  Headquarters  department  is  temporarily  removed  to  Vicksburg, 
Miss. 

By  order  of  General  Van  Dorn: 

M.  M.  KIMMEL, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  27,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Governor  Moore, 

Care  Col.  Thomas  E.  Adams , Brookhaven , Miss.  : 

I telegraphed  to  General  Van  Dorn  immediately  on  hearing  of  the 
seizure  of  the  arms,  directing  them  to  be  restored  if  not  in  actual  use 


Chap.  XXVH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


769 


against  the  enemy,  in  which  case  your  arms  were  to  be  replaced  from 
those  forwarded  to  him.  I presume  that  you  do  not  desire  more  than 
this.  The  Confederate  Government  has  had  to  pay  the  freight  on  all 
the  State  arms  brought  over  and  has  had  all  the  trouble  and  expense  of 
running  the  blockade.  This,  together  with  constant  seizures  by  officers, 
who  frequently  did  it  in  ignorance  of  the  State  marks,  leads  to  so  much 
annoyance,  that  the  Department  has  been  compelled  to  exclude  from 
shipments  hereafter  made  all  arms  not  the  property  of  the  Government. 

So  soon  as  the  battle  now  progressing  shall  release  General  Magruder 
he  shall  start  for  Louisiana  with  a military  chest  and  arms.  Your  arms 
will  of  course  be  returned  or  replaced. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  694.  j Opelousas , June  27,  1862. 

I.  Colonel  Bisland,  commanding  Terre  Bonne  Regiment,  will  order 
out,  on  receipt  of  this  order,  the  militia  of  Terre  Bonne,  and  put  it  into 
active  service. 

II.  Should  Colonel  Bisland  not  obey  these  orders  Lieut.  Col.  William 
L.  Shaffer  will  immediately  comply  with  requisites  of  article  No.  1 of 
these  orders. 

******* 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

M.  GRIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept.  South.  Miss,  and  East  La., 

No.  5.  ] Vicksburg , Miss.,  June  28,  1862. 

General  Yan  Dorn  assumes  command  in  person  of  the  defense  of 
Yicksburg  and  surrounding  country.  General  M.  L.  Smith  will  remain 
in  immediate  charge  of  the  defense  of  the  city,  and  will  call  upon  the 
general  commanding  for  whatever  force  he  may  require  from  time  to 
time.  He  will  keep  him  informed  of  his  operations  and  of  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy  on  the  river  in  his  front. 

The  general  commanding  the  troops  in  the  field  (Breckinridge’s  corps) 
will  make  the  disposition  already  indicated  by  written  instructions  to 
him,  and  will  be  continually  ready  for  active  service.  The  greatest 
promptness  is  essential  to  success,  and  it  is  hoped  that  all  will  be  actuated 
by  the  same  spirit,  to  resist  to  the  death,  that  the  citizens  of  Yicksburg 
have  manifested  by  the  willing  sacrifice  of  their  property. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Ferguson  is  charged  with  observing  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy  on  both  flanks  of  our  position.  His  cavalry  should 
be  vigilant,  energetic,  fearless,  and  untiring.  Information  must  be 
conveyed  promptly  to  these  headquarters.  The  outpost  under  com- 
mand of  General  Bowen  is  important,  and  it  is  expected  that  he  will 
do  all  in  his  power  to  guard  it  well,  as  well  also  the  post  of  Colonel 
Miller.  Couriers  should  be  kept  at  all  headquarters  to  convey  infor- 
mation to  general  headquarters.  Colonel  Ferguson  will  detail  them 
upon  application. 

Let  it  be  borne  in  mind  by  all  that  the  army  here  is  defending  the 
49  r r — VOL  xv 


770 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xxvn. 


place  against  occupation.  This  will  be  doce  nt  all  hazards,  even  though 
this  beautiful  and  devoted  city  should  be  laid  in  ruins  and  ashes. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Bari  Tan  Dorn : m m rimMEL, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  29, 1862, 


General  Bragg,  Tupelo,  Miss.  : 

Your  department  is  extended  so  as  to  embrace  that  part  of  Louisiana 
east  of  the  Mississippi,  the  entire  States  of  Mississippi  and  Alabama, 
and  the  portion  of  Georgia  and  Florida  west  of  the  Chattahoochee  and 
Apalachicola  Rivers*  You  can  take  charge  of  the  Selma  and  Men- 
dian  connection,  but  the  only  funds  appropriated  to  the  work  are  the 
$400,000  authorized  by  Congress  to  be  loaned  to  the  Alabama  and 
Mississippi  Railroad  Company.  They  can  disburse  it  under  your  di- 
rections; After  two  days’  fighting  McClellan  is  in  a critical  position. 
Large  re-enforcements  are  expected  from  the  West.  Strike  the  moment 

an  opportunity  offers.  G w RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Report  of  the  District  of  the  Gulf,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  John  B. 
Forney , C.  S.  Army,  June  30,  1862. 


Commanding  officer. 

% 

Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

i 

j Effective  total. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Remarks. 

£ 

© 

o 

S 

§ 

a 

Brig.  Gen.  Sam’l  Jones. 

Col.  W.  L.  Powell 

Col.  [J.R.F-]  Tatnall . . 

Col.  Robert  H.  Smith.. 

Army  of  Mobile.. 
Second  Brigade  . . 
Detachment  of  ob- 
servation. 
Troops  at  Mount 
Yernon. 

227 

61 

140 

20 

2, 966 
914 
2,098 

352 

3, 200 
1, 007 
2,178 

380 

4,626 
1, 181 
2, 753 

567 

5,  516 
1,  332 
3, 106 

664 

Partially  armed. 
Do. 

Unarmed. 

448 

6, 330 

6, 765 

9, 127 

10, 618 

Tangipahoa,  La.,  July  1, 1862. 

Capt.  I.  IT.  Brown, 

C.  S.  Gunboat  Arkansas , Yazoo  Hirer: 

Sir*  A detail  of  126  men  was  made  at  Grenada  from  General  Jett. 
Thomps^troops  and  ordered  to  report  to  you  before  I . ; reheved 
from  command  of  the  special  department.  Telegraph  General  Thomp- 

son  near  Panola.  DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

TtvianAipr.  General.  Commanding. 


See  Special  Orders  of  May  26  and  June  25,  pp.  746, 766. 


771 


Chap.  XXVH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Department  No.  2, 

No.  89.  j Tupelo . Jfm.,  July  2,  1862. 

I.  In  compliance  with  orders  from  the  War  Department,  dated  the 
24th  and  25th  ultimo,  the  commander  of  the  forces  assumes  command 
of  Department  No.  2,  as  extended  by  the  President,  and  embracing,  in 
addition  to  the  limits  already  announced,  all  of  Department  No.  1, 
the  entire  State  of  Alabama,  and  eastward  to  the  line  of  railroad  from 
Chattanooga  via  Atlanta  to  West  Point,  Ga.,  on  the  Chattahoochee 
Eiver,  and  thence  down  that  stream  and  the  Apalachicola  to  the  Gul-f 
of  Mexico. 

II.  The  department  is  sub-divided  as  follows : 

1st.  District  of  the  Mississippi,  embracing  all  the  country  west  of  Pearl 
Eiver  from  its  mouth  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  and  the  line  of  the  Mississippi 
Central  Eailroad  to  Grand  Junction,  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn  com- 
manding. 

2d.  District  of  the  Gulf,  which  will  include  all  the  country  east  of 
Pearl  Eiver  to  the  Apalachicola  and  as  far  north  as  the  thirty-second 
parallel  of  latitude,  Brig.  Gen.  John  H.  Forney  commanding. 

* # # * * # # 

By  command  of  General  Bragg  : 

THOMAS  JOED  AN, 

Chief  of  /Staff. 


Tangipahoa,  La.,  July  3,  1862. 

General  Bragg,  Tupelo , Miss.  : 

Copy  of  telegram  received  at  Grenada : 

Jackson,  Miss.,  June  22,  1862. 

By  authority  from  General  Bragg  I have  ordered  6,000  men  from  your  command  and 
the  corps  of  General  Breckinridge  to  the  defense  of  Vicksburg.  Have  them  in  readi- 
ness to  take  the  cars  with  ten  days’  rations. 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major-General. 

The  general  says  that  he  called  for  6,000  troops  only  from  General 
Breckinridge’s  corps.  This  erroneous  dispatch  induced  the  belief  that 
in  accordance  with  previous  orders  I was  to  accompany  my  command. 

DANIEL  ECGGLES, 

Brigadier-  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept.  South.  Miss,  and  East  La., 

No.  9.  ( VicJcsburg , July  4,  1862. 

The  general  commanding  having  announced  in  General  Orders,  No. 
1,  his  intention  to  defend  the  department  to  the  last  extremity,  or  in 
view  of  the  exigencies  of  the  country  hereby  declares  martial  law  in 
the  following  counties:  Issaquena,  Yazoo,  Warren,  Hinds,  Holmes, 
Claiborne,  Hancock,  Harrison,  and  Jackson,  all  in  Mississippi;  and 
Carroll  and  Sunflower,  Miss.,  and  all  the  counties  in  Louisiana  east  of 
the  Mississippi  Eiver. 

As  there  seems  to  be  some  misapprehension  in  regard  to  the  mean- 
ing and  effect  of  martial  law,  the  general  commanding  deems  it  proper 
to  state  that  it  has  been  well  defined  to  be  “ the  will  of  the  military 
commander;”  but  the  extent  of  the  action  that  may  be  under  it  cannot 
be  definitely  announced,  depending  as  it  does  upon  the  emergency  call- 


772 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA,,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 


ing  for  such  action.  It  is  not  intended  to  interfere  with  courts,  either 
civil  or  criminal,  except  so  far  as  they  may  come  in  conflict  with  mili- 
tary orders.  . , ...  , „ . 

That  u private  interests  must  be  subservient  to  the  public  good  is 
an  old  and  respected  maxim,  and  the  loyal  and  intelligent  will  yield  a 
willing  obedience  to  the  military  mandate  based  thereon.  The  general 
commanding  confidently  calls  upon  all  officers,  both  civil  and  military, 
as  also  the  citizens  generally,  to  co-operate  with  and  sustain  him  m 
all  things  necessary  for  the  defense  of  the  country. 

Disloyalty  must  and  will  not  be  countenanced.  The  credit  of  the  Gov- 
ernment must  be  sustained.  The  seeds  of  dissension  and  dissatisfaction 
shall  not  be  sown  among  the  troops . Speculation  and  extortion  upon 
soldiers  and  citizens  will  not  be  tolerated  ; and  to  these  ends  the  general 

commanding  orders : ^ . 

I.  Any  person  who  shall  trade  or  attempt  to  trade  with  the  enemy 
under  any  pretense  whatsoever,  or  who  shall  give  any  signal  to  or  m 
any  manner  hold  communication  with  the  enemy  for  the  purpose  of  giv- 
ing information  concerning  the  Confederate  forces,  or  shall  pass  into 
his  camp  or  through  his  lines  without  a passport  from  the  proper 

authority,  shall  suffer  death.  ^ , 

II.  Any  person  who  shall  refuse  to  receive  Confederate  money,  or 
shali  do  or  say  or  write  anything  calculated  to  depreciate  the  same, 
shall  be  subject  to  fine  and  imprisonment  or  confiscation  of  property, 
either  or  both,  as  the  nature  of  the  case  may  indicate. 

III.  The  publication  of  any  article  in  the  newspapers  in  reference  to 
the  movements  of  the  troops  is  x>rohibited,  and  if  the  editor  or  pro- 
prietor of  any  newspaper  published  in  any  of  the  counties  hereinbefore 
designated  shall  publish  any  editorial  article  or  copy  into  his  paper  any 
article  or  paragraph  calculated  to  impair  confidence  in  any  of  the  com- 
manding  officers  whom  the  President  may  see  fit  to  place  over  the 
troops,  such  editor  or  proprietor  shall  be  subject  to  fine  and  imprison- 
ment, and  the  publication  of  the  paper  shall  be  thereafter  suspended. 

IV.  The  asking  of  exorbitant  prices  for  goods  or  the  commodities  ot 

life,  such  as  would  indicate  a want  of  confidence  in  Confederate  money, 
or  the  bartering  of  or  offering  to  barter  goods  at  “low  prices  for  t e 
commodities  of  life,  is  prohibited,  and  any  person  so  offending  snail  be 
subject  to  fine  and  imprisonment  or  confiscation  of  property,  either  or 
both,  as  the  nature  of  the  case  may  indicate.  . 

V.  Provost-marshals  will  be  appointed  for  each  of  the  counties  m 
which  none  have  been  appointed.  The  appointments  heretofore  made 

are  confirmed  until  further  orders. 

VI.  Col.  Fred.  Tate,  provost-marshal  general  of  the  department, 
is  charged  with  the  execution  of  the  above  order,  and  the  local  provost- 
marshals  will  report  to  him  weekly  all  proceedings  had  before  them. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  E.  Van  Dorn : ^ ^ KIMMELL, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Orders,  ) 
No.  727.  i 


Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

Opelousas,  July  7 , 1862. 

The  Governor  and  commander-in-chief  has  been  informed  that  parties 
in  Calcasieu  and  Vermillion  Parishes  have  refused  and  do  refuse  to  re- 
ceive in  payment  the  notes  of  this  State  and  also  of  the  Confederate 
States,  and  that  one  Bertrand,  residing  in  Grand  Chenier,  and  one 
Corso,  on  Lake  Charles,  in  the  parish  of  Vermillion,  have  positively  re- 


773 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

fused  the  notes  of  this  State  and  the  Confederate  States.  That  these 
parties  and  all  others  who  thus  refuse  the  aforesaid  notes  are  consid- 
ered and  are  enemies  to  the  Southern  Confederacy  and  its  cause,  and 
should  be  dealt  with  accordingly. 

Col.  Daniel  O’Bryan,  of  the  parish  of  Vermillion,  will  immediately  on 
the  reception  of  this  order  cause  the  arrest  of  Bertrand  and  Corso  and 
of  all  others  in  his  parish  who  have  refused  the  notes  of  the  State  and 
of  the  Confederate  States,  and  he  will  cause  them  to  be  imprisoned,  ex- 
amine facts,  require  of  them  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance,  and  in  dis- 
charging them  warn  them  not  to  commit  the  offense  again.  And  should 
the  act  be  committed  again  by  the  parties  thus  arrested  he  will  cause 
them  to  be  rearrested  and  held  in  jail  until  further  orders  from  this  de- 
partment. 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief : 

M.  GRIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana . 


Headquarters  Louisiana  Militia, 
Opelousas , July  8,  1862.  (Received  July  29.) 

George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond : 

Sir:  1 sent  you  a list  of  persons  by  letter  of  June  13  * to  whom  I had 
granted  authorizations  to  raise  companies  of  Partisan  Rangers.  None 
have  succeeded  except  the  following,  who  have  reported,  viz:  James 
A.  McWaters,  company;  S.  D.  Ashe,  company  ; W.  W.  Breazeale,  bat- 
talion of  three  companies ; W.  H.  Bayliss,  two  companies ; L.  M.  Nutt, 
company ; James  [M.]  Thompson,  company.  The  first  named  is  already 
in  service. 

I have  not  received  one  of  my  guns  yet.  I have  agents  over  the 
Mississippi  River  charged  with  the  transportation  of  my  State  prop- 
erty, but  they  are  seized  by  General  Forney,  and  when  released  by  him 
then  by  Van  Dorn,  and  afterward  by  every  petty  colonel  or  captain 
who  under  plea  of  excessive  vigilance  manages  to  abstract  for  himself 
and  his  command  whatever  they  may  need  or  their  fancy  may  suggest 
as  agreeable. 

I do  not  wish  to  complain  unnecessarily,  but  it  does  appear  to  me 
that  while  the  Confederate  Government  have  withdrawn  every  one  of 
their  officers  and  soldiers  from  this  State,  and  have  never  yet  sent  a 
musket  or  rifle  to  us,  it  is  the  smallest  justice  they  can  do  to  permit  me 
to  use  what  my  own  State  money  has  bought  and  what  the  Confederate 
Government  has  not  in  any  manner  helped  me  to  get. 

How  much  longer  is  Louisiana  to  be  considered  without  the  protec- 
tion or  beneath  the  consideration  of  the  Confederate  Government  1 
When  am  I to  have  a general,  as  long  ago  promised  ¥ I forbear  to 
express  all  that  I feel  on  this  matter,  but  there  are  interests  at  stake 
independent  of  any  considerations  of  State  defense.  The  Army  of  the 
Mississippi  Valley  is  wholly  dependent  for  supplies  on  keeping  open 
our  communication  with  Texas.  A few  troops  thrown  out  by  Butler, 
by  extending  from  New  Iberia  to  Alexandria,  would  completely  block 
us  off  from  our  supplies  for  that  army.  Yet,  although  such  immense 
results  hang  on  that  contingency,  nothing  has  been  done  to  prevent  it, 
and  nothing  has  prevented  it  but  the  daring  act  of  a single  company 


To  appear  in  Series  IV. 


774 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

of  my  State  Militia.  The  whole  army  of  Beauregard  dependent  for 
their  supplies  of  beef  on  the  activity  and  vigilance  of  a company  of 
ragged  and  half-armed  militia!  All  Louisiana  south  of  Bed  Biver  has 
been  attached  to  Texas,  and  General  Hubert  placed  in  command.  In 
what  respect  does  that  better  our  condition  ? I have  begged  for  an 
officer,  and  the  Government  answers  me  by  attaching  one  part  of  my 
State  to  the  command  of  a general  whose  headquarters  are  in  Texas, 
another  part  to  another  general  whose  headquarters  are  in  Little  Bock, 
and  another  to  a general  whose  headquarters  are  in  Jackson.  This 
last,  however,  is  right,  because  the  Mississippi  Biver  completely  severs 
the  State,  but  as  for  the  other  two  I have  no  more  facility  of  commu- 
nication than  I have  with  Bichmond.  I have  not  even  been  informed 
that  General  Hindman  has  any  command  over  any  portion  of  my  State. 
The  only  notice  I have  had  of  his  pretending  to  exercise  any  authority 
here  is  the  visit  of  a Captain  Taylor,  with  a party  of  armed  men,  about 
the  24th  of  last  month,  who  came  to  Alexandria,  south  of  Bed  Biver, 
and  seized  private  property,  entered  houses  of  private  citizens,  brutally 
practiced  extortion  and  outrage,  and  with  bullying  and  threatening 
language  and  manner  spread  terror  among  the  people  and  disgraced 
the  service  upon  whose  errand  he  came.  Mark  you,  no  public  neces- 
sity justified  this  conduct.  The  pretense  was  to  get  provisions  for 
Hindmaffs  army  but  if  you  will  look  at  the  map  you  will  see  the  dis- 
tance puts  that  out  of  the  question.  Besides  they  came  from  Shreve- 
port, and  both  at  that  point  and  Marshall  there  are  collected  large 
stores  for  the  Arkansas  army. 

Nothing  prevented  our  citizens  from  resisting  this  man  but  the  desire 
of  our  people  now  and  at  all  times  to  pay  due  respect  to  the  authority 
of  our  Government,  even  though  it  should  be  represented  by  such  a 
man  as  this  Taylor. 

I do  not  believe  General  Hindman  knew  anything  of  these  outrages. 
Tavlor  was  sent  by  one  Colonel  Wilkes,  and  I have  asked  of  General 
Hindman,  as  I now  ask  of  you,  their  dismissal  from  the  service. 

While  I ask  this  punishment  of  these  officers  I have  taken  measures 
to  protect  my  people  from  a repetition  of  such  raids.  With  Butler  be- 
low and  Hindman  above,  each  by  his  officers  committing  the  same  out- 
rages, I am  forced  to  self-protection.  I have  ordered  a force  of  militia 
at  Alexandria  to  prevent  any  similar  raid.  I have  directed  that  any  simi- 
lar expedition  shall  not  only  be  stopped,  but  the  whole  party  to  be^  ar 
rested,  and  if  their  boat  will  not  stop  I have  cannon  planted  to  fire  iuto 
her  and  sink  her.  I have  selected  men  to  command  this  force  who  are 
fully  impressed  with  the  indignities  we  have  suffered  and  who  wilt 
carry  out  my  orders.  . 

Large  quantities  of  Confederate  property  collected  at  Alexandria  by 
the  energy  of  Major  McKee  from  Mexico  were  also  taken  by  this  man 
and  incalculable  injury  has  been  done.  You  can  refuse  to  dismiss  them 
(the  captain  and  the  colonel),  but  my  marksmen  may  save  you  the 
trouble  if  they  come  again.  There  is  a point  to  which  patient  endur- 
ance can  extend  no  further. 

I learn  that  General  Price  is  coming  here  instead  of  General  Magru- 
der.  I care  not  who  it  is  you  send,  so  he  be  a general  to  command  in 
this  State  of  Louisiana  whose  headquarters  will  be  accessible  to  me. 

Very  respectfully,  tho.  G.  M0ORE, 

Governor. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


775 


[Indorsement.] 

The  Governor  has  been  misinformed  as  to  the  action  of  the  Govern- 
ment. The  entire  country  west  of  the  Mississippi  has  been  formed  into 
one  department,  and  Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes  assigned  to  the  command, 
Gen  Magruder  having  been  recalled.  Nine  thousand  stand  of  arms  and 
a considerable  quantity  of  ammunition  are  on  their  way  to  the  depart- 
ment, and  the  supply  will  probably  be  largely  increased. 

General  Holmes  is  by  this  time  at  Jackson’s  Mill. 

A general  order  prohibiting  seizure  of  State  property  has  been  issued 
from  these  headquarters. 


Bayou  Sara,  La.,  July  9,  1862. 

(Via  Clinton,  July  10.) 

General  Ruggles,  Camp  Moore : 

Yesterday  afternoon  the  steamers  Saint  Maurice  and  Whiteman  landed 
not  exceeding  2,200  troops,  including  100  cavalry,  at  Baton  Rouge. 
This  is  reliable. 

J.  C.  WHITEMAN-, 

Operator , Bayou  Sara , La. 

J.  E.  MOULKER, 

Operator,  Clinton , La. 


Tangipahoa,  La.,  July  9,  1862. 
Major-General  Van  Dorn,  [Vicksburg,  Miss.]  ; 

Five  thousand  men  and  two  batteries  of  guns  will  do  it.  The  move- 
ment promptly  made  is  important.* 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier - General. 


Tangipahoa,  La.,  July  10,  1862. 
General  Van  Dorn,  Vicksburg , Miss.: 

I need  3,500  disciplined  troops  and  one  battery  of  six  guns  in  addi- 
tion to  what  I have.  Will  you  send  them  to  me  ? 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier-  General. 


General  Ruggles  : 


Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  11, 1862. 


Did  the  troops  come  from  New  Orleans  ? Can  you  not  get  wagons 
nearer  you  I There  are  none  that  can  be  sent  you  in  time.  Answer 
this  evening. 


EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major-  General.. 


* Reference  seems  to  have  been  to  a projected  movement  against  Baton  Rouge. 
Previous  correspondence  on  the  subject  not  found. 


776 


W.  FLA. 7 S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chap.  XXV IL 


July  11, 1862. 

[General  Earl  Van  Dorn:] 

From  Baton  Bouge,  Wednesday  night,  July  9.  Forces : Twenty-first 
Indiana,  Fourteenth  Maine,  Sixth  Wisconsin,  fragments  of  Michigan,  j 
Massachusetts,  &c.  j sick,  &c.,  about  3,000  (about  2,000  fit  for  duty) ; : 
one  field  battery  of  six  guns ; not  to  exceed  100  cavalry,  and  gunboat  i 
No.  3,  [under  command  of]  Colonel  McMillan. 

5 L J [DANIEL  RUGGLES.] 


New  Orleans,  July  11,  1862.  j 


His  Excellency  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

Governor  of  Louisiana : 

Governor  : I have  been  informed  that  in  several  quarters  of  Louisi- ! 
ana  the  authorities  organized  by  the  orders  of  Your  Excellency  wish  to 
impose  on  French  citizens  not  only  active  military  service,  but  also  to 
oblige  them  to  enroll  themselves  in  the  corps  which  is  organizing  under 
the  name  of  “ guerrillas,”  or  irregular  corps.  I cannot  believe,  Mr.  Gov- 
ernor, that  such  acts  can  have  your  approbation,  for  I know  that  your 
Government  is  opposed  to  all  imposition  of  obligatory  active  service 
upon  foreign  citizens.  Neutrality  in  the  midst  of  actual  conflict  is  im- 
posed not  only  by  the  law  of  nations,  but  also  by  the  express  orders 
of  the  Government  of  the  Emperor,  whom  I have  the  honor  to  represent. 
As  to  service  in  irregular  corps,  it  would  be  even  more  contrary  to  the 
duties  which  are  imposed  upon  them  and  expose  them  to  dangers, 
natural  consequences  of  organizations,  which  all  civilized  nations  equally 


disapprove.  „ . . 

I believe,  Mr.  Governor,  that  your  spirit  of  justice,  of  which  I have 
had  more  than  one  proof,  will  cause  you  to  receive  these  observations 
favorably,  but  in  the  contrary  case  I shall  be  forced  to  protest  in  the 
name  of  my  Government  and  of  my  compatriots  against  any  violence 
to  which  they  may  be  subjected  in  reserving  their  right  to  give  support 
to  those  who  are  responsible  for  the  authorization  of  such  acts. 

Accept,  Mr.  Governor,  the  assurance  of  my  respect  and  of  my  very 

high  consideration.  „ • 4 ^ 

MEJAN, 

French  Consul. 


Vicksburg,  July  12, 1862. 

Brigadier-General  Ruggles: 

Find  out  how  many  troops  at  Baton  Rouge  certain,  and  let  me  know 
as  soon  as  possible.  Are  you  sure  the  troops  came  down  the  river  *? 

F EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major-  General. 


July  12,  [1862]. 


General  Van  Dorn,  Vicksburg  : 

There  are  about  3,500.  Twelve  to  fifteen  hundred  arrived  there  from 
New  Orleans  on  Thursday,  the  10th.  One  hundred  cavalry  arrived. 
There  were  about  200  before.  They  have  two  field  batteries  and  some 
heavy  guns. 


777 


Chat.  IXYH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

The  troops  which  arrived  on  Tuesday  or  Wednesday  are  reported  as 
arriving  from  both  ways,  probably  from  New  Orleans. 

The  enemy  is  evidently  on  the  alert  there^^  RUGGLEg; 

Briaadier- General. 


Tangipahoa,  La.,  July  13, 1862. 

General  Van  Dorn,  Vicksburg , Miss. : 

Recommend  movement  against  New  Orleans  by  railroad  when  the 
other  movement  takes  place.  Major  Ranney  will  repair  bridges.  The 
enemy  has  9,000  troops  there;  demoralized.  Answer 

DArsILL  xiUvaijDJib, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Jackson,  La.,  July  13, 1862. 

(Received  July  15.) 

Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles: 

The  undersigned  would  respectfully  represent  that  East  Baton  Rouge 
and  East  and  West  Feliciana  Parishes  (constituting  the  northwest  por- 
tion of  your  district)  are  now  seriously  threatened  by  the  enemy  from 
the  city  of  Baton  Rouge.  The  Federal  forces  almost  daily  visit  the 
surrounding  country,  arrest  citizens,  and  compel  them  to  take  the  oath 
of  allegiance,  or  carry  them  to  prison,  burn  residences,  quarters,  and 
sugar-houses,  plunder  planters  of  all  stock,  provisions,  cotton,  corn, 
sugar,  and  some  of  their  servants,  and  subject  the  citizens,  male  and 
female,  to  all  manner  of  indignities.  The  sphere  of  these  depredations 
is  constantly  enlarging  in  consequence  of  the  presence  of  no  adequate 
opposing  forces.  These  parishes  are  eminently  loyal  to  the  Confederate 
cause.  For  example,  this  parish,  with  a voting  population  of  about  800, 
has  sent  about  600  volunteers  to  the  Army,  and  the  blood  of  her  sons 
has  stained  nearly  every  battle-field.  It  has  given  by  individual  dona- 
tions and  vote  of  the  police  jury  over  $50,000  to  our  cause.  Indeed, 
with  few  unimportant  individual  exceptions  there  has  been  manifested 
by  our  citizens  a willingness  to  sacrifice  all,  even  life  itself,  to  advance 
the  common  cause.  These  parishes  are  populous,  wealthy,  and  pro- 
ductive. According  to  the  census  for  1850  they  had  a population  of 
11,880  whites  and  25,341  slaves.  They  raised  979,316  bushels  of  corn, 
29,604  bales  of  cotton,  and  12,946  hogsheads  of  sugar.  This  year  there 
is  planted  about  three  times  the  ordinary  amount  of  corn.  All  is  at  the 
mercy  of  an  enemy  greedy  for  destruction,  unless  they  are  met  by  an 
adequate  force  and  shut  up  to  the  city  of  Baton  Rouge  or  confined  to 
the  river.  Those  remaining  able  to  bear  arms  will  readily  co-operate 
with  troops  sent  for  their  relief,  and  our  people  will  cheerfully  submit 
to  the  sacrifices  incident  to  such  a movement.  This  aid  we  think  is  due 
to  so  loyal  a population,  if  it  can  be  afforded  consistently  with  the  gen- 
eral interests  of  the  service.  But,  further  than  this,  you  will  permit  us 
to  suggest  to  your  superior  knowledge  of  what  constitutes  a favorable 
field  for  effective  military  movements  that  we  consider  this  portion  of 
your  district  especially  so,  not  only  for  army  movements,  but  for  offen- 
sive operations  against  the  enemy,  to  their  serious  discomfiture  on  the 
river,  in  Baton  Rouge,  and  finally  down  the  river,  thus  relieving  its 


778 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYII. 

rich  coasts  and  threatening  the  city  of  New  Orleans.  To  this  we  may  i 
add  that  between  Baton  Rouge  and  the  mouth  of  Red  River  there  are  | 
several  high  bluffs  favorable  for  planting  batteries  and  for  the  move- 1 
ments  of  artillery  and  infantry,  and  easily  protected  from  any  effort  to 
flank  them  by  the  enemy. 

The  country  between  this  and  Oamp  Moore  is  variously  intersected 
with  good  roads,  affording  facilities  for  easy  land  transportation.  To 
save  our  property  and  to  keep  our  people  from  total  demoralization  on 
account  of  the  varied  efforts  by  tyranny,  forces,  and  trade  on  the  part  j 
of  the  enemy  to  seduce  them  from  their  allegiance  to  the  Confederate  1 
cause,  and  Anally  and  chiefly  in  view  of  the  favorable  offensive  move-  j 
ments  that  may  be  made  from  this  section  against  the  enemy,  the  un-  ] 
dersigned,  believing  that  we  express  the  sense  of  our  fellow-citizens, 
would  respectfully  urge  upon  you,  and  through  you  upon  General  Van  j 
Dorn,  the  importance  of  sending  troops  to  this  portion  of  your  district  j 
and  of  planting  one  or  more  batteries  upon  the  river. 

With  assurances  of  distinguished  regard,  we  remain,  your  obedient  i 
servants,  ■ 

A.  G.  CARTER, 

JOHN  C.  MILLER, 
Deputy  Provost-Marshals. 

N.  B. — The  enemy,  in  passing  down  with  their  gunboats,  took  the 
ferry-boat  from  Bayou  Sara. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  July  13,  1862. 
General  Earl  Yan  Dorn,  Vicksburg,  Miss.  : 

Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  received. ' Your  gallantry  has  fulfilled  my  j 
expectations.  Accept  my  thanks  and  congratulations  for  what  has  been 
achieved.  Have  ordered  more  and  heavier  guns  to  be  furnished  to  you. 
What  of  the  gunboat  Arkansas ? The  junction  of  the  departments* 
arose  from  no  want  of  confidence,  but  to  render  the  whole  force  most 
available  to  the  paramount  object — the  defense  of  our  country. 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


July  15,  [1862]. 

General  Yan  Dorn,  Vicksburg: 

The  enemy  commits  depredations  near  Baton  Rouge,  and  the  disaf- 
fection thence  to  Madisonville  is  so  great  that  I absolutely  need  2,000 
more  disciplined  troops. 

The  enemy  threaten  landing  at  Madisonville.  Answer. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 
Brigadier-  General . 


Tangipahoa,  La.,  July  15, 1862. 
General  Yan  Dorn,  Vicksburg , Miss.  : 

The  inroads  of  the  enemy  above  Baton  Rouge  are  represented  as  dis- 

*See  special  orders  of  May  26  and  June  25,  pp.  746,766,  and  Randolph  to  Bragg, 
June  29,  p.  770. 


HAP.  XXYII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


779 


,strous.  Immediate  relief  is  invoked.  Captain  Mullett  recommends 
hat  the  42-pounder  be  placed  at  Port  Hudson.  Let  me  have  him  and 

he  gun  at  that  point.  Answer.  . „ 

6 DANIEL  RUGGLES. 


Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  15,  1862. 

(Received  July  16.) 


leneral  Ruggles: 

Will  send  you  men  if  possible.  Will  let  you  know  in  a day  or  two. 
Steamer  Arkansas  came  out  this  morning ; made  two  enemy’s  boats 
strike  colors;  ran  the  gauntlet  of  the  upper  fleet  of  twelve  vessels  of 
var,  and  is  now  safe  under  our  guns.  Will  attack  below  as  soon  as  some 

•epairs  are  made.  _ 

EARL  VAN  DORN. 


Monroe,  La.,  July  17,  1862. 

Son.  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va. : 

General  : I arrived  here  on  the  12th  instant  after  much  difficulty, 
rhe  communication  across  the  Mississippi  River  is  almost  entirely  cut 
iff.  I crossed  at  midnight  in  a skiff.  Of  course  we  are  without  news 
from  the  east  but  at  intervals.  On  my  arrival  I found  General  Roane 
in  command  here  by  order  of  General  Hindman,  and  as  General  Roane 
is  junior  to  me,  it  makes  it  embarrassing  and  inconvenient.  Everything 
is  in  trouble  here.  The  conscripts  a, re  not  here.  I have  issued  orders 
for  them  to  come  in,  but  it  will  be  weeks  before  they  will  all  be  here, 
rhere  are  no  more  arms  to  be  had.  The  country  is  exhausted  of  them. 
The  seizure  of  those  armed  by  the  State  of  Louisiana  by  the  Confed- 
erate officers  in  Mississippi  is  having  a bad  effect.  The  volunteer  troops 
(two  regiments  and  one  battalion  of  six  companies)  are  only  partially 
provided  with  shot-guns.  There  is  no  cavalry.  The  Texan  cavalry  has 
been  ordered  to  Arkansas.  There  is  no  preparations  for  defending  the 
many  navigable  streams  of  Louisiana,  and  no  artillery,  either  siege  or 
field^  The  Yankees  have  the  country  where  they  wish,  as  the  people 
do  not  resist  their  marauding  parties.  I inclose  herewith  some  orders 
of  General  Hindman,  which  seem  to  me  to  be  illegal,  as  I see  no  law  tor 
paragraphs  VII,  VIII,  or  X.  Has  General  Hindman  any  control  over 
me  as  superintendent  of  the  conscripts  of  Louisiana,  and  can  he  order 
them  where  he  pleases  U I beg  an  answer  to  these  questions.  The  State 
of  Louisiana  west  of  the  Mississippi  River  is  divided  into  two  military 
districts.  That  portion  north  of  Red  River  is  commanded  by  Brigadier- 
General  Roane.  That  portion  south  of  Red  River  is  said  to  be  under 
General  P.  O.  Hebert.  You  can  see  at  once  how  unpleasantly  I am  sit- 
uated. I have  no  news  of  General  Magruder’s  arrival  on  this  side  of 
the  Mississippi  River.  Our  communication  by  mail  is  entirely  stopped. 
We  send  letters  by  such  chances  as  offer.  I hope  that  sufficient  funds 
will  be  sent  to  the  several  departments  here,  as  the  people  are  unwill- 
ing to  sell  without  the  cash,  and  impressment  is  to  be  avoided  if  possi- 
ble. There  are  salines  about  40  miles  from  this  place  which  are  very 
rich.  The  Government  ought  to  work  them.  It  is  all-important  to  pre- 
vent the  speculators  from  skinning  us  too  much. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  G.  BLANCHARD, 
Brigadier -General,  Provisional  Army  C.  S. 


780 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVU.I 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

No.  2.  / Little  Bock,  Ark.,  June  2,  1862. 

I.  Separate  military  organizations  cannot  exist  in  the  same  jurisdiol 
tion  without  causing  confusion  and  provoking  dissensions ; therefore,* 
the  State  authorities  consenting,  there  will  hereafter  be  no  State  forces! 
within  this  district.  No  additional  force  of  mounted  men  will  be  re4 
ceived,  unless  raised  under  special  authority  from  the  major-general 
commanding  or  organized  with  his  approval. 

II.  All  white  male  persons  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  thirtyJ 
five  years  who  may  reside  or  be  at  this  date  within  the  limits  of  thei 
State  of  Arkansas  must  enroll  themselves  as  members  of  volunteer  in-j 
fantry  companies  for  the  Confederate  service  for  the  term  of  during  the 
war  on  or  before  the  20th  day  of  this  month. 

III.  Each  infantry  company  must  consist  of  not  less  than  100  narj 
more  than  125  rank  and  file : Provided,  that  where  the  company  oij 
companies  in  any  county  are  full  fractional  numbers  of  men  therein 
embraced  within  this  order  must  be  attached  for  the  time  being  td 
such  company  or  companies. 

IV.  Companies  formed  before  the  20th  day  of  this  month  may  elect 
their  own  officers,  but  such  election  will  be  annulled  and  officers  ap-j 
pointed  unless  the  captain  or  one  of  the  lieutenants  shall  report  inj 
person  at  these  headquarters  with  a correct  list  of  the  names  and  resi^i 
dences  of  the  members  of  the  company  on  or  before  the  20th  day  of 
this  month. 

V.  All  persons  embraced  within  this  order  who  shall  fail  to  enroll 
themselves  as  members  of  an  infantry  company  on  or  before  the  20tb| 
day  of  this  month,  or  who  shall  at  any  time  before  that  day  manifest 
an  intention  to  evade  the  requirements  of  this  order  by  concealing  them- 
selves or  departing  or  attempting  to  depart  from  the  county  in  which] 
they  now  are  or  from  the  State,  must  be  enrolled  as  conscripts,  and  held 
as  such  by  the  captain  or  member  of  any  such  company  or  by  any  Con- 
federate or  State  officer. 

VI.  Any  member  of  an  infantry  company,  whether  voluntarily  en- 
rolled or  taken  as  a conscript,  who  shall  absent  himself  from  the  county 
in  which  he  was  enrolled  without  leave  in  writing  from  his  captain 
shall  be  deemed  a deserter  and  punished  as  such  under  the  Rules  and! 
Articles  of  War.  Captains  must  not  grant  leaves  for  a longer  period 
than  five  days  without  special  authority  from  these  headquarters. 

VII.  Infantry  companies  formed  under  this  order  will  be  organized] 
into  regiments  or  battalions  by  persons  hereafter  to  be  designated  foi 
that  purpose. 

VIII.  The  field  and  staff  officers  of  all  infantry  regiments  and  bat-* 
talions  organized  under  this  order  will  be  appointed;  vacancies  in  com- 
pany officers  will  be  filled  in  like  manner.  Inefficient  officers  of  all 
grades,  whether  elected  or  appointed,  will  be  summarily  dismissed  front 
the  service  or  reduced  to  the  ranks,  at  the  option  of  the  major-general 
commanding,  and  meritorious  soldiers  promoted  in  their  stead. 

IX.  Persons  not  within  the  ages  of  conscription  who  have  heretofore 
enrolled  themselves  under  the  late  proclamation  [following]  of  Governoi 
Rector  will  be  discharged  upon  application  forwarded  by  their  com- 
manding officers. 

X.  Substitutes  will  not  in  any  case  be  accepted. 

XI.  Enrolling  officers  heretofore  appointed  will  continue  to  exercise 
their  functions  as  such  and  are  charged  with  the  duty  of  aiding  in  the 
due  execution  of  this  order. 


'hap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


781 


XII.  The  following  persons  are  by  law  exempt  from  conscription  : 

1st.  Officers  and  enlisted  men  of  the  Confederate  service ; but  employes 
)f  Departments  who  have  not  been  sworn  in  as  officers  or  soldiers  are 
lot  exempt. 

2d.  Judicial  and  executive  officers  of  the  State  or  Confederate  Govern- 
ment. 

3d.  Members  of  the  Confederate  Congress  and  of  the  State  Legisla- 
tures and  their  respective  officers. 

4th.  Clerks  of  Confederate  or  State  officers  allowed  by  law. 

5th.  Persons  actually  engaged  in  carrying  the  mails. 

6th.  One  ferryman  at  each  ferry  on  every  post-route. 

7th.  Pilots  and  persons  in  the  marine  service  of  the  Confederate  States 
and  those  in  actual  service  on  river  and  railroad  routes  of  transporta- 
tion. 

8th.  Persons  actually  engaged  in  working  iron  mines,  furnaces,  and 
founderies. 

9th.  Journeymen  printers  actually  engaged  in  printing  newspapers. 

10th.  Presidents  of  colleges  and  academies  and  teachers  having  as 
many  as  twenty  pupils. 

11th.  Ministers  of  religion  in  the  regular  discharge  of  their  ministerial 
duties. 

12th.  Telegraph  operators  actually  employed  as  such. 

13th.  Superintendents  of  public  hospitals  and  lunatic  asylums  and  the 
regular  nurses  and  attendants  therein,  and  the  teachers  employed  in 
institutions  for  the  deaf  and  dumb  and  the  blind. 

14th.  In  each  apothecary  store  one  apothecary  in  good  standing  who 
is  a practical  druggist. 

15th.  Where  application  is  made,  accompanied  by  reliable  testimony  as 
to  the  facts,  the  major-general  commanding  will  exempt  persons  actually 
engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  wool,  cotton,  arms,  powder,  salt,  leather, 
breadstuffs,  and  array  clothing  or  equipments,  and  overseers  upon 
[plantations  owned  by  widows  or  minors  or  by  officers  or  soldiers  in 
the  Confederate  service,  when  there  is  no  other  white  male  person  on 
such  plantation  capable  of  managing  the  same : Provided,  [that]  such 
plantations  have  been  planted  in  grain  and  not  more  cotton  than  the 
law  allows,  and  not  less  than  ten  negro  men  on  the  place. 

16th.  Persons  physically  disabled  for  service  according  to  the  Army 
[ Regulations : Provided,  that  when  any  person  shall  claim  exemption 
on  that  ground  a practicing  physician  in  good  standing,  whose  char- 
acter as  such  shall  be  certified  to  by  the  clerk  of  the  proper  county, 
under  his  seal  of  office,  shall  certify  to  the  fact  of  such  disability,  and 
such  certificate  shall  be  verified  by  the  oath  of  the  physician  giving  it. 
Persons  claiming  exemption  because  of  physical  disability  shall  be  ex- 
amined by  the  physician  in  the  presence  of  the  proper  enrolling  officer, 
to  whom  the  certificate  of  disability  shall  be  delivered.  The  proper 
I enrolling  officer  will,  when  satisfied  that  any  person  is  exempt  from  con- 
i scription  as  above,  give  him  a certificate  of  the  fact,  setting  forth  the 
grounds  of  exemption,  &c. 

By  order  of  Major-General  ffrndman : 

R.  O.  NEWTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant - General. 

Executive  Office, 

Little  Rock,  Ark. , June  2,  1862. 

It  being  essential  that  but  one  military  organization  shall  exist  with- 
in the  Trans-Mississippi  District,  all  Arkansas  State  troops  are  hereby 


782 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTL  | 

transferred  to  the  Confederate  service,  and  will  report  for  duty  to  Major- 
General  Hindman.  Men  not  within  the  ages  of  conscription  will  be 
discharged  upon  application. 

H.  M.  RECTOR, 

Governor  and  President  of  Military  Board. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

No.  4.  j Little  Pock,  Ark .,  June  2,  1862. 

I.  All  persons  within  this  district  are  hereby  required  to  take  Con- 
federate notes  as  currency  at  par  in  all  business  transactions. 

II.  The  following  tariff  of  prices  is  hereby  established  throughout 
this  district  for  the  articles  specified : 


Flour 

Bacon 

Beef 

Corn 

Corn  meal 

Chickens 

Butter 

Eggs 

Potatoes 

Hay  and  fodder 

Lard 

Pork 

Turkeys 

Salt 

Sole  leather 

Upper  leather 

Harness  leather 

Molasses 

Sugar 

Quinine 

Calomel 

Morphine 

Castor  oil 

Ipecac  

Opium 

Tartar  emetic 

Blistering  ointment 

Epsom  salts 

Soda 

Rhubarb 

Cream  of  tartar 

Turpentine 

Dover’s  powders... 


per  hundred . . $8  00 
...per  pound..  25 

do 10 

..  per  bushel . . 75 

do 1 00 

...per  dozen..  2 40 
...per  pound..  20 
...per  dozen..  15 
..per  bushel..  1 00 
per  hundred . . 1 50 

...per  pound..  20 

do 15 

each..  1 00 

per  sack..  15  00 

...per  pound..  50 

do 80 

do 75 

...  per  gallon . . 40 

...per  pound..  10 

...per  ounce..  10  00 

do 50  i 

do 15  00 

. .per.  gallon. . 5 00 

..per  pound..  8 00 
...per  ounce..  2 00 

do 25; 

. . . per  pound . . 8 00 

do 60 

do 50 

...per  ounce..  50 
. .per  pound..  2 00  I 
..per  gallon..  2 50 
. . . per  ounce . . 75 


III.  Every  person  violating  paragraph  I of  this  order,  and  every 
person  having  for  sale  any  article  specified  in  paragraph  II,  and  de- 
manding or  receiving  for  the  same  any  higher  price  than  that  estab- 
lished therefor,  or  refusing  to  sell  the  same  for  such  price,  must  be 
arrested  and  sent  to  these  headquarters,  to  be  dealt  with  as  such  in- 
human and  disloyal  conduct  may  deserve.  Proof  of  the  fact,  in  the 
form  of  affidavits,  before  any  State  officer  authorized  by  law  to  admin- 
ister an  oath,  must  be  sent  with  the  prisoner. 

IV.  All  Confederate  officers  and  soldiers  are  hereby  instructed,  and 
State  officers  and  loyal  citizens  are  authorized  and  requested,  to  execute 
this  order  promptly  and  without  respect  to  persons  in  every  case  of  its 
violation. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Hindman: 

R.  C.  NEWTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


:hap.  XXVIL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  783 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

No.  5.  f Little  Rock , Ark.,  June  2,  1862. 

I.  Private  property  within  this  district  must  not  in  any  case  what- 
ever be  taken  or  impressed  by  any  person,  whether  officer,  soldier, 
or  citizen,  without  special  authority  in  writing  from  these  headquarters, 
and  such  authority  must  in  every  instance  be  exhibited  and  read  to  the 
owner  or  his  agent  before  the  property  is  taken,  unless  he  shall  pur- 
posely absent  himself  to  avoid  the  same. 

II.  All  Confederate  officers  and  soldiers  are  hereby  instructed,  and 
all  State  officers  and  loyal  citizens  are  hereby  authorized  and  requested, 
to  resist  and  prevent  the  taking  or  impressment  of  private  property, 
except  in  strict  accordance  with  paragraph  I of  this  order.  If  the  per- 
sons attempting  to  prevent  such  outrages  are  overpowered  they  must 
report  the  facts  at  once  to  these  headquarters,  where  the  proper  steps 
will  be  taken  to  punish  the  wrong-doer.  The  men  who  take  or  im- 
press private  property  without  authority  are  robbers  and  marauders, 
and  will  be  put  to  death  without  hesitation. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Hindman: 

* R.  C.  NEWTON, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Bladen  Springs,  Ala.,  July  18, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  H.  Forney, 

Commanding  C.  S.  Forces , Mobile , Ala. : 

Dear  General  : I hope  you  will  excuse  the  following  suggestions, 
in  view  of  my  anxiety  for  the  success  of  our  arms  everywhere,  especially 
of  those  under  your  command.  Should  the  enemy  give  up  further 
attempts  against  Vicksburg  they  may  make  a demonstration  against 
Mobile ; hence  the  necessity  of  being  prepared  for  them : 

1st.  I would  order  a map  of  Mobile  and  its  vicinity  prepared,  with  a 
reconnaissance  of  all  the  roads  made  for  at  least  10  miles  outside  of  the 
city,  said  reconnaissance  to  extend  to  the  Gulf  shore  on  the  principal 
roads  in  that  direction. 

2d.  I would  make  the  two  or  three  officers  next  to  you  in  command 
become  well  acquainted  with  that  map,  copies  of  which  would  be  fur- 
nished them,  and  make  them  reconnoiter  well  all  the  roads  to  a distance 
of  about  5 miles  outside  of  the  lines. 

3d.  I would  see  that  each  regiment  is  furnished  with  at  least  twelve 
or  fourteen  wagons  and  four  or  five  ambulances. 

4th.  I would  throw  them  out  on  outpost  duty  in  succession  for  three 
days  at  a time,  to  teach  them  the  bivouac  life  and  how  to  march ; also 
the  outpost  duty. 

5th.  I would  see  that  the  ordnance  stores  are  in  a proper  condition  for 
distribution  at  a moment’s  notice,  i.  e .,  40  rounds  per  man  in  haver- 
sack and  60  in  regimental  ordnance  wagons,  100  more  per  man  in 
reserve  with  chief  of  ordnance  wagons,  100  rounds  per  piece  ot  field 
artillery  and  100  in  reserve,  about  100  rounds  per  piece  in  magazines 
of  heavy  batteries  and  about  the  like  number  in  depot  magazines. 

6th.  I would  establish  depots  of  provisions  for  a few  days — according 
to  the  length  of  time  I expected  to  stop  there — every  40  or  50  miles 
along  any  line  of  retreat  I might  have  to  follow  if  compelled  to  abandon 


784 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH 


Mobile,  and  I .would  see  that  the  bridges,  &c.,  on  said  road  are  always 
in  good  condition. 

7th.  I would  leave  nothing  to  be  done  at  the  last  hour  and  during  the 
hurry  of  a retrograde  movement. 

Hoping  that  the  above  suggestions  may  be  of  service  to  you,  I re- 
main. dear  general,  yours,  very  truly, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


P.  8. — Should  the  enemy  come  to  Mobile  while  I am  here,  and  you 
have  need  of  my  assistance,  I would  gladly  serve  on  your  staff  as  a 
volunteer  aide. 


General  Orders,  > War  Dept.,  Adjt.  & Insp.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  50.  f Richmond , Va .,  July  18,  1862. 

******* 

II.  Military  Department  No.  2 will  embrace  the  States  of  Mississippi, 
Alabama,  East  Louisiana,  and  part  of  Florida  which  is  west  of  the 
Chattahoochee  and  Apalachicola  Rivers. 

******* 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Orders,  1 Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  765.  ) Opelousas , July  20,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  John  B.  Smith,  commanding  Tenth  Brigade  Louisiana 
Militia,  will,  on  reception  of  this  order  and  without  delay,  order  into 
active  service  the  militia  of  the  parishes  of  Rapides  and  Natchitoches, 
to  rendezvous  at  some  point  below  Alexandria,  to  be  selected  by  him. 
******* 

IY.  Brig.  Gen.  John  B'.  Smith  will  take  the  command  of  the  forces 
and  of  the  defenses  of  that  portion  of  the  State  at  Old,  Black,  Red, 
and  Atchafalaya  Rivers,  and  along  Red  River,  and  on  the  Atchafalaya 
and  Black  Rivers.  He  will  at  once  proceed  to  make  selections  of 
proper  points  for  the  erection  of  batteries,  &c.,  to  prevent  the  ingress 
of  the  enemy  into  the  interior  or  to  harass  him. 

******* 

Bv  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

M.  GRIYOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  July  21, 1862. 

Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

Opelousas , La.  ( via  Woodville , Miss.) : 

Dispatches  sent  to  you  via  Camp  Moore  and  more  recently  via  Jack- 
son.  General  Holmes  is  en  route  as  commander  of  Trans-Mississippi 
Department.  General  Bragg  cannot  now  spare  General  Price’s  troops. 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


Chaf.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


785 


Tangipahoa,  La.,  July  22,  1862. 
General  Van  Dorn,  Vicksburg , Miss.  : 

The  enemy  has  three  regiments  of  effective  men  at  Baton  Rouge,  two 
batteries  of  six  guns  each,  and  about  100  cavalry.  The  enemy  is  in- 
trenching there.  It  is  supposed  that  they  are  arming  negroes.  Gen- 
eral Phelps  is  arming  negroes  near  New  Orleans. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier- General . 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  22,  1862. 

General  Daniel  Ruggles, 

Commanding  District  No.  1 : 

General:  Keep  the  gun,  but  I would  not  put  it  up  until  I had  men 
to  guard  it.  I cannot  possibly  send  men  to  you  now.  I should  expose 
Vicksburg  to  assault  by  overwhelming  numbers  from  Memphis.  If 
Bragg  moves  I can  then  send  you  a force  to  take  Baton  Rouge.  I have 
ordered  transportation  to  you ; keep  it  always  ready.  Raise  men  in 
mean  time.  I will  have  some  arms  for  them. 

Yours,  &c., 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major-General. 


Tangipahoa,  La.,  July  25, 1862. 
General  Van  Dorn,  Vicksburg , Miss. : 

Enemy  reported  at  Denham  Springs,  on  Amite,  500  to  1,500  strong ; 
shall  soon  know.  Cutting  timber  and  intrenching  with  negroes  at 
Baton  Rouge.  Some  2,000  disciplined  troops  and  one  light  battery 
necessary  here 5 can  you  send  them?  Number  of  Partisan  Rangers 
overstated  and  without  discipline.  Cannonading  on  the  23d  near  Bayou 
Sara.  Phelps  has  armed  4,000  negroes  near  New  Orleans. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  25, 1862. 

General  Ruggles  : 

Will  start  as  soon  as  can  get  here,  say  to-morrow  by  12  o’clock ; 4,000 
men  and  battery  of  artillery.  Be  ready  with  wagons  to  move  as  soon 
as  they  arrive.  I send  ten  days’  rations  with  them. 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major-General. 


Tangipahoa,  La.,  July  25, 1862. 

General  Van  Dorn,  Vicksburg: 

It  is  reported  that  the  enemy  has  been  re-enforced  at  Baton  Rouge, 
and  numbers  from  7,000  to  8,000. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier- General. 


50  R R— VOL  XV 


786 


W.  FLA., 


, ilJUA.j 


Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  26,  1862. 

General  Price,  [ Tupelo , Miss.  ] : 

General  : The  enemy  at  Baton  Rouge  are  threatening  Camp  Moore. 
I have  ordered  4,000  men  there.  If  you  will  send  me  one  of  your  bri- 
gades I will  break  up  their  nest  there  and  return  to  you  in  twelve  days. 
Will  you  do  it  ? Please  answer.  I cannot  venture  more  than  4,000 
from  this  point  just  now,  and  the  enemy  are  5,000  or  6,000  strong  in 
position. 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

Vicksburg , Miss .,  July  26,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  O.  Breckinridge, 

Commanding  Division : 

General:  The  object  of  the  expedition  under  your  command  to 
Camp  Moore  is  to  re-enforce  the  troops  at  that  point  for  the  purpose  of 
holding  the  enemy  in  check,  and,  if  you  find  after  joining  forces  with 
General  Buggies  and  informing  yourself  of  the  strength  of  the  enemy 
(now  supposed  to  be  about  5,000  men)  that  you  are  strong  enough,  to 
dislodge  him  from  Baton  Bouge  and  that  vicinity.  I have  asked  for  a 
brigade  of  troops  from  the  Army  of  the  West  to  join  you.  If  it  is  sent 
you  will  certainly  be  able  to  drive  the  enemy  from  Baton  Bouge.  Should 
you  succeed,  you  will  be  governed  by  circumstances  and  your  own  good 
judgment  whether  to  hold  the  place  with  your  forces  or  destroy  public 
property  and  retire  to  some  point  near  and  report  for  orders.  You  will 
take  with  you  ten  days’  rations  from  Jackson,  Miss.,  which  have  been 
ordered  to  be  in  readiness  for  you.  Transportation  has  been  ordered 
for  you.  The  general  commanding  does  not  deem  it  necessary  to  give 
General  Breckinridge  any  further  instructions.  He  will  of  course,  as 
major-general,  assume  command  of  all  the  troops  of  the  expedition,  in- 
cluding the  troops  of  Camp  Moore  under  Brig.  Gen.  D.  Buggies. 
s EABL  VAN  DOBN, 

Major-General. 


Richmond,  Va.,  July  26, 1862. 
Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Opelousas,  La. : 

I have  sent  you  several  telegrams.  One  informed  you  of  others  sent 
before.  General  Holmes  has  gone  to  Trans-Mississippi  Department. 
General  Blanchard  left  some  time  since  for  Monroe.  Due  efforts  have 
been  made  to  secure  the  delivery  of  arms.  General  Taylor  will  go  to 
Opelousas.  Refer  you  to  him  for  full  information. 
y JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


PONCHATOULA,  La.,  July  27,  1862. 

General  RuGGLES: 

I arrived  here  this  evening  at  8 o’clock.  The  Yankees,  have  landed 
about  3 miles  up  the  Tchefuncta  River ; 500  strong  on  this  side  of  the 
river ; also  150  strong  on  the  other  side.  This  is  only  about  15  miles 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


787 


from  this  point.  Our  men  are  scattered  so  much  on  picket  duty  I can- 
not rally  much  force  before  the  enemy  may  be  on  me.  I shall  do  all  I 
can  and  keep  you  informed  of  their  movements.  Please  answer. 

J.  DE  BATTN, 

Major . 


Ponchatoula,  La.,  July  27, 1862. 

General  Ruggles: 

The  following  dispatch  just  received  from  Captain  Slocum  : 

Federals  200  or  300  strong  on  steamer  Grey  Cloud,  H miles  below  Covington.  The 
New  London  is  lying  out  below  Mandeville. 


I have  only  25  effective  men. 


W.  D.  L.  McRAE. 


Ponchatoula,  La.,  July  27, 1862. 

General  Ruggles  : 

Have  received  another  dispatch  from  Captain  Slocum.  Four  hundred 
Yankees  landed  in  Covington  5 put  out  pickets.  New  London  and  Grey 
Cloud  lying  off  1J  miles.  Captain  Bredow  was  here  from  Van  Buren ; 
says  the  detachment  ordered  there  has  no  corn  or  provisions ; will  leave 

there  to-morrow.  _ _ ,,  _ 4 _ 

W.  D.  L.  McRAE. 


Tangipahoa,  July  27,  [1862]. 
Capt.  [W.  D.  L.]  McRae,  Ponchatoula : 

Will  give  orders  soon  about  forces  to  meet  Federals  at  Covington. 
General  Breckinridge  will  soon  be  here  and  I await  his  arrival  to  make 
further  moves.  Keep  me  advised  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy.  Keep 
a strong  picket  of  Rangers  at  Van  Buren  and  on  railroad  below.  Con- 
centrate rest  toward  Covington  to  watch  enemy. 

DANIEL  RTTGGLES, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Clinton,  La.,  July  27, 1862.  (Received  July  28.) 
Capt.  James  O.  Fuqua,  Camp  Moore , La. : 

Sir  : I looked  for  you  over  last  night,  as  I was  informed  by  one  of 
your  cousins  that  it  was  your  intention  to  come  home.  Our  commu- 
nity has  been  under  some  excitement  for  two  or  three  days  in  reference 
to  a skirmish  between  a scouting  party  of  the  enemy  from  Baton  Rouge 
and  our  Rangers  on  the  Amite  River  at  or  near  Henry  Warnach’s.  I 
saw  a gentleman  from  within  a short  distance  of  Baton  Rouge  yester- 
day, from  whom  I learn  some  of  the  particulars.  The  Federals,  as  this 
gentleman  (A.  M.  Stewart,  an  uncle  of  Duncan  Stewart)  informs  me, 
were  50  strong — cavalry  of  course.  Our  forces  were  much  larger,  but 
in  what  numbers  the  enemy  were  [we  were]  not  able  to  tell,  nor  have 
we  yet  learned.  The  enemy  report  a loss  of  2 men  killed  and  some 
others  wounded.  They  also  captured  12  or  15  horses,  with  saddles, 
bridles,  &c. ; besides,  they  brought  in  4 prisoners,  Henry  Warnach  be- 
ing one  of  the  number. 


788  w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

It  does  seem  to  me  that  these  raids  of  40  or  50  men  ought  to  be  more 
successfully  met.  From  the  best  information  I can  obtain  the  enemy 
are  about  2,500  or  3,000  strong  in  Baton  Rouge,  and  are  intrenching 
themselves  to  defend  the  city  against  an  army  which  they  expect  us 
to  have  soon.  As  to  our  Partisan  Rangers,  they  express  the  most  su- 
preme contempt : and  having  been  advised  that  our  army  has  not  yet 
arrived,  they  prowl  about  perfectly  indifferent  to  the  presence  of  our 
Rangers.  1 also  learn  that  the  enemy  are  out  of  money,  having  expended 
all  they  had  for  cotton,  &c.  This  scouting  party  of  50  men  were  com- 
manded by  Colonel  Keith.  Keith  is  drunk  nearly  all  the  time.  The 
enemy  were  offering  to  sell  the  horses  which  they  captured  for  almost 

any  price  they  could  get.  . . , « 

I place  much  reliance  upon  the  information  which  I obtained  from 
Stewart,  as  his  means  of  obtaining  information  were  as  good  as  they 
could  be.  If  I felt  authorized  I would  send  “ our  man”  within  the  en- 
emy’s lines  for  full  particulars.  How  shall  I support  the  militia  it  called 
out  under  the  order  just  received  ? 

Yours,  truly,  D 0 HABDEE. 

P g Pond  has  ordered  Jones’ cavalry  from  Jackson  to  Clinton. 

This  change  is  attended  with  some  expense,  without  much  profit.  This 
cavalry  might  be  profitably  employed  capturing  negroes  on  the  lower 
Baton  Rouge  road  and  in  preventing  intercourse  between  our  people 
and  the  enemy. 


Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

Ko  789.  ] Opelousas , July  27,  1862. 

I Brig  Gen.  John  Blair  Smith,  commanding  Tenth  Brigade,  Louis- 
iana Militia,  will  revoke  his  orders  to  the  militia  of  the  parishes  of 
Natchitoches  and  Rapides  so  far  as  it  orders  them  to  proceed  to  Gro- 
ton’s Landing,  but  he  will  order  the  militia  of  said  parishes  to  organ- 
ize and  remain  within  the  limits  of  their  parishes  and  be  prepared  to 

obev  further  orders.'  . „ 

II  Brigadier-General  Smith  will  inspect  the  shores  of  the  Bed  Biver 
to  the  mouth,  and  report  to  these  headquarters  the  proper  points  at 

which  to  erect  batteries  for  its  defenses.  . . 

Bv  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-m-chiel : 
y uiluu  u JOHN  H.  BERNOS, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  La. 


Ponchatoula,  La.,  July  28, 1862. 

General  Rtjgg-les  : 

I started  for  Camp  Slocum,  and  got  near  there  when  I met  a courier 
with  the  news  that  the  enemy  had  shelled  Madisonville  last  night,  kill- 
ing one  woman  and  child.  They  returned  this  morning  with  large 
force— some  say  4,000,  as  they  had  four  large  transports  full  of  troops. 
They  have  a cavalry  force  hunting  the  Rangers.  I have  ordered  t 
pickets  to  watch  their  movements.  DE  BAUN 

Major . 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


789 


Ponchatoula,  La.,  July  28,  1862. 

General  Ruggles: 

The  enemy  have  all  left  Madisonville ; not  a sail  in  sight.  Will 
leave  for  Camp  Slocum  early  in  the  morning.  Will  concentrate  troops 
as  ordered. 

J.  DE  BA  UN, 

[Major.] 


Ponchatoula,  La.,  July  28,  1862. 

General  Ruggles: 

No  further  news.  I have  no  idea  they  will  make  any  demonstration 
from  Covington.  My  impression  is  it  is  a feint. 

W.  D.  L.  McRAE. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  174.  J Richmond , Fa.,  July  28, 1862. 

III.  Brig.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor  is  hereby  detached  from  the  command 
of  the  Second  Louisiana  Brigade,  and  will  proceed  to  Opelousas,  La., 
for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  the  enrolling  act  in  Western  Louisiana, 
in  hastening  forward  recruits  to  fill  the  regiments  of  the  Louisiana 
Brigade  serving  in  Northern  Virginia,  and  in  assembling  conscripts  for 
further  assignment  or  for  the  future  organization  of  the  reserve. 
*###### 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Camp  Moore,  July  28,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles,  Commanding : 

General:  In  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No.  18,1  proceeded  to 
Ponchatoula,  and  found  Lieutenant  Bradley,  with  whom  I advised. 
The  guns  left  by  our  forces  at  Manchac  Pass,  on  this  side  of  the  bridge, 
are  worthless,  the  trunnions  being  broken.  The  two  32-pounders  on 
the  other  side  of  the  bridge  are  in  the  water  filled  with  shot,  and  it 
would  require  the  use  of  a good  schooner  to  raise  them.  This  I deem 
at  the  present  impracticable,  as  the  enemy  are  at  that  point.  Lieu- 
tenant Simmons,  of  Captain  Slocum’s  company,  at  Covington,  informed 
me  that  there  was  but  one  smooth-bore  24-pounder  in  Pearl  River, 
lying  in  12  feet  of  water,  and  that  to  get  it  will  require  the  taking  a 
schooner  there  and  sufficient  force  to  repel  the  enemy,  who  are  there 
with  launches  mounting  Dahlgren  howitzers.  The  guns  which  were 
upon  the  gunboats  were  taken  up  to  Jackson  and  are  now  in  use.  The 
recent  movement  of  the  enemy  and  the  concentration  of  the  troops 
under  your  command  at  this  point  leaving  me  no  means  of  securing 
the  guns  remaining  at  the  points  above  mentioned  lead  me  to  make 
this  report  and  ask  for  further  instructions. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

Tour  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  MULLETT, 

First  Lieutenant  Eighth  Battalion  Heavy  Artillery. 


790  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 

Monroe , La.,  July  28,  1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va. : 

General  : I report  to  yon  the  arrival  of  Colonel  Gray’s  Thirtieth 
[Twenty-eighth]  Louisiana  Regiment,  without  a single  gun.  You  will 
oblige  me  very  much  by  sending  an  order  to  forward  here  the  arms 
they  are  retaining  at  Vicksburg  by  order  of  General  Van  Dorn,  and 
also  to  hasten  the  invoice  of  the  guns  which  were  to  be  sent  by  the 
Ordnance  Department  at  Richmond. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  G.  BLANCHARD, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

[Indorsement.] 

Inform  him  that  10,000  stand  of  arms  have  been  sent  to  the  Trans- 
Mississippi  Department  via  Jackson.  Many  have  probably  crossed  the 
river  by  this  time. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH. 


Tangipahoa,  July  29,  [1862]. 

Major  De  Baun, 

Commanding  Partisan  Rangers,  Ponchatoula  : 

Move  with  all  your  available  force  of  Rangers  to  Williams’  Bridge,  on 
the  Amite,  with  the  least  possible  delay.  Take  all  of  the  three  com- 
panies of  Capts.  [J.  J.]  Slocum,  [Richard]  Bredow,  and  [A.  C.]  Bick- 
ham  with  you,  leaving  only  a detachment  of  25  or  30  mounted  men 
with  Capt.  [W.  D.  L.]  McRae  and  his  company,  for  scouting  service 
and  local  defense.  Leave  your  sick  and  unserviceable  men  with  him  at 
Ponchatoula.  Take  the  best  route  to  Davidson’s  plantation.  Report 
to  me  when  you  start  and  how  many  men  you  take.  Answer  imme- 
diately. 

Captain  McRae  will  forward  this  dispatch. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier- General. 

— 

General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  in  the  Field, 

No.  4.  f Camp  near  Tangipahoa,  July  29,  1862. 

Brigadier- General  Clark  will  move  with  his  division  as  early  to-mor- 
row as  possible  via  Greenville  to  or  near  Williams’  Bridge,  on  the 
Amite  River,  guarding  any  fords  near  by  above  or  below  that  point, 
moving  out  scouting  parties  to  right  and  left,  and  obtaining  all  informa- 
tion possible  from  his  front.  If  his  information  justifies  it  he  will  move  on 
toward  Baton  Rouge,  informing  these  headquarters  frequently  of  his 
position,  and  he  will  be  followed  by  the  rest  of  the  forces  as  soon  as 
subsistence  and  transportation  can  be  obtained.  He  will  have  his  troops, 
take  two  days’  cooked  rations  in  haversacks,  and  as  much  in  wagons 
as  his  transportation  will  allow,  after  reserving  enough  for  ammunition 
and  such  hospital  tents  as  he  can  procure.  He  will  collect  as  much 
subsistence  and  transportation  as  possible  on  his  march. 

It  is  not  deemed  necessary  to  give  more  detailed  instructions,  since 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  791 

the  movement  has  been  the  subject  of  full  verbal  consultation  and 
decision. 

Bv  order  of  Maior-General  Breckinridge  : 

JOHN  A.  BUCKNER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Richmond , Va.,  July  30,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  Richmond , Va. : 

General  : You  will  proceed  to  Opelousas,  La.,  and  thence  report  by 
letter  to  Major-General  Holmes,  at  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  commanding  the 
Trans-Mississippi  Department,  sending  him  at  the  same  time  a copy  of 
these  instructions.  You  are  assigned  to  duty  in  the  District  of  West- 
ern Louisiana,  in  the  Trans-Mississippi  Department,  and  you  are  spe- 
cially charged  with  the  command  of  the  troops  serving  in  the  southern 
part  of  the  district  confided  to  you.  You  will  prevent  the  use  of  the 
rivers  and  bayous  in  that  region  of  country  by  the  enemy  and  will 
generally  prevent  him  from  getting  supplies  from  or  bolding  communi- 
cation with  the  interior.  From  the  men  enrolled  you  will  select  those 
who  can  be  most  advantageously  sent  to  the  Louisiana  regiments  serv- 
ing in  Virginia,  and  from  time  to  time  fill  up  the  ranks  of  the  regiments 
of  the  First  Brigade  and  subsequently  those  of  the  Second  Brigade, 
retaining  for  service  in  Louisiana  those  of  the  recruits  that  can  be  more 
advantageously  employed  there.  Such  organization  of  the  reserves  as 
may  be  found  advisable  will  be  made  after  the  Louisiana  regiments  in 
the  field  shall  have  been  filled  up.  You  will  establish  such  lines  of  com- 
munication as  the  state  of  the  country  may  require  for  the  regular  re- 
ceipt and  transmission  of  intelligence  in  Western  Louisiana;  and  to 
embarrass  the  enemy  in  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  River  you  will 
organize  and  equip  light  batteries  in  such  numbers  as  circumstances 
will  permit,  with  directions  to  approach  the  river  at  points  suitable  for 
the  attack  on  passing  vessels  of  the  enemy,  with  instructions  to  change 
their  positions  (the  light  batteries)  so  frequently  as  to  prevent  any  ex- 
pedition for  their  capture.  You  will  also  cause  to  be  destroyed  all  wood 
collected  on  the  river  banks  for  the  supply  of  steamboats,  and  prohibit 
in  future  the  cording  of  wood  in  the  proximity  of  the  river.  You  will 
require  partisan  battalions  organized  within  your  command  to  be  care- 
fully inspected,  and  will  disband  or  discharge  any  that  may  not  give 
promise  of  useful  service.  All  others  you  will  so  direct  and  control  as 
to  make  them  contribute  in  the  greatest  degree  to  the  protection  of  the 
persons  and  property  of  our  fellow-citizens*  You  will  confine  the  enemy 
within  the  narrowest  limits,  and  recover  from  his  possession,  as  oppor- 
tunity may  serve,  any  and  all  positions  in  the  State  of  Louisiana  which 
by  the  fortune  of  war  have  fallen  into  his  hands.  As  far  as  circum- 
stances will  permit,  you  will  keep  up  communication  with  Col.  M.  Ma- 
rigny  in  Eastern  Louisiana,  and  endeavor  to  maintain  cointelligence 
with  General  Van  Dorn,  commanding  the  military  district  from  which 
yours  is  divided  by  the  Mississippi  River.  In  addition  to  the  reports 
and  returns  to  be  made  by  you  to  General  Holmes  you  will  communi- 
cate directly  to  this  office  information  of  all  important  events,  and  send 
also  a duplicate  of  the  monthly  consolidated  returns  of  the  forces  under 
your  command. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 


792 


W.  FLA,,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

On  the  March,  July  31,  1862. 

L.  D.  Sandidge, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

Sir:  Your  communication  just  at  hand,  and  have  communicated  with 
General  Clark  fully.  The  movement  is  this:  I have  a strong  picket  at 
the  following  places:  Benton’s  Ferry,  Curtis’  Ford,  Dunn’s  Ford,  Bur- 
lington Ferry,  Courtney’s  Ferry,  and  Williams’  Bridge,  and  also  a 
picket  on  the  swamp  road,  or  what  is  known  as  the  Springfield  road. 
This  picket  has  been  on  duty  all  this  week,  and  will  not  be  relieved 
until  our  advance  goes  down.  I have  sent  Captain  Morgan’s  company, 
by  order  of  General  Clark,  to  act  as  his  advance.  Captain  Tate,  with 
one  squadron,  will  be  in  your  advance,  provided  you  go  down  on  this 
side  of  the  Amite  and  cross  at  Benton’s  or  Davidson’s ; otherwise  our 
pickets  will  answer  the  purpose.  I shall  go  now  and  receive  further 
instructions  from  General  Clark.  Up  to  this  hour  no  Yankees,  except 
the  2,000  reported  by  courier  at  Caldwell’s,  have  left  town ; they  are 
fortifying.  I shall  send  advices  to  you  promptly  from  both  sides  the 
river.  Capt.  E.  A.  Scott  will  join  me  at  the  intersection  of  the  plank 
road  turning  down  to  Greenwell  Springs. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WINGFIELD, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding. 

p.  s.___Capt.  O.  P.  Amacker  will  be  in  command  of  two  companies  of 
infantry  as  skirmishers  in  advance  of  your  column. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  District  of  the  Mississippi,  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn,  C.  S. 
Army,  commanding,  for  July , 1862  ( headquarters  Viclcsburg). 


Sub-districts 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

/ 

CO 

i 

se 

o 

Men. 

123 

2,  337 

2,897 

3,  286 

281 

3. 466 

6,  595 

8,  065 

223 

3,  245 

4,  260 

6,  591 

30 

231 

278 

350 

T'nfnl  

637 

9,  279 

14,  030 

| 18, 292 

1 

Mobile,  Atigust  1, 1862. 

General  Beauregard,  C.  S.  A.,  Bladen , Ala. : 

General  : Present  appearances  indicate  that  Government  purposes 
leaving  New  Orleans  in  the  undisturbed  possession  of  the  enemy.  If 
it  remain  in  their  hands  until  the  tall  they  will  surround  it  with  fortifi- 
cations and  hold  it  at  their  pleasure. 

Twenty-five  hundred  men  can  retake  it  now,  and,  with  half  the  can- 
non at  present  unused  in  this  department  5,000  men  can  hold  it  till  we 
could  fortify  it.  Outside  of  the  city  your  name  would  bring  to  the  ranks 
a legion  of  volunteers  and  inside  the  people  w ould  rally  in  mass  to  > our 
appeal.  The  disgrace  brought  upon  the  place  by  others  can  be  wiped 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


793 


out  by  her  native  and  adopted  sons,  and  they  are  ready  and  anxious  to 
do  it.  Lend  your  countenance  to  this  movement,  and  in  one  month 
every  footprint  of  a Federal  will  be  obliterated  in  their  own  blood. 

If  relief  be  not  afforded  to  her  misery  by  some  such  act  the  people  ot 
the  State  will  take  matters  into  their  own  hands,  leave  the  Confederacy, 
and  proclaim  New  Orleans  a free  city,  and  form  treaties  with  the  North 
and  West  and  Europe.  Her  interests  are  supposed  by  many  to  have 
been  shamefully  neglected  by  the  Confederate  Government.  It  boots  not 
now  to  determine  whether  falsely  or  truthfully ; this  idea  obtains,  and 
it  can  only  be  allayed  by  immediate  attention  to  her  sufferings  and  a 
show  of  sympathy  in  her  humiliation  and  writhings  in  the  grasp  of  her 
beastly  tyrants.  Her  manacles  were  placed  upon  her  not  with  her  own 
consent,  by  no  act  of  her  own  children,  but  by  those  who  may  have  done 
all  that  their  natures  would  admit  of,  but  who  fell  far  short  of  what  may 
and  should  have  been  done  by  such  as  were  to  the  manor  born  or  have 
drawn  their  first  breath  under  a Southern  sun  ; these  would  have  gloned 
in  martyrdom  before  they  would  have  surrendered.  This  opinion  comes 
not  of  narrowness  of  feeling,  but  from  a knowledge  of  the  innate  prin- 
ciples of  human  nature. 

Let  me  implore  you  to  move  in  this  affair.  Express  a willingness  to 
take  part  with  us  and  the  battle  will  be  more  than  half  won.  I will  not 
speak  of  the  glory  of  such  a deed,  for  of  that  you  have  no  doubt  had 
enough  already ; but  what  would  be  your  satisfaction  in  being  able  to 
say  to  your  native  city,  “You  are  free;  be  so  forever 5 I make  you  so. 
You  can  do  it ; we  will  be  humble  but  willing  agents  m causing  you  to 

“Arise  now  or  be  forever  fallen77  is  the  dreadful  alternative  left  to 
your  home  and  your  birth-place ; will  you  hesitate  to  throw  your  weight 
in  lier  favor  1 Surely  not.  Let  us  strike  like  men  for  those  we  love. 
You  may  rest  assured  that  enough  brave  hearts  and  strong  arms,  tried 
warriors  on  the  battle-field,  will  come  forth  at  your  rally- call  ready  to 
prove  that  New  Orleans  has  sons  who  can  fight  for  her  and  who  would 
glory  in  dying  for  her  liberty  and  her  rights. 

You  must  not  say  your  rank  forbids  participation  in  such  movement. 
There  is  more  true  honor  to  be  thus  won  than  if  you  had  led  the  men  of 
Shiloh  in  triumph  to  the  waters  of  the  Great  Lakes. 

I shall  await  your  answer  with  some  impatience,  but  cannot  admit  to 
myself  a doubt  of  what  it  will  be.  Means  of  transportation  to  Bladen 
have  been  taken  by  the  Government,  else  I would  be  with  you  111  per- 
son. If  you  respond  assentingly  or  even  hopefully  I will  be  with  you 
in  the  shortest  possible  delay. 

With  distinguished  regard,  JN0  M HUGER, 

Colonel  and  Aide-de-camp. 


Bladen,  Ala.,  August  2, 1862. 

Col.  J.  M.  Huger, 

Aide-de-Camp,  Mobile,  Ala. : 

Dear  Colonel  : Your  letter  of  the  1st  instant  has  just  been  received, 
and  I hasten  to  answer  it  in  a few  lines  to  be  in  time  for  the  mail ; other- 
wise I should  have  to  wait  several  days  for  another  opportunity  to  send 

you  an  answer.  . ...  , 

I feel  highly  flattered  by  your  proposition ; for  there  is  no  position,  how- 


794 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

ever  honorable  and  elevated,  1 would  prefer  to  the  one  referred  to  by  you 
of  being  able  to  lead  on  ato  victory  or  to  death  ” the  gallant  sons  of  my 
own  native  Louisiana  in  their  patriotic  endeavor  to  drive  back  from 
her  sacred  soil  the  polluting  feet  of  the  Abolition  hordes  of  the  North. 
But,  in  the  first  place,  my  health  unfits  me  at  present  for  such  an  ardu- 
ous and  responsible  position,  admitting  that  I am  otherwise  qualified 
for  it:  and,  in  the  second  place,  so  long  as  the  enemy  has  command  of 
the  river  with  his  gunboats  the  recovery  of  New  Orleans  must  depend 
upon  our  taking  Saint  Louis,  Louisville,  Cincinnati,  Washington,  and 
Baltimore,  which  I think  could  be  done  before  long  by  a proper  com- 
bination of  our  still  latent  forces  and  resources.  Meanwhile  a proper 
organization  of  our  State  forces  can  keep  the  enemy  within  the  limits 
of  the  few  points  he  now  holds.  No  exertion  should  be  spared  to  attain 
that  desirable  end,  and  I have  no  doubt  that  General  Van  Dorn  will 
soon  be  able  to  afford  great  assistance  in  so  doing. 

uNil  desperandum”  is  my  motto,  and  I feel  confident  that  ere  long  the 
glorious  sun  of  Southern  liberty  will  appear  more  radiant  than  ever  from 
the  clouds  which  obscure  temporarily  its  brilliant  disk. 

With  sincere  esteem,  I remain,  yours,  very  truly, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


War  Department, 
Richmond , August  4,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Comdg.  Department  of  Northern  Virginia , &e. : 1 

General  : General  Van  Dorn  has  sent  General  Breckinridge  to  attack 
Port  Hudson  and  Baton  Rouge,  and  if  he  is  successful  he  will  very  much  i 

need  heavv  artillery- men.  . . ~ 

De  Gournay’s  battalion,  now  in  the  city  works,  was  raised  m New  Or- 
leans and  could  stand  the  climate.  We  had  better  send  them  out,  as 
the  batteries  established  at  Port  Hudson  will  enable  us  to  command  the 
Mississippi  from  that  point  to  Vicksburg,  including  the  mouth  of  Red 


River.  , .. 

Gibbs’  Forty-second  North  Carolina  Regiment  will  soon  be  relieved 
from  the  custody  of  the  prisoners  at  Lynchburg.  I propose  to  send  the 
regiment  to  General  Loring;  it  is  conveniently  situated  and  is  not 

brigaded.  , , , . , 

Has  Col.  J.  Lucius  Davis  gone?  If  not,  the  order  to  him  will  be  re- 
scinded and  Colonel  Jenkins  will  be  made  a brigadier  and  sent  to  com- 
mand General  Loring’s  cavalry. 

There  will  be  another  North  Carolina  Regiment  relieved  from  guarding 
the  prison  at  Salisbury,  Godwin’s  regiment.  Shall  I send  them  also 
to  Loring? 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J F G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War . 


Richmond,  Va.,  August  4,  1862. 

General  Earl  Van  Dorn,  Vicksburg , Miss.  : 

The  importance  of  the  object  at  which  you  aim  cannot  be  overesti- 
mated. I fear  General  Bragg  cannot  detach  any  more  of  his  force. 
The  Secretary  of  War  will  send  you  an  order  for  the  Texas  Legion. 


Dhap.  XXVII  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


795 


Some  heavy  artillerists  may  be  sent  from  here.  Colonel  Marigny  is  en 
route  to  Camp  Moore,  with  instructions  to  collect  and  organize  partisans. 
From  the  Florida  parishes  I hope  you  will  get  considerable  accessions 
of  force.  See  General  Eichard  Taylor,  on  his  way  to  W estern  Louisiana, 
and  General  Holmes,  to  Trans-Mississippi  Department,  and  confer  with 

them  as  to  their  ability  to  aid  you.  ^ . ^TTC, 

JEFFEBSON  DAVIS. 


General  Orders,  1 Headquarters  in  the  Field, 

No.  20.  1 August  4,  1862. 

I.  Brigadier-General  Euggles  will  remain  at  Port  Hudson  and  take 
command  of  troops  as  they  arrive.  He  will  get  the  42-pounder  in  posi- 
tion as  soon  as  possible. 

II.  Colonel  Breaux  will  move  with  his  division  as  soon  as  possible  to 
Port  Hudson  and  report  to  General  Euggles.  He  will  take  the  gen- 
eral’s camp  equipage  along.  He  will  make  arrangements  to  receive 
supplies  via  Williams’  Bridge  and  Clinton,  and  will  start  this  evening 
if  possible.  The  Hudson  Battery  will  report  to  accompany  you. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Breckinridge  : 

J JOHN  A.  BUCKNEB, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


August  11,  1862. 

At  a meeting  of  citizens  residing  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Mississippi 
Eiver,  in  the  parishes  of  Ascension  and  Saint  James,  this  day  held,  at 
the  residence  of  Capt.  Camille  Mire,  in  the  said  parish  of  Saint  James, 
on  motion  of  J.  Adam  Gaudet,  Governor  Eoman  was  called  to  the  chair, 
and  J.  A.  Landry,  esq.,  was  appointed  secretary. 

The  honorable  chairman  having  briefly  explained  the  object  of  the 
meeting  (which  is  fully  embodied  in  the  report  of  the  committee  ap- 
pointed to  draught  its  resolutions), 

On  motion,  a committee  of  five,  composed  of  the  following-named  gen- 
tlemen, viz,  Michel  Gaudet,  John  H.  Ilsley,  Ernest  Pedesclaux,  Elvi 
M61an§on,  and  J.  K.  Gaudet,  was  appointed  by  the  chair  to  draught  res- 
olutions expressive  of  the  views  entertained  by  the  people  of  the  said 
parishes,  whom  this  meeting  fully  represents,  in  regard  to  the  momen- 
tous question  now  pending.  The  said  committee,  having  withdrawn  to 
deliberate,  reported  as  follows  : 

report.  . 

Whereas  an  event  most  disastrous  in  its  consequences  occurred  at 
Donaldsonville  on  the  morning  of  Saturday  last,  the  9th  instant,  when 
two  United  States  sloops-of-war  and  one  gunboat,  commanded  by  Com- 
modore Farragut,  anchored  immediately  in  front  of  the  town  and  pro- 
ceeded to  fire  on  it  with  their  guns  and  mortars,  and  to  accelerate  their 
work  of  destruction  landed  a force  and  set  fire  to  and  consumed  the 
most  valuable  portion  of  the  town,  and  also  the  costly  buildings  ot  an 
adjacent  sugar  plantation,  besides  other  valuable  buildings  below  the 
town,  and  assigned  as  the  reason  for  this  wanton  and  barbarous  act 
that  some  of  the  unarmed  vessels  of  the  United  States  had  been  fired 
upon  from  Donaldsonville  and  its  vicinity ; and  whereas  the  enemy  has 


796 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chai*.  XXVI 


declared  his  intention,  if  the  firing  on  his  vessels  be  repeated,  to  con 
plete  the  destruction  of  the  town  and  to  lay  waste  the  whole  neighboi 
ing  coast,  a threat  which  this  committee  believes  he  will  most  assuredl 
carry  into  effect ; and  whereas,  whilst  the  people  of  the  said  parishe 
disclaim  any  intention  to  question  any  policy  which  the  Governmer 
may  deem  it  advisable  to  pursue  in  the  prosecution  of  the  war  withi 
the  limits  of  the  said  parishes,  and  they  are  willing  to  make,  as  the 
have  already  made,  every  personal  sacrifice  for  the  common  defens< 
they  humbly  conceive  at  the  same  time,  with  due  deference  to  the  opii 
ion  of  those  in  authority,  that  the  firing  upon  and  destroying  a few  ui 
armed  boats  (for  hitherto  no  armed  vessels  have  been  assailed)  can  b 
productive  of  no  results  which  would  justify  the  jeopardizing  the  live 
and  the  total  destruction  of  the  property  of  our  own  people  and  the  d< 
moralizing  of  our  servile  population,  a result  which  they  consider  inev 
table  if  that  course  be  persisted  in.  They  conceive  that  so  long  as  tb 
enemy  with  his  immense  fleet  possesses  exclusively  the  whole  of  tb 
river,  embracing  the  lower  coast,  any  attempt  to  molest  him  from  it 
banks,  unless  systematically  and  efficiently  made,  must  necessarily  pro? 
utterly  fruitless,  whilst  the  enemy’s  ability  to  retaliate  exposes  riparia 
estates  to  utter  destruction  and  ruin  : Be  it  therefore 
Resolved , That  a committee,  composed  of  the  following  gentlemen,  viz 
Hon.  A.  Duffel,  Hon.  St.  M.  Berault,  Aristide  Landry,  Trusemon  Lai 
dry,  Capt.  Camille  Mire,  and  Emile  Legendre  be,  and  they  are  herebV 
appointed  to  wait  upon  His  Excellency  Governor  Moore,  in  person,  an 
to  submit  to  him  the  proceedings  and  resolutions  of  this  meeting  ; an 
the  said  committee  is  hereby  authorized  to  explain  verbally  to  His  Ei 
cellency  the  Governor  the  true  object  of  this  meeting,  and  to  use  ever 
means  to  induce  the  Governor  to  take  all  necessary  steps  to  avert  tb 
evil  now  impending  over  the  good  and  loyal  people  of  these  parishes. 
Respectfully  submitted. 

JOHN  H.  ILSLEY,  Chairman . 

ELVI  MfiLANQON. 

J.  K.  GAUDET. 

ERNEST  PEDESCLAUX. 

MICHEL  D.  GAUDET. 


On  motion, 

Resolved , That  the  report  and  resolutions  of  the  committee  be,  and  th 
same  are  hereby,  fully  adopted  by  this  meeting. 

A.  B.  ROMAN. 

J.  Aristide  Landry,  Secretary . 

Saint  James,  August  11,  1862. 

[Inclosure.] 

To  the  People  of  Donaldsonville , La. : 

Every  time  my  boats  are  fired  upon  I will  burn  a portion  of  you 
town. 

D.  G.  FARRAGUT, 

Flag-Officer. 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  810.  ) Opelousas , August  12,  1862. 

I.  The  Militia  now  in  actual  service  at  Camp  Pratt  will  remain  i 


IHAP.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


797 


iervice  for  six  additional  months,  to  commence  from  the  expiration  of 
heir  present  term  of  service,  unless  sooner  discharged. 

# # # * * * * 

Bv  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 
.cy  oruei  ui  x M>  GRIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  August  13,  1862. 

General  Breckinridge,  near  Baton  Rouge : 

Move  your  whole  force  to  Port  Hudson,  and  make  dispositions  for 
lolding  it  and  to  guard  roads  to  Camp  Moore  and  Clinton.  Port  Hud- 
ion  must  be  held  if  possible.  I have  directed  your  camp  and  garrison 
equipage  to  be  sent  there.  When  I get  your  letter  will  telegraph  further. 
^ EARL  VAN  DORIS, 

Major-General . 


PONCHATOTJLA,  LA., 
Wednesday , August  13,  1862 — 2 p.  m. 

Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Rugg-les,  0.  S.  A., 

In  Gamp  near  Baton  Rouge , La. : 

General  : I have  been  to  all  the  points  around  this  post,  and  am  now 
prepared  to  make  any  demonstration  which  may  be  ordered  or  clash  at 
anvthing  which  shows  itself.  I have  been  to  North  Pass  of  Manchac  ; 
it  can  be  repaired  in  a few  hours.  I will  visit  the  South  Pass  to-mor- 
row or  next  day.  I was  in  Covington  and  Madison ville  yesterday. 

The  Militia  are  turning  out  slowly,  and  there  will  not  be  more  than 
300  of  them  from  all  the  parishes.  It  is  said  that  Washington  Parish 
was  not  included  in  your  order,  and  that  there  will  be  no  turnout  from 
there.  They  are  coming  without  arms,  cooking  utensils,  or  anything 
else.  They  do  not  know  yet  how  they  will  organize,  as  there  will  be 
four  or  five  full  colonels  to  the  300  men. 

Under  the  short  general  order  from  General  Breckinridge  1 do  not 
feel  like  issuing  many  orders  in  the  premises,  but  hope  to  receive  some 
definite  instructions  on  the  subject.  Something  will  have  to  be  done 
to  equip  them,  but  this  can  be  done  after  they  organize  and  it  is  dis- 
covered how  many  of  them  are  willing  and  fit  tor  duty.  The  conscripts 
are  still  in  Saint  Tammany,  and  it  is  said  that  Saint  Helena  was  not 
included  in  the  order  when  they  were  called  out.  We  are  Laving  a 
splendid  rain  and  I hope  that  the  people  will  feel  encouraged,  although 

those  in  camp  have  no  tents.  # . _ , , 

I will  have  to  appoint  a temporary  commissary  and  quartermaster 
to  issue  to  the  separate  comfiiands  here.  There  is  plenty  of  beet  in  this 
country  if  it  is  needed,  and  unless  a good  supply  is  coming  from  lexas 
it  would  be  well  to  have  it  driven  farther  from  the  coast. 

The  schooners  that  have  been  running  between  this  and  New  Orleans 
are  delayed  too  long  here  if  the  trade  is  to  be  kept  open.  I should  have 
power  to  give  them  clearances  at  once  or  the  provost-marshal  should. 
The  charcoal,  lumber,  brick,  and  such  like  are  of  no  earthly  value  to 
us,  and  each  lugger  can  bring,  as  the  last  two  have,  150  sacks  ot  salt, 
10  barrels  flour,  &c.,  each,  and  when  properly  arranged  thousands  ot 
dollars’  worth  of  valuable  medicines,  &c. 

If  there  is  any  one  in  the  city  with  whom  the  authorities  are  corre- 


798 


W.  FLA., 


sponding  I would  like  to  know  it,  and  if  there  is  not  I can  readily  find 
some  one  who  will  keep  us  posted.  The  steamboat- men  are  generally 
sound  and  smart,  and  through  them  I can  open  communication. 


Eight  p.  m. 

Several  parties  have  arrived  on  their  way  to  New  Orleans.  Mr. 
Foster,  who  seems  to  be  an  especial  agent,  came  down  to  examine  the 
cargoes  and  give  clearances.  I will  let  you  know  the  result  to-morrow. 

My  commissary  has  arrived.  I will  send  him  to  Camp  Moore  to-mor- 
row for  rations  for  the  Militia.  Please  give  me  full  instructions  in  re- 
gard to  the  militia  organization,  as  I already  see  trouble  brewing 
among  the  various  colonels,  captains,  &c. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON,  Mo.  S.  G., 

Brig.  Gen.,  on  Special  Service , G.  S.  Army. 


Orders,  ) 

2.  I 


No.  812. 


Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

Opelousas , August  14,  1862. 


I.  The  sections  I,  II,  III,  IV,  and  V,  of  the  General  Orders,  No.  8,  issued 
by  Brig.  Gen.  E.  0.  Martin,  commanding  Fifth  Brigade,  Louisiana  Militia* 


are  hereby  revoked,  as  being  highly  disrespectful  to  the  Governor  and 


<1 1 iicl  UV  ICVUJiCU,  CDO  -L  w 

commander-in-chief,  unwarranted,  unnecessary,  and  m contravention  to 
military  rule  and  discipline  and  to  orders  before  issued  from  these  head- 
quarters, of  which  Brigadier- General  Martin  has  been  informed. 

II.  Partisan  Eanger  corps  throughout  the  State  will  proceed  to  obey 
the  special  orders  issued  directly  by  these  headquarters,  in  absence  of 
orders  from  this  office  to  the  contrary.  They  will  report  on  their  arrival 
to  the  brigadier-general  of  the  district  in  which  they  may  be  operating, 
informing  him  of  their  presence,  and  giving  him  a copy  of  the  orders 
under  which  they  are  acting. 

III.  Brigadier-General  Martin  is  temporarily  removed  from  the  com- 
mand of  the  Fifth  Brigade,  to  await  a trial  by  court-martial.  He  will 
report  himself  to  Maj.  Gen.  John  L.  Lewis,  commanding  the  State 
Militia,  under  arrest. 

IV.  Maj.  Gen.  John  L.  Lewis,  commanding  State  Militia,  will  enforce 
this  order,  and  will  place  in  command  of  the  brigade  the  senior  colonel. 

Bv  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief- 
J M.  GEIVOT, 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana. 


Orders,  ) 
h ) 


No.  814. 


Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

Opelousas , August  14,  1862. 


I.  Maj.  Gen.  John  L.  Lewis,  commanding  State  Militia,  will  proceed 
to  Thibodeauxville,  parish  of  La  Fourche,  and  establish  there  his  head- 
quarters, or  at  some  other  convenient  point,  until  further  orders. 

II.  Maj.  Gen.  John  L.  Lewis  will  take  charge  of  the  defenses  of  the 

Fifth  and  Ninth  Brigades,  examine  the  state  of  defenses  therein  erected, 
and  report  thereon.  


Not  found. 


Chap.  XX vn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  799 

III.  Maj.  Gen.  J.  L.  Lewis  will  cause  all  the  Militia  in  the  Fifth 
Brigade  to  be  placed  in  actual  service  and  sent  to  Camp  Martin. 

# # # # * * * 

Bv  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief : 

M.  GRIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana. 


Bladen,  Ala.,  August  15, 1862. 
Mr.  Ed.  Gotheil,  Richmond , Va. : 

Dear  Sir  : Your  favor  of  the  2d  instant*  has  been  received.  I thank 
you  for  all  the  information  it  contains  with  regard  to  the  contemplated 
operations  in  Louisiana.  My  brother-in-law,  the  Hon.  Charles  J.  Vil- 
ler6,  of  the  house,  will  give  you  my  answer,  and  will  show  you  my  let- 
ter on  the  same  subject  to  Mr.  John  M.  Huger,  of  Hew  Orleans.  Of 
course  I should  be  both  proud  and  happy  to  drive  from  my  native 
State  the  Abolitionists  who  are  now  desecrating  its  soil.  It  is  a task 
easily  accomplished  away  from  their  gunboats.  Hear  these  it  cannot 
be  done  with  our  present  means.  We  can  retake  Hew  Orleans,  but  we 
cannot  hold  it  without  subjecting  it  to  destruction,  for  it  occupies  a 
different  position  from  glorious  Vicksburg,  and  its  destruction  would 
be  attended  with  a degree  of  human  misery  frightful  to  contemplate, 
without  a proper  return  of  evil  to  the  enemy.  The  Russians  destroyed 
Moscow  because  they  knew  that  its  destruction  would  annihilate  Hapo- 
leon’s  army  and  free  their  country  forever  from  his  iron  grasp,  but  the 
destruction  of  Hew  Orleans  would  not  even  give  us  the  command  of  a 
single  foot  of  ground  along  the  Mississippi,  much  less  of  the  river  itself; 
hence  why  make  this  sacrifice?  But  we  must  hold  the  State,  i.  e .,  all 
not  immediately  under  the  protection  of  his  gunboats.  The  great  error 
was  to  have  allowed  him  to  take  the  river.  How  we  must  suffer  pa- 
tiently the  great  evils  resulting  from  our  negligence.  Meanwhile,  in- 
stead of  bewailing  our  misfortune,  we  must  gird  on  our  armor  and  strike 
our  dastardly  enemy  with  renewed  vigor  and  energy  wherever  he  is 
vulnerable.  God  will  surely  lend  us  his  protecting  and  avenging  arm. 

I have  requested  Mr.  Villere  to  endeavor  to  effect  the  exchange  of 
Mr.  Soul6.  If  I return  to  the  command  of  my  department  I will  en- 
deavor to  take,  by  means  of  Forrest  and  Morgan,  a civilian  for  his 
exchange. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


PONCHATOULA,  LA., 
Friday , August  15,  1862 — 9 p.  m. 

.Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Breckinridge,  C.  S.  A., 

Near  Baton  Rouge , La. : 

General:  I have  just  returned  from  Jackson  (and  a consultation 
with  General  Van  Dorn)  and  find  your  favor  of  the  13th  instant.  I be- 
lieve that  I now  understand  the  programme,  and  will  endeavor  to  carry 
out  my  part  of  it.  I would  be  pleased  to  have  the  French  Zouave  com- 


Not  found. 


800 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

pany  which  you  have,  as  I think  I can  use  them  to  double  ad\antage 
against  the  city  which  you  can  against  the  Yankees  at  Baton  Rouge. 
They  can  be  marched  directly  to  this  point  and  can  report  nothing 
which  we  do  not  wish  told.  The  enemy  have  already  heard  of  my 
presence  and  are  on  tbe  lookout,  and  I tlrink  I will  make  a demonstra- 
tion to-morrow  to  keep  them  uneasy.  If  the  Zouaves  are  here  the 
creoles  will  hear  of  the  movement  and  be  prepared  to  render  assistance 
if  necessary.  I can  stuff  them  easier  than  I can  gossiping  Americans. 
From  your  camp  on  Oomite  to  this  place  is  10  miles  nearer  than  to 
Tangipahoa,  and  every  movement  and  march  can  and  will  be  construed 
as  a double  intention  on  New  Orleans  or  Baton  Rouge,  and  although 
the  railroad  may  make  more,  the  Government  will  save  transportation 
as  well  as  confusing  the  enemy.  Therefore  I would  recommend  this 
route. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON,  Mo.  S.  G., 
Brigadier  General , on  Special  Service , G.  S.  Army. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  in  the  Field 

Ho.  23.  ] August  15, 1862. 

j.  Colonel  Trabue  will  move  with  his  command  this  evening  at  5 
o’clock  to  Port  Hudson.  He  will  take  with  him  Cobb’s  battery,  leav- 
ing  two  pieces  to  report  to  Colonel  Scott,  of  Brigadier-General  Bowen  s 
command.  He  will  take  at  least  three  days’  rations,  and  will  make  the 
march  as  soon  as  possible,  and  will  observe  carefully  toward  his  lelt 

flank  as  he  proceeds.  _ . ~ , , a , , 

II  Brigadier-General  Bowen  will  have  the  command  of  Colonel  Scott, 
with  two  pieces  of  Cobb’s  battery  (which  will  report  to  Colonel  Scott 
this  afternoon),  ready  to  move  with  such  transportation  as  it  may  have 
and  at  least  three  days’  rations  at  daylight  to-morrow  morning,  to  await 
final  orders  from  these  headquarters.  , _ . ; „ . 

III.  The  chief  commissary  will  have  three  days’  subsistence  for  4,000 

men  at  Clinton  within  two  days,  thence  to  be  conveyed  by  railroad 
immediately  to  Port  Hudson.  Supplies  for  that  number  at  least  must 
be  kept  constantly  on  hand  at  Port  Hudson.  _ , 

IV.  Brigadier-General  Ruggles  will  urge  forward  the  works  at  Port 
Hudson  as  rapidly  as  possible,  obtaining  where  he  can  tools,  labor,  <&c. 
He  will  gather  all  the  transportation  possible  for  use  on  the  railroad 
between  Port  Hudson  and  Clinton.  He  must  throw  out  pickets  a good 
distance  toward  Baton  Rouge  from  Port  Hudson  and  extend  them 
near  Baton  Rouge  as  he  can  on  the  Clinton  plank  road. 

By  order  of  Major-Genera!  Breckinridge^  ^ BUCKNER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  t Headquarters  in  the  Field, 

No.  25.  j < Near  Port  Hudson , August  18, 1862. 

I.  In  pursuance  of  orders  from  headquarters  of  department,  Briga 
dier  General  Ruggles  will  assume  command  of  all  the  troops  in  this 
military  district,  except  the  Kentucky  and  Tennessee  troops  and  the 
regiments  from  General  Villepigue’s  command,  now  commanded  by 
[Colonel]  Scott.  The  troops  thus  excepted  will  move  to-morrow  morn- 


3 hap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


80  L 


in g as  early  as  possible  via  Clinton  to  Camp  Moore,  and  will  be  expected 
to  reach  the  latter  place  very  early  on  Friday  morning.  The  pickets 
from  the  troops  to  move  to  Camp  Moore  will  be  called  in  this  evening 
and  their  places  supplied  by  Brigadier-General  Buggies  from  his  com- 
mand. If  Brigadier- General  Bowen  has  any  organized  force  from  Ken- 
tucky or  Tennessee  he  will  immediately  send  it  to  Camp  Moore. 

II.  Major  Brown,  commissary,  and  Major  Haynes,  quartermaster, 
will  provide  subsistence  and  transportation  for  the  troops  to  move  to 
Gamp  Moore. 

III.  Colonel  Scott  will  move  his  brigade  independently  of  Colonel 
rrabue’s  brigade,  but  they  will  confer  together  and  not  separate  far  on 
the  road,  and  will  try  to  reach  Camp  Moore  together  early  Friday 
morning. 

IV.  Cobb’s  and  Hudson’s  batteries  will  report  to  Colonel  Trabue. 
Gap  tain  McClung,  with  his  battery,  will  report  to  Brigadier-General 
Ruggles. 

V.  Capt.  [E.  M.]  Blackburn’s  cavalry  will  report  to  these  headquar- 
ters to-morrow  morning  at  8 o’clock. 

VI.  Colonel  Trabue  will  cause  all  the  troops  under  his  command,  ex- 
cepting the  Kentucky  and  Tennessee  troops,  to  report  immediately  to 
Brigadier-General  Buggies. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Breckinridge : 

JOHN  A.  BUCKNEB, 
Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters  in  the  Field, 

Ko.  108.  1 Port  Hudson , August  18,  1862. 

Brigadier- General  Bowen  will  report  to  Brigadier-General  Buggies, 
who  is  now  at  Port  Hudson,  for  orders,  in  pursuance  of  orders  from 
Major-General  Van  Dorn. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Breckinridge : 

JOHN  A.  BUCKKEB, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


West  Baton  Bough,  August  20,  1862. 

Oaptain  Hooe, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Buggies ’ Army  : 

Sir  : I have  the  following  important  communication  to  make  : 

Dr.  Lyle,  of  this  parish,  a perfectly  reliable  gentleman  and  conspic- 
ious  for  his  loyalty,  has  just  returned  from  opposite  Baton  Bouge. 
Provost-Marshal  Killborn  has  been  in  communication  this  day  with 
Messrs.  Pike  and  Hart.  He  (Killborn)  informed  them  that  a dispatch 
aad  just  been  received  from  General  Butler,  ordering  an  immediate  evac- 
lation  of  Baton  Bouge  and  countermanding  the  order  for  burning  the 
bown.  The  transports  are  now  anchored  in  the  middle  of  the  river,  with 
steam  up,  having  taken  on  board  all  their  stores.  The  men  only  are 
pet  to  be  embarked.  The  Essex  was  lying  in  close  to  the  shore,  shelling 
the  woods. 

This  Killborn  also  offered  to  deliver  up  to  Messrs.  Pike  and  Hart, 
is  agents  of  the  State,  the  penitentiary,  provided  they  (the  enemy)  be 
permitted  to  remove  a certain  number  of  the  prisoners  and  what  ma- 

51  r r — vol  xv 


802 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA., 


chinery  they  wish ; that  is,  the  machinery  which  would  prevent  the 
manufacture  of  goods  for  the  Southern  Army.  This  was  told  to  Dr. 
Lyle  by  Messrs.  Pike  and  Hart  themselves,  who  said  also  that  they 
had  refused  to  accept  the  offer.  Killborn  told  them  that  they  intended 
to  leave  all  the  negroes  now  in  their  possession  in  the  town,  and  your 
own  judgment  will  suggest  the  necessity  of  immediately  occupying  the 
place  with  a body  of  troops.  . 

Killborn  told  Messrs.  Pike  and  Hart  that  he  had  received  a dis- 
patch confirming  the  capture  of  Pope’s  army  (23,000  men)  by  Stonewall 
Jackson.  If  I hear  or  obtain  any  reliable  information  to-morrow  I shall 
send  you  word  at  once. 

Respectfully,  &c., 

P ’ B.  W.  CLARK, 

Adjutant  Fourth  Louisiana. 


Headquarters  Western  District  of  Louisiana, 

Opelousas , August  20,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles  : 

General:  I have  just  learned  with  much  gratification  of  your  hav- 
ing occupied  Port  Hudson;  a movement  I regard  of  very  great  impor- 
tance at  the  present  juncture.  I shall  ascertain  what  siege  guns  there 
are  at  my  disposal  on  this  side  of  the  river,  and  if  there  are  any  which 
can  be  of  service  to  you  I shall  take  the  proper  measures  to  let  you 
have  the  benefit  of  them. 

Since  my  arrival  here  a communication  dated  August  11  has  been 
placed  in  my  hands  from  Col.  Preston  Pond,  directed  to  the  command- 
ing officer  of  the  Texas  troops  on  this  side  of  the  river.  The  object  of 
Colonel  Pond’s  letter  was  to  obtain  the  co-operation  of  those  troops  in 
the  attack  then  meditated  on  Baton  Rouge.  As  the  attack  was  made 
before  Colonel  Pond’s  letter  reached  its  destination  it  has  of  course 
failed  in  its  object,  and  there  is  no  occasion  at  present  that  I am  aware 
of  which  would  render  it  desirable  to  transfer  these  troops  to  the  Cache 
River,  even  if  I could  spare  them,  which  1 cannot  now  well  do. 

I am  about  to  undertake  an  expedition  which  I anticipate  will  place 
me  in  possession  of  the  Opelousas  Railroad  up  to  the  vicinity  of  Algiers. 

I am  establishing  a line  of  couriers  between  this  point  and  Woodville. 
It  would  greatly  facilitate  my  communications  with  Richmond  and  with 
General  Van  Dorn  if  the  general  would  place  couriers  on  the  route 


between  Summit  and  Woodville. 

You  would  oblige  me  by  transmitting  this  letter  to  the  general  after 
reading  it. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J ^ 7 R,  TAYLOR. 


Major-General,  Commanding  Western  Louisiana. 


[Indorsement.] 

General  Beall  : 

I recommend  establishing  the  couriers  requested. 

Please  return  this  by  courier. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


[August  20,  1862.— For  order  establishing  the  Districts  of  Louisiana, 
Texas,  and  Arkansas,  see  Series  I,  Yol.  IX,  y.  731.] 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


893 


Port  Hudson,  August  21,  [1862]. 

Major-General  Van  Dorn,  Jackson , Miss. : 

Can  you  let  me  have  the  Twelfth  Regiment  Louisiana  Troops?  If  so, 
it  can  be  stopped  in  time  at  Camp  Moore.  I have  scarcely  1,500  men 
besides  Bowen’s  brigade,  which  is  required  on  the  Amite.  Has  General 
Beall  orders  to  join  me  f 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Port  Hudson,  August  21,  [1862]. 
Major-General  Van  Dorn,  Jackson , Miss.  : 

Rumored  that  the  enemy  intend  evacuating  Baton  Rouge.  The 
absence  of  gunboats  from  this  point  gives  color  to  the  report.  I shall 
soon  know.  If  so,  I shall  prepare  to  move  toward  New  Orleans. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier- General. 


Port  Hudson,  August  21,  [1862], 
Brig.  Gen.  M.  Jeff.  Thompson,  Ponchatoula , La. : 

Take  measures  to  rebuild  the  Manchac  Bridge  and  repair  the  rail- 
road. Apply  to  Major  Ranney,  president.  Let  me  know  the  condition 
of  things  by  telegram  to  Clinton,  La.  Reported  that  the  enemy  is 
evacuating  Baton  Rouge.  Push  your  scouts  well  forward  toward  the 
Mississippi  to  encourage  that  idea. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Port  Hudson,  August  23,  [1862]. 
Major-General  Van  Dorn,  Jackson , Miss.: 

Breckinridge’s  troops,  Robertson’s  brigade,  march  for  Camp  Moore 
to-day;  Bowen’s  to-morrow.  I want  McClung’s  rifle  guns.  Shall  I 
retain  his  company  ? 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Port  Hudson,  La.,  August  23,  1862. 
Major-General  Van  Dorn,  Jackson  or  Vicksburg : 

The  gunboat  Essex  just  passed  up.  It  is  represented  that  she  in- 
tends passing  Vicksburg  to  join  the  upper  fleet.  My  troops  are  occu- 
pying the  vicinity  of  the  garrison  to-day.  It  is  rumored  Captain 
Semmes  has  five  iron-clad  gunboats  at  mouth  of  Mississippi  River. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 
Brigadier- General,  C.  S.  Army. 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  841.  J Opelousas,  August  25,  1862. 

I.  The  Militia  now  at  Camp  Pratt  and  in  service,  and  composed  of 


804 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Ghai\  xxvn. 

persons  between  the  ages  of  thirty-five  and  forty -five,  will  be  released 
from  duty  on  reception  of  this  order. 

II.  All  persons  now  in  service  in  Camp  Pratt  between  the  ages  of 
eighteen  and  thirty -five  years,  and  who  are  conscripts,  whether  holding 
commissions  in  the  State  Militia  or  not,  will  be  held  in  service  at  Camp 
Pratt  and  will  be  transferred  to  Colonel  Burke,  0.  S.  Army,  appointed 
by  Maj.  Gen.  B.  Taylor,  commanding  Department  of  Western  Louisiana, 
to  take  charge  of  the  camp  and  conscripts. 

******  * 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in  chief : 

M.  GEIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana . 


Vicksburg,  August  29,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Buggles,  Port  Hudson , La. : 

Going  to  move  north.  Want  all  the  men  I can  get.  Think  2,500  or 
2,800  sufficient  at  Port  Hudson.  Turn  over  command  there  to  Beall 
and  come  to  Jackson  to  take  command.  Send  Twelfth  Louisiana  Begi- 
ment  to  Villepigue  at  once.  Send  Fourth  to  Vicksburg  at  once  also,  if 
by  so  doing  you  do  not  reduce  the  command  to  less  than  the  above 
number. 

EABL  VAN  DOEN. 


Abstract  from  Morning  Report  of  troops  stationed  at  Port  Hudson , La.,  August  31 


1662, 


Brig.  Gen.  W.  N.  R.  Beall , C.  S.  Army,  commanding. 


Command. 


§ 


£ • 

t 

S'* 

MO 

& 

tt 


General  staff 

30th  Louisiana 

Miles’  Legion 

Artillery : 

Capt.  R.  M.  Boone’s  company.. 
Capt.  R.  T.  English’s  company 
Capt.  J.  A.  Hoskins’  company 
Capt.  G.  Ralston’s  company — 
Capt.  C.  Roberts’  company  — 
Capt.  O.  J.  Semmes’  company.. 
Partisan  Rangers : 

Capt.  A.  J.  Lewis’  company... 
Capt.  C.  McLaurin’s  company. 

Total 


260 

177 


102 

59 

42 

63 

35 

103 


107 


31 


946 


1, 175 


Biohmond,  Va.,  September  1,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  John  H.  Forney,  Mobile , Ala. : 

We  are  desirous  of  sending  forces  to  Louisiana  for  a purpose  not  ad- 
mitting of  delay.  Gan  you  spare  the  Eighteenth  aud  Nineteenth  Louisi- 
ana Begiments  ? Their  services  much  needed.  If  you  can,  send  them 
to  Mai.  Gen.  B.  Taylor  at  Opelousas.  Answer  by  telegraph. 

G.  W.  BANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XXVII.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


806 


Richmond,  Madison  Parish,  La., 

September  1,  1862. 


Col.  Wm.  Preston  Johnston, 

Aide-de-Camp , President's  Office , Richmond , Va.  : 

Colonel  : I reached  this  place  to-day,  having  crossed  the  Mississippi 
at  Vicksburg  and  passed  within  1 mile  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  (two), 
now  engaged  in  observing  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo  at  Young’s  Point, 
10  miles  above  Vicksburg.  General  Blanchard  is  still  in  command  of 
this  department,  headquarters  at  Monroe,  La.,  105  miles  by  the  wagon 
road  and  80  by  rail  to  Vicksburg.  The  railroad  is  now  in  operation  from 
Monroe  to  Tallulah ; distance,  60  miles.  The  force  in  this  department 
consists  of  Morrison’s  regiment,  Thirty -first  Louisiana ; Gray’s  Twenty- 
eighth  Louisiana ; Shelley’s  Louisiana  battalion ; Chambliss’  battalion 
(Partisan  Rangers);  Harper’s  company  (Partisan  Rangers),  and  Ben- 
ton’s light  battery,  four  pieces.  This  force  has  a heavy  sick  list,  and 
furnishes  but  1,000  men  for  duty.  I am  informed  by  officers  stationed 
here  that  there  are  but  1,200  stand  of  effective  arms  in  this  department, 
chiefly  shot-guns. 

I have  the  honor  herewith  to  transmit  through  you  to  the  Presi- 
dent a map#  of  Madison  Parish,  Louisiana.  The  section  lines  will  fur- 
nish the  scale.  From  this  map  you  will  perceive  that  unless  there  is 
an  adequate  force  to  prevent  it  the  enemy  may  construct  a military 
road  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  New  Carthage,  a distance  of  32  miles,  and 
through  it  keep  open  his  communication  with  his  best  sources  of  sup- 
plies on  the  upper  river,  thus  avoiding  Vicksburg  altogether  and  cutting 
off  this  only  practicable  line  of  communication  with  Texas,  Western 
Louisiana,  Arkansas,  and  the  Indian  Territory.  Deserters  from  the 
Yankee  fleet  state  that  it  lies  at  Lake  Providence,  40  miles  above  Vicks- 
burg, and  consists  of  seven  iron-clad  gunboats  and  five  transports,  with 
troops.  I should  have  stated  that  this  section  of  Louisiana  can  now 
furnish  4,000  men  for  service,  and  the  people  are  ready  and  anxious  to 
take  the  field,  but  have  no  arms.  I will  write  from  Marshall,  Tex.,  and 
inform  you  of  what  was  done  or  intended  by  that  military  hybrid  the 
Governors’  caucus. 

With  best  wishes  for  the  President’s  good  health,  I am,  colonel,  yours, 


T.  J.  MACKEY, 

Captain , Ac. 


General  Orders,  ) District  of  the  Mississippi, 

No.  2.  J Headquarters , Jackson , Miss .,  September  8, 1862. 

I.  To  preserve  order  among  military  persons,  and  to  prevent  improper 

ntercourse  with  the  enemy,  by  either  citizens  or  soldiers,  the  following- 
persons  will  act  temporarily  as  provost-marshals  at  the  points  desig- 
nated, viz : Vicksburg  and  Warren  County,  Mississippi,  Capt.  C.  A. 
Taylor;  Jackson  and  Hinds  County,  Mississippi,  James  D.  Stuart; 
^aint  Helena  Parish,  Louisiana,  Judge  G.  W.  Martin;  Saint  Tammany 
Parish,  Louisiana,  Jules  L.  Blanc;  Livingston  Parish,  Louisiana,  F.  G. 
Davidson;  Baton  Rouge  Parish,  Louisiana,  R.  A.  Hunter;  Port  Hud- 
son, Louisiana,  John  C.  Miller;  East  Feliciana  Parish,  Louisiana,  D.  C. 
Hardee;  West  Feliciana  Parish,  Louisiana,  J.  H.  Collins;  Ascension 
Parish,  Louisiana,  Capt.  Samuel  Bard ; Adams  County,  Mississippi,  A. 


Not  found. 


806 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


K.  Farra;  Jefferson  County,  Mississippi,  Howell  Hinds;  Claiborne 

County,  Mississippi, ; Wilkinson  County,  Mississippi,  J. 

H.  Simms ; Madison  County,  Mississippi,  Hr.  M.  J.  McKie  ; Yallabusha 


County,  Mississippi,  R.  H.  Forrester;  Yazoo  County,  Mississippi,  H.  C. 


Tyler. 


II.  Martial  law  having  been  abolished,  the  duties  of  the  provost- 
marshals  above  named  will  be  confined  strictly  within  their  proper 
military  jurisdiction,  in  conformity  with  the  customs  of  war  and  the 
following  articles  of  war : 

Art.  56.  Whoever  shall  relieve  the  enemy  with  money,  victuals,  or  ammunition, 
or  shail  knowingly  harbor  or  protect  an  enemy,  shall  suffer  death,  or  such  other  pun- 
ishment as  shall  be  ordered  by  the  sentence  of  a court-martial.  ... 

Art.  57.  Whoever  shall  be  convicted  of  holding  correspondence  with  or  giving  in- 
telligence to  the  enemy,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  shall  suffer  death,  or  such  other 
punishment  as  shall  be  ordered  by  the  sentence  of  a court-martial. 

Art.  58.  All  public  stores  taken  in  the  enemy’s  camps,  towns,  ports,  or  magazines, 
whether  of  artillery,  ammunition,  clothing,  forage,  or  provisions,  shall  be  secured  for 
the  service  of  the  Confederate  States,  for  the  neglect  of  which  the  commanding  officer 

is  to  be  answerable.  , . , ,,  , 

Art.  82.  Every  officer  or  provost-marshal  to  whose  charge  prisoners  shall  be  com- 
mitted shall,  within  twenty-four  hours  after  such  commitment  or  as  soon  as  he  shall 
be  relieved  from  his  guard,  make  report  in  writing  to  the  commanding  officer  of  their 
names,  their  crimes,  and  the  names  of  the  officers  who  committed  them,  on  the  pen- 
alty of  being  punished  for  disobedience  or  neglect,  at  the  discretion  of  a court-martial. 


III.  All  correspondence  with  this  department  will  be  held  with  the 
district  provost-marshal,  Ool.  James  0.  Fuqua,  at  these  headquarters. 
By  command  of  Brigadier -General  Buggies : 

J R.  M.  HOOE, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General 


Jackson,  Miss.,  September  11, 1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.  : 

I recommend  an  immediate  movement  against  New  Orleans.  I send 
proposed  plan  by  messenger.  DANIEL  EUGGLES, 

Brigadier- General , C.  S.  Army , Commanding  District. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

Jackson,  Miss.,  September  11,  1862. 

S.  Cooper. 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Richmond,  Va.: 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  forward  for  your  consideration  an  outline 
plan  for  an  advance  on  New  Orleans. 

The  question  is  apparently  one  of  some  urgency,  anticipating  the 
period  when  the  enemv  will  be  enabled  to  re-enforce  the  city  and  add 
to  its  defenses.  The  present  force  is  greatly  demoralized  and  enfeebled 
by  sickness  and  is  known  to  be  in  a state  of  continued  alarm;  circum- 
stances greatly  in  our  favor.  It  is  also  to  be  observed  that  our  loyal 
men  within  the  enemy’s  jurisdiction  are  subjected  to  indignities  and 
are  gradually  rendered  powerless  in  our  cause.  . , . , 

The  combined  operations  of  a force  of  20,000  men  within  from  four  to 
six  weeks  would  probably  prove  adequate  to  the  great  object  in  view. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ 

Brigadier- General,  C.  S.  Army. 


Chap.  Xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


807 


[Inclosure.] 

Outline  plan  of  proposed  expedition  for  the  recapture  of  New  Orleans. 

THE  CITY  AND  ITS  DEFENSES. 

The  present  resident  population  is  supposed  to  comprise  some  100,000 
people,  among  whom  few  will  be  found  disloyal  to  the  Confederate 
Government. 

The  defenses  consist  of  two  parallel  cremailUre  lines,  one  above  and 
the  other  below  the  city,  extending  from  the  river  to  the  swamp  in  rear. 
The  communications  with  lake  shore  are  defended  by  redoubts  mount- 
ing siege  guns. 

The  present  strength  of  the  enemy  is  known  to  be  less  than  10,000 
men,  and  those  greatly  demoralized  and  suffering  from  the  influences  of 
the  climate. 

THE  PROPOSED  PLAN  OF  ATTACK. 

1st.  Concentrate  troops  near  Manchac  Pass,  Pontchatoula,  repair 
railroad  bridge  across  Manchac  and  below,  which  will  require  only  a 
brief  period. 

2d.  Concentrate  a movable  column  at  a camp  already  ordered  in  As- 
cension Parish,  about  35  miles  below  Baton  Rouge. 

3d.  The  light-draught  gunboats  at  Mobile,  with  available  transports, 
to  proceed  to  Lake  Pontchartain,  clear  the  lake,  and  convey  troops 
across. 

4th.  The  troops  in  West  Louisiana  to  be  concentrated  in  two  columns 
near  Plaquemine  and  on  the  Opelousas  Railroad,  ready  to  co-operate.  If 
deemed  expedient,  5,000  troops  to  be  thrown  from  the  west  across  the 
river  to  the  east  bank. 

5th.  The  different  columns  to  move  simultaneously  and  co-operate  in 
a combined  attack  on  the  defenses  of  the  city,  in  which  it  is  anticipated 
that  loyal  men  in  large  numbers  under  arms  will  co-operate  with  our 
troops. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 
Brigadier -General , Commanding  Department. 


[September  12,  1862. — For  President  Davis  to  the  Governors  of 
Arkansas,  Louisiana,  Missouri,  and  Texas,  see  Series  I,  Vol.  XIII,  p. 
879.1 


Jackson,  Miss.,  September  17, 1862. 
Brigadier-General  Beall,  Port  Hudson , La. : 

Concentrate  your  troops  for  the  defense  of  Port  Hudson. 

Guard  Baton  Rouge  with  one  company  of  infantry,  section  of  two 
guns,  and  15  mounted  men,  under  Lieutenant- Colonel  Shields. 

Protect  the  machinery  in  the  penitentiary ; recover  any  taken  away, 
and  place  it  all  under  charge  of  the  police  jury  of  the  parish  of  East 
Feliciana. 

Place  a small  guard  at  Bayou  Sara  if  expedient. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES. 


808 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVir. 

War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond , Fa.,  September  17,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  Sparrow,  C.  S.  Senate: 

Sir  : In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  13th  instant  I have  the  honor  to 
inform  you  that  14,400  stand  of  arms  have  been  actually  sent  to  the 
Trans-Mississippi  Department  and  5,000  of  those  taken  at  Manassas 
have  been  ordered  to  the  same  destination ; 10,400  of  those  forwarded 
were  for  Arkansas,  of  which  5,000  were  captured  by  the  enemy;  and 
4,000  were  for  General  Taylor  in  Louisiana,  the  arms  needing  repairs. 
Those  for  General  Taylor  were  sent  to  Macon  and  those  for  Arkansas 
to  Atlanta,  Ga.,  and  consequently  a portion  of  them  have  not  reached 
their  destination. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  BANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Clinton,  La.,  September  21, 1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond : 

Dear  Sir  : Excuse  me  for  calling  your  consideration  to  the  position 
now  held  and  being  fortified  by  our  troops  at  Port  Hudson,  on  the 
Mississippi  Biver.  An  intimate  knowledge  of  the  country  and  a deep 
interest  in  the  success  of  the  enterprise  must  be  my  apology  for  tres- 
passing upon  your  attention.  From  conformation  of  ground  and  cur- 
rents this  is  one  of  the  most  formidable  points  on  the  river.  The  ene- 
my’s fleets  can  be  held  in  check  or  destroyed  here  and  they  cannot 
indulge  their  u shell  practice  ” without  encountering  the  direct  fire  of 
our  guns.  They  have  no  banks  to  shelter  them  while  delivering  their 
own  fire.  In  passing  up  or  down  they  must  come  directly  up  to  the 
muzzles  of  our  pieces  and  must  feel  the  effect  of  our  fire  whenever  they 
attempt  to  pass.  The  Essex  is  said  to  have  been  fatally  injured  on  her 
last  trip  down  by  the  fire  of  our  guns,  two  24  and  one  42  only  being 
mounted  at  the  time.  Pieces  of  large  caliber  are  being  mounted,  and 
when  the  batteries  are  equipped  according  to  design  the  strongest  vessel 
will  find  the  position  too  hot  for  gunboats  and  too  strong  for  any  amount 
of  iron  sheeting  that  will  float.  The  position  is  of  the  strongest  charac- 
ter so  far  as  the  command  of  the  river  is  concerned. 

As  relates  to  land  movements  it  is  not  so  strong  as  Vicksburg  and 
other  points.  The  place  is  approachable  over  a large  and  level  country, 
presenting  very  few  natural  difficulties  to  a land  attack.  The  posi- 
tion of  a defending  force  would  be  one  not  free  from  serious  difficulties, 
while  an  advancing  foe  would  encounter  but  few  natural  impediments. 

This  position  is  of  the  first  magnitude,  and  should  be  held  against  all 
contingencies  and  at  any  cost.  It  gives  us  command  of  a section  of  the 
river  from  here  to  Vicksburg ; guards  the  country  watered  by  Little  Bed, 
Black,  and  Washita  Bi  vers,  in  Louisiana;  provides  a safe  means  of  transit 
for  supplies  and  munitions  of  war,- and  opens  communication  with 
an  immense  producing  area  in  the  West.  Texas  is  brought  into  com- 
munion with  all  the  interests  of  the  nation,  and  her  abundant  products 
can  and  will  find  their  way  to  our  army  depots.  The  western  side  of 
the  river  is  our  only  reliance  for  sugar,  and  already  thousands  of  hogs- 
heads are  collected  on  the  other  bank,  under  the  range  of  our  guns, 
awaiting  transportation.  Western  Louisiana  produces  immense  quanti- 
ties of  salt,  and  all  that  is  needed  is  the  means  of  transit  to  fill  the  de- 
mand both  for  public  and  private  uses. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  809 

The  results  of  the  enterprise  would  afford  details  for  a book.  The 
value  of  success  in  the  matter  is  incalculable.  A failure  to  hold  it  will 
be  productive  of  the  widest  disaster  and  distress. 

I wish  to  say  that  the  place  is  not  sufficiently  defended;  that  is,  there 
are  not  men  enough  to  make  the  tenure  of  the  place  anything  like  sure. 
Independent  of  other  and  larger  considerations,  we  have  a large  or  are 
collecting  a large  amount  of  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  here,  and 
there  are  only  about  1,200  men  to  defend  the  place  in  the  event  of  an 
attack  by  land,  which  is  imminent  at  any  moment,  unless  Butler’s  spies 
are  all  asleep  or  he  himself  is  a coward.  He  can  land  an  overwhelming 
force  within  3 miles  of  the  point  in  ten  hours  from  Few  Orleans,  and 
re-enforcements  could  not  reach  us  under  forty-eight  hours.  I have  no 
doubt  that  General  Ruggles  is  fully  apprised  of  the  inadequacy  of  the 
means  under  his  control  to  hold  Port  Hudson  and  Vicksburg.  There 
cannot  be  over  6,000  men  in  the  department,  and  any  re-enforcement  to 
this  point  must  be  drawn  from  Vicksburg,  and  could  not  reach  here  in 
time  to  grapple  with  an  attack  which  can  be  conceived  and  executed 
in  twenty-four  hours.  Light  batteries  have  been  stationed  at  Troth’s 
house,  3 miles  below,  to  prevent  a landing,  but  this  can  be  effected  be- 
low, between  the  lake  and  river  and  out  of  the  range  of  the  pieces,  and 
we  have  taught  them  lessons  in  taking  light  batteries  which  they  might 
readily  put  into  practice. 

Permit  me  to  suggest,  very  respectfully  and  very  earnestly,  that  there 
should  be  a force  of  at  least  10,000  men  kept  at  or  within  striking  dis- 
tance of  this  place  all  the  time.  The  loss  of  this  position  would  be  dis- 
astrous and  shameful  to  the  last  degree ; and  I do  assure  you  that  it  is 
momentarily  exposed  to  the  contingency  of  capture  unless  defended  by 
a stronger  force.  A force  of  10,000  men  could  not  on  any  field  be  em- 
ployed more  usefully  than  in  holding  this  position,  and  in  my  judgment 
they  would  see  service  under  fire  as  often  as  any  troops  in  our  armies. 

If  there  are  any  useful  suggestions  in  this  desultory  note  I shall  be 
truly  glad,  as  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  magnitude  and  importance 
of  the  subject. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  POND,  Jr. 

[Indorsement.  ] 

Respectfully  referred  to  Major-General  Pemberton,  at  Jackson,  Miss. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Dist.  of  the  Miss.,  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 
Jackson , Miss.,  September  22,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith, 

Commanding  Second  Sub -District : 

Sir:  The  brigadier- general  commanding  directs  that  you  take  imme- 
diate measures  to  establish  a four- gun  battery  at  the  bend  of  the  river 
above  Vicksburg,  so  as  to  sweep  the  reach  above.  It  will  be  necessary 
to  raise  it  some  feet  above  the  bottom  level.  He  also  directs  that  the 
light-draught  steamers  in  the  Yazoo  be  sent  as  soon  as  practicable  into 
the  waters  of  the  Red  River  for  transport  service.  He  also  directs  that 
then  the  raft  in  the  Yazoo  River  at  Liverpool  be  repaired  thoroughly, 
so  as  to  impede  the  navigation  of  the  river.  He  also  directs  that  an 


810 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX  , N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


engineer  officer  be  sent  to  construct  a boom  at  Haines7  Bluff  and  a bat- 
tery to  defend  it,  further  to  impede  the  navigation  of  the  Yazoo.  He 
also  directs  that  this  battery  (at  Haines’  Bluff)  be  covered  by  a suffi- 
cient force  to  protect  it,  and  that  the  road  be  repaired  leading  thence  to 
Vicksburg.  He  also  directs  that  you  employ  negro  labor  to  prosecute 
these  works  with  the  greatest  energy  and  promptitude. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 


Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


— 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Richmond , September  23, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles, 

Commanding  District  of  Mississippi,  Jachson , Miss. : 

General  : In  reply  to  your  communication  of  the  11th  instant  I am 
instructed  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  inform  you  that  Major-General 
Taylor  has  already  been  assigned  by  the  President  to  the  very  respon- 
sible duties  referred  to  therein,  and  the  Secretary  is  at  a loss  to  under- 
stand why  Brigadier -General  Buggies,  who  commands  the  District  of 
Mississippi,  should  propose  to  interfere  with  the  authority  vested  in 
Major-General  Taylor,  or  why  he  should  give  publicity  through  the 
medium  of  the  telegraph  to  suggestions  which  should  have  been  re- 
garded by  him  as  private  and  are  so  regarded  in  the  instructions  to 
General  Taylor. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ JASPEK  S.  WHITING, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Charleston,  S.  0.,  September  24,  1862. 

[General  S.  Cooper  :!] 

General  : At  the  earliest  moment  on  returning  to  duty,  and  having 
[referred]  again  to  the  necessary  records,  I have  to  submit  the  follow- 
ing report  touching  the  occupation  and  fortification  of  the  position  of 
Vicksburg,  to  the  end  that  due  justice  may  be  done  the  services  of  a 
modest  officer  of  high  worth,  namely,  Capt.  D.  B.  Harris,  Provisional 
Engineer  Corps,  C.  S.  Army.  , 

Satisfied  early  in  March  last  that  the  several  positions  of  Island  [iso.j 
10,  Madrid  Bend,  and  Port  Pillow,  with  the  inadequate  means  at  my 
disposition,  would  afford  but  temporary  barriers  to  the  enemy’s  gun- 
boats and  great  resources,  I became  extremely  anxious  to  have  the 
river  thoroughly  examined  by  a competent  officer  for  the  most  favora- 
ble points  for  defensive  works  southward  of  Port  Pillow  and  north  of 
Port  Hudson.  With  that  view  I applied  to  the  late  General  A.  S. 
Johnston  for  the  services  of  Maj.  J.  F.  Gilmer,  C.  S.  Engineers,  for  that 
duty,  as  well  as  for  the  inspection  and  strengthening  of  the  works  at 
Fort  Pillow.  That  capable  officer,  however,  could  not  be  spared  from 
his  other  important  duties.  Subsequently — after  the  battle  of  Shiloh-— 
I detailed  an  intelligent  officer,  Capt.  A.  B.  Gray,  Provisional  Engi- 
neers, to  make  the  river  reconnaissance,  but  he,  unfortunately,  was 
killed  at  the  starting  point  of  his  duties,  within  the  works  of  Fort  Pil- 
low. But  previous  to  any  examination  I had  recommended  to  Major- 


811 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC- CONFEDERATE. 

General  Lovell  the  fortification  of  Port  Hudson  as  a measure  of  pre- 
caution against  the  fall  of  our  defenses  north  of  Memphis.  I was  also 
of  the  opinion  that  Helena,  on  the  west  bank  ot  the  Mississippi,  was 
another  favorable  point,  especially  since  it  might  be  so  fortified  as  also 
to  cover  the  Saint  Francis  Eiver  and  prevent  the  possibility  of  a descent 
into  the  Mississippi  of  the  enemy’s  forces  by  that  stream,  and  I was  sat- 
isfied that  at  or  near  Vicksburg  another  favorable  position  for  defense 
would  be  found,  whether  against  the  enemy  from  the  quarter  of  New 
Orleans  or  Memphis. 

About  April  20,  however,  an  officer  sent  by  Major-General  Lovell 
reached  my  headquarters,  asking  my  assistance  to  occupy  and  fortify 
Vicksburg.  Meantime,  having  become  satisfied  from  further  investiga- 
tion that  the  position  at  Helena  would  not  answer  all  the  ends  prom- 
ised at  the  first  glance,  I at  once  complied  with  General  Lovell’s  wishes, 
and  telegraphed  to  Oapt.  D.  B.  Harris,  then  at  Fort  Pillow,  to  repair 
immediately  to  Vicksburg  ; at  the  same  time  I provided  him  with  the 
most  competent  assistance  available,  while  I called  on  the  commanding 
officer,  Colonel  Autry,  already  at  Vicksburg  by  my  orders,  to  collect 
laborers,  tools,  and  other  needful  supplies  for  the  work  with  the  utmost 
possible  dispatch.  And  here,  be  it  noted,  no  guns  were  at  my  disposi- 
tion until  then,  when  they  were  supplied  from  Pensacola  by  General 
Bragg  and  from  New  Orleans  by  General  Lovell. 

The  letter  of  instructions  herewith  (marked  A)  to  Captain  Harris 
will  show  my  views  as  to  the  character  of  the  works  to  be  constructed, 
which  may  be  briefly  summed  up  as  follows  : The  erection  of  batteries 
or  works  immediately  north  of  the  city,  carefully  and  properly  located ; 
if  practicable,  a battery  commanded  by  the  first,  and  commanding  the 
mouth  of  the  Yazoo,  to  be  obstructed  by  piles,  rafts,  or  other  efficient 
barriers.  To  guard  against  the  cutting  of  a canal  across  the  narrow 
peninsula  opposite  Vicksburg  (actually  attempted  afterward,  it  will  be 
remembered)  by  the  enemy,  an  inclosed  battery  below  Vicksburg,  to 
command  any  points  at  which  the  canal  must  debouch  into  the  river. 
Leaving  the  plans  and  profiles  of  the  works  to  the  judgment  of  Captain 
Harris,  he  was  informed  of  the  character  of  the  armament  disposable 
and  which  would  be  sent  him,  to  wit,  some  ten  or  twelve  8 and  10  inch 
guns,  fifteen  42 -pounders,  three  24-pounders,  several  mortars,  with  a 
dozen  field  rifled  guns  and  half  as  many  24-pounder  howitzers.  The 
garrison  to  occupy  these  defenses  was  fixed  at  3,000  men.  Magazines 
were  to  be  built  within  the  works,  also  cisterns  made,  field  bomb-proofs 
erected,  and  traverses  against  an  enfilading  fire  in  all  directions. 

Four  days  later  (see  papers  herewith  marked  B*)  by  telegraph  Cap- 
tain Harris  was  further  instructed  to  erect  works  below  Vicksburg, 
putting  his  guns  in  position  first  and  then  erecting  works,  one  main 
work  with  detached  batteries  preferred.  Informed  by  Captain  Harris 
on  April  27  that  the  proposed  battery  to  command  the  mouth  of  the 
Yazoo  was  not  practicable,  but  could  be  favorably  located  at  a point  18 
miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  stream,  the  construction  of  the  battery 
and  of  proper  booms,  rafts,  and  piles  was  at  once  ordered.  The  prog- 
ress made  toward  the  execution  of  the  duty  intrusted  to  Captain 
Harris  will  be  seen  in  his  several  reports*  of  the  6th  and  20th  of  May, 
1862,  before  which  last  date  Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith  had  reached  Vicks- 
burg and  assumed  command. 

It  is  due  to  Captain  Harris  that  I should  here  notice  the  fact  that 
much  delay  was  caused  by  the  want  of  labor,  which  was  not  freely 
furnished  in  the  vicinage. 


* Not  found. 


812 


W.  FLA.,  S.  FLA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


I shall  also  inclose  with  this  copies  of  certain  telegrams,*  which  will 
show  what  other  steps  were  taken  from  time  to  time  to  aid  the  con- 
struction in  various  ways  of  these  important  works  and  looking  to  the 
success  of  the  impending  defense. 

It  only  remains  to  add  that  I am  assured  Captain  Harris  planned 
and  conducted  the  construction  of  these  works  with  his  characteristic 
intelligence,  zeal,  and  industry. 

Respectfullv.  vour  obedient  servant, 

Gr.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

[In closure  A.] 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 

Corinth , Miss.,  April  21,  1862. 

Capt.  H.  B.  Harris, 

Chief  Engineer , Vicksburg , Miss.  : 

Captain:  Understanding  that  there  are  no  points  sufficiently  high 
on  the  river  between  Memphis  and  Vicksburg  which  could  be  fortified 
for  the  defense  of  the  Mississippi  I have  concluded  to  construct  some 
defensive  works  on  the  bluffs  at  or  about  Vicksburg,  for  which  purpose 
you  will  make  a careful  reconnaissance  of  that  locality.  From  what  I 
am  told  I should  think  the  bluffs  immediately  above  that  city,  not  far 
from  where  a small  stream  empties  into  the  river,  would  be  a proper 
point  for  said  works,  provided  it  is  not  commanded  by  surrounding 
heights  within  2 miles.  A lower  battery,  with  four  or  five  guns,  might 
be  so  located  as  to  defend  the  entrance  of  the  Yazoo  River  and  the 
small  stream  above  mentioned,  provided  said  battery  can  be  protected 
by  the  guns  of  the  upper  work $ otherwise  the  entrances  into  these  two 
branches  of  the  Mississippi  must  be  obstructed  by  rafts,  piling,  or  other- 
wise. 

Another  important  consideration  is  that  the  peninsula  opposite  Vicks- 
burg should  not  be  susceptible  of  being  canalled  across  from  the  river 
above  to  the  river  below  for  the  passage  of  the  enemy’s  boats  beyond 
the  reach  of  the  guns  of  the  fort. 

Should  the  locality  admit  of  such  a canal  beyond  range  of  said  guns, 
another  inclosed  battery  of  four  or  five  guns  will  have  to  be  constructed 
below  Vicksburg  to  command  the  ground  over  which  said  canal  might 
be  made. 

The  plans  and  profiles  of  these  works  must  be  left  to  your  own  judg- 
ment and  to  the  nature  of  the  ground  on  which  they  are  to  be  located. 
Their  armament  will  consist  of  ten  or  twelve  8-inch  and  10-inch  guns ; 
fifteen  42-pounders  ; three  24-pounders,  and  several  mortars,  with  a 
dozen  field  rifle  guns  and  half  a dozen  24-pounder  howitzers,  those  bemg 
all  the  guns  we  can  spare  at  present  for  the  defense  of  the  river  at  that 
point.  The  total  garrison  will  consist  of  about  3,000  men.  There 
should  be  ample  space  in  those  works  for.  magazines,  traverses  in  every 
direction,  field  bomb-proofs,  a store-house,  and  cisterns. 

Actg.  Capts.  John  M.  Reid  and  — Patterson,  also  Actg.  Lieut. 

John  H.  Reid,  have  been  ordered  to  report  to  you  for  the  construction 
of  these  works.  The  two  Reids  (father  and  son)  I am  well  acquainted 
with,  and  they  were  for  years  employed  by  me  in  the  construction  of 
my  forts  in  Louisiana.  They  are  very  reliable,  practical  men,  and  will 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  813 

be  of  much  assistance  to  you.  The  other  gentleman  I am  not  person- 
ally acquainted  with. 

Colonel  Autry,  military  commander  of  Vicksburg,  has  been  ordered 
to  afford  you  all  the  assistance  in  his  power  in  the  collection  of  men 
and  materials  for  the  construction  of  said  works.  About  1,000  negroes 
have  been  ordered  to  report  to  you,  with  their  tools,  &c.,  immediately, 
but  should  you  not  be  able  to  procure  them  otherwise  you  will  impress 
them  at  once. 

You  must  put  forth  all  your  energy  to  complete  these  works  as  soon 
as  practicable  and  report  their  progress  every  week. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Beaumont , Tex .,  September  26,  3862. 

Capt.  C.  M.  Mason, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  &c. : 

Captain  : I reached  this  place  yesterday  at  3 p.  m.  with  743  men  of 
Elmore’s  regiment. 

Please  find  herewith  Colonel  Spaight’s  report*  on  the  late  events  at 
Sabine  Pass.  I concur  with  him  in  the  belief  that  a large  force  could 
have  done  no  more  than  Major  Irvine’s  command,  having  no  guns  of 
sufficient  range  to  answer  those  of  the  enemy.  The  engine  and  rolling 
stock  on  the  Sabine  Pass  Railroad  are  all  safe.  I have  received  infor- 
mation (not  very  reliable)  that  the  enemy  landed  a force  variously  esti- 
mated at  from  15  to  100  men,  who  hoisted  the  United  States  flag  at 
Sabine  Pass  and  signified  their  will  to  procure  beeves,  by  purchase  or 
otherwise,  promising  the  inhabitants,  whose  number  has  been  consid- 
erably reduced  by  death  and  escape,  that  they  would  not  harm  them- if 
not  interfered  with  by  us. 

I sent  upon  my  arrival  some  scouts,  whose  return  I expect  some  time 
to-day.  I intend  also  to  reconnoiter  the  country  between  here  and  Sa- 
bine Pass  on  the  railroad,  represented  to  me  to  be  the  only  route  by 
which  access  can  be  had  through  the  marshes  that  surround  that  place. 

Colonel  Spaight’s  command  is  reuniting  fast  upon  the  news  of  the 
presence  of  the  enemy.  I will  send  his  mounted  men  to  drive  off  the 
beeves  from  the  neighborhood  of  Sabine  Pass.  I shall  also  send  to 
Orange  a company  or  two  of  infantry  to  protect  the  railroad  aud  several 
hundred  bales  of  cotton  deposited  there  from  forays  by  small  parties 
up  the  river.  I believe,  if  the  reports  of  the  scouts  and  the  reconnais- 
sance I intend  to  make  confirm  reports  already  received,  that  Spaight’s 
battalion  will  be  sufficient  to  resist  the  enemy  if  he  intends  to  commit 
depredations  up  the  river.  I would  then  return  to  Houston  with  El- 
more’s regiment,  the  detachment  of  Griffin’s  battalion,  and  Wilson’s 
battery,  whose  services  may  be  required  at  some  other  point  on  the 
coast.  Should  it  turn  out  that  the  enemy  will  hold  permanently  the 
bay,  thus  cutting  us  off  effectively  from  that  port,  which  has  proven  to 
be  so  valuable,  the  only  way  to  prevent  him  from  making  forays  on  the 
Sabine  and  Nechez  will  be  to  lay  at  the  mouths  of  these  rivers  obstruc- 
tions that  cannot  be  easily  removed.  Colonel  Gentry,  who  has  kindly 


See  p.  144. 


814 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA  , S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


volunteered  to  accompany  me,  says  he  can  do  it  at  a small  expense  and 
with  little  labor.  I would  respectfully  request  the  general  to  give  me 
his  views  on  the  subject.  I could  perhaps  drive  off  the  enemy  from  the 
bay  by  using  the  guns  of  long  range  now  at  Houston,  but  to  do  this  it 
would  be  necessary  to  throw  up  a work  of  fortification  and  to  make 
platforms  resting  upon  a solid  foundation,  all  qf  which  would  have  to 
be  accomplished  within  range  of  the  enemy’s  guns,  exposing  for  several 
davs  the  working  parties  and  the  troops  protecting  them  to  a fire  which 
they  could  not  answer.  Lieut.  Col.  A.  Smith,  of  the  Independent 
Texas  Infantry,  is  with  me.  His  experience  has  already  been  very 

useful  to  me.  . , , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBRAY, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston. 


P.  S.— Several  residents  of  Sabine  Pass,  sick  with  yellow  fever,  ar- 
rived here  yesterday.  I requested  the  provost-marshal  to  restrict  the 
intercourse  of  the  persons  who  nurse  them  to  the  lower  portion  of  the 
town,  where  they  have  found  shelter. 


Headquarters  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Houston , Tex .,  September  28,  1862. 

Capt.  C.  M.  Mason, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 
gjjj*  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  returned  to-day  from 
Beaumont  with  Elmore’s  regiment  and  the  detachment  of  Griffin’s  bat- 
talion. Wilson’s  battery  had  no  transportation,  but  shall  return  to- 
morrow. From  a reconnaissance  made  personally  down  to  near  the 
terminus  of  the  Sabine  Pass  Railroad  (2J  miles  from  the  f0^n)>  ana 
from  information  received  through  scouts  who  penetrated  into  the  town, 
I have  satisfied  myself  that  two  schooners — one  140  tons  burden,  armed 
with  two  32-pounders  and  one  mortar  gun,  and  the  other  120  tons  bur- 
den, carrying  two  32-pounders  and  one  20-pounder  Parrott  gun  are 
lying  at  anchor  within  the  bay  and  shut  completely  the  Pass.  Xo  per- 
manent landing  has  been  made  and  none  will  probably  be  made,  owing 
to  yellow  fever,  which  is  still  raging.  Each  schooner  has  50  men  on 
board.  I have  stationed  the  two  mounted  companies  of  Spaight  s bat- 
talion between  Beaumont  and  Sabine  Pass  at  a point  from  which  they 
can  watch  the  movements  of  the  enemy  in  the  bay  and  bring  prompt 
intelligence  to  Beaumont  and  Orange.  Their  orders  are  to  drive  on; 
the  herds  of  cattle  from  the  vicinity  of  the  bay,  to  push  frequent  scouts 
to  the  town  of  Sabine  in  order  to  watch  the  inhabitants,  and  to  receive 
information  to  endeavor  to  cut  off  enemy’s  parties  who  may  attempt  to 
land  to  procure  beeves.  The  section  of  artillery  of  Spaight’s  battalion 
is  stationed  at  a bend  of  the  Xechez,  with  two  32-pounders,  at  12  miles 
from  Beaumont,  Owing  to  the  short  distance  from  which  they  can  be 
fired  at  by  the  enemy  he  will  not  have  the  advantage  ot  long  range. 
One  company  of  Spaight’s  battalion  (infantry)  is  ordered  to  take  station 
at  Orange  to  protect  the  railroad  and  shipping  and  to  give  aid  to  the 
provost-marshal  if  needed.  Another  company  is  stationed  near  Beau- 
mont to  protect  the  railroad  bridge.  I have  ordered  the  provost-mar- 
shal at  Orange  to  require  the  owners  of  cotton  at  Orange  or  then 
agents  to  remove  it  within  one  week  beyond  reach  of  the  enemy,  with 
warning  that  should  they  fail  to  do  so  it  shall  be  removed  by  him  at 


Chap.  XXVLL.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


815 


their  expense,  the  cotton  being  security  for  the  cost  of  removal.  I 
ordered  him  also  to  cause  all  the  shipping  at  or  below  Orange  to  move 
as  far  up  the  river  as  possible  and  not  to  suffer  any  navigation  down 
the  river  except  for  good  reasons,  and  only  by  persons  whose  fidelity 
to  our  Government  is  beyond  doubt.  Should  the  enemy  approach  all 
the  cotton  at  Orange  must  be  destroyed.  Some  inhabitants  of  Sabine - 
town  convalescent  from  yellow  fever  have  succeeded  in  breaking  the 
quarantine  and  found  shelter  in  the  lower  part  of  Beaumont.  I ordered 
the  provost- marshal  at  Beaumont  to  place  that  portion  of  the  town  in 
quarantine.  1 doubt,  however,  the  efficiency  of  that  measure,  and 
apprehend  that  the  disease  will  spread  over  the  whole  town.  If  so,  the 
trains  are  ordered  not  to  stop  at  Beaumont.  I have  forbidden  the 
transportation  of  cotton  to  any  point  on  the  New  Orleans  Bailroad  from 
Houston.  Having  full  confidence  in  the  judgment  and  activity  of  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Spaight,  an  excellent  officer,  and  believing  that  for  the 
present  his  battalion  is  more  than  sufficient  to  check  the  enemy  on  land, 
I have  ordered  the  troops  I had  taken  with  me  to  Beaumont  to  return 
to  their  stations,  and  to  keep  in  readiness  to  move  at  short  notice  should 
their  presence  be  required  at  any  point  of  the  coast.  I cannot  praise 
too  highly  the  promptness  with  which  the  railroad  companies  supplied 
me  with  means  of  transportation.  I received  information  upon  my 
return  that  the  blockading  steamer  at  Galveston  left  her  station  two 
days  ago  and  has  not  returned.  I made  mention  above  of  orders  given 
me  to  the  provost-marshal.  In  this,  as  in  former  instances,  my  order, 
although  peremptory,  in  order  to  cover  their  responsibility  and  to  assume 
it  upon  myself,  had  to  be  accompanied  by  letters  requesting  them  to 
obey  it,  because  they  are  compelled  to  obey  the  orders  of  General  Bee 
alone.  I would  respectfully  submit  to  the  consideration  of  the  general 
commanding  whether  it  would  not  be  expedient  for  certain  purposes  to 
place  them  under  the  orders  of  the  commander  of  this  sub-district  when 
prompt  action  is  required. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBBAY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston. 


Houston,  Tex.,  September  28, 1862. 
General  P.  O.  Hubert,  San  Antonio , Tex . : 

General  : Allow  me  to  address  you  directly,  to  inform  you  that  your 
negroes  are  all  safe.  I saw  some  of  them,  who  appear  to  be  in  good 
health  and  satisfied.  I made  with  Mr.  Gentry  arrangements  for  their 
removal  in  case  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  I have  returned  from 
Beaumont  to-day  with  the  troops  I had  taken  there,  except  Wilson’s 
battery,  for  which  there  was  no  transportation.  He  will  be  back  here 
the  day  after  to  morrow.  I send  by  this  mail  an  official  report  * on  the 
state  of  affairs  at  Sabine  Pass  up  to  the  26th  in  the  evening.  Since  I 
went  on  the  railroad  down  to  the  terminus  where  the  two  schooners 
could  be  seen  very  plainly.  They  have  hoisted  no  flag  at  Sabine  Pass 
nor  do  they  show  their  colors ; for  the  purpose,  I suppose,  of  deluding 
some  of  our  vessels  on  their  return  trip.  I hope,  however,  they  shall 
be  deceived  in  their  expectation,  for  Mr.  Mott  has  at  the  Pass  a signal 
agent  who  will  inform  them  of  the  danger.  I could,  had  I wished  some 


See  p.  143. 


816 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chat.  XXYII. 


newspaper  notoriety,  have  bagged  some  of  the  Federate  by  lying  in  am- 
bush with  some  of  Colonel  Spaight’s  cavalry,  if  they  had  attempted,  as 
was  probable,  to  steal  beeves ; but  I thought  that  Colonel  Spaight  was 
up  to  the  task,  and  that  my  presence  might  be  required  here  for  some 
other  purpose. 

The  steamship  stationed  at  Galveston  left  two  dajs  ago  for  parts  un- 
known, and  is  probably  at  some  mischief.  I had  transmitted  to  you 
officially  two  months  ago  a report  * of  Major  Kellersberg  upon  the  inef- 
ficiency of  the  works  of  defense  at  Sabine  Pass  and  recommending  some 
improvements  and  modifications.  I have  reasons  to  believe  that  that 
report  has  not  been  submitted  to  you.  I regret  it,  for  the  place  might 
perhaps  have  been  put  in  a condition  of  defense  if  Major  Kellersberg’s 
suggestions  had  been  acted  upon.  I ordered  the  provost-marshal  at 
Orange  to  cause  all  the  cotton  there  (over  750  bales)  to  be  removed  or 
destroyed  if  the  enemy  approaches  and  to  order  all  the  shipping  at  or 
below  Orange  to  move  as  far  up  the  river  as  possible.  I have  stationed 
one  company  of  infantry  at  Beaumont  and  one  at  Orange  for  the  pro- 
tection of  the  rfiilroad  and  shipping,  but  I have  no  artillery.  I warned 
the  people  of  Sabine  that  should  they  be  known  to  have  traded  with 
the  enemy  I would  withhold  from  them  the  supplies  heretofore  sold  to 
them  by  the  commissary  while  they  are  in  quarantine.  Elmore’s  regi- 
ment has  an  excellent  composition  of  men,  but  is  poorly  officered.  In 
fact  they  have  no  notions  of  discipline  or  military  instruction.  I could 
never  imagine  that  a set  of  men  could  be  terrified  as  they  were  by  a 
remote  apprehension  of  the  yellow  fever.  I was  so  harassed ‘by  the 
objections  and  remonstrances  of  the  lieutenant-colonel  in  command  at 
my  taking  them  so  close  to  an  infected  place  that  I was  compelled  to 
forbid  him  to  mention  the  word  yellow  fever  before  me. 

Captain  Chubb,  who  will  hand  you  this  letter,  and  Capt.  Leon 
{Smith  believe  that  they  would  be  able  to  destroy  the  blockading 
schooners  at  Sabine  Pass  if  they  were  allowed  to  put  the  two  rifled  guns 
now  lying  idle  at  Houston  on  board  of  river  boats  which  are  at  Orange.  ' 
Being  totally  unacquainted  with  naval  matters,  I dare  not  trust  to  my 
judgment,  and  submit  their  plan  to  your  consideration. 

I would  wish  in  some  instances  to  address  you  directly  on  mat- 
ters of  public  service  which  require  a prompt  decision  from  you,  and 
which  are  sometimes  delayed  by  pressure  of  business  in  the  adju- 
tant-general’s office,  and  respectfully  solicit  permission  to  do  so  in  the 


lutuic.  . - , 

Hoping  that  you  will  excuse  me  m this  case,  when  a letter  com- 
menced with  private  matters  has  degenerated  into  a semi-official  com- 
munication, I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 


servant, 


X.  B.  DEBRAY. 


p.  S._Please  find  herewith  a letter,!  which  will  inform  you  of  the 
state  of  feeling  among  the  people  of  Sabine  Pass.  The  names  men- 
tioned in  it  should  remain  secret,  for  the  interest  of  the  parties  concerned 
and  the  public  service.  The  man  Pennington,  whose  name  is  mentioned 
in  the  letter,  was  master  of  a boat  at  Sabine  Pass,  and  is  said  to  be 
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  waters  of  the  Sabine  and  Nechez.  He 
was  suspected  of  having  allowed  his  boat  to  be  taken  in  Berwick  Bay 
at  the  beginning  of  the  blockade  and  had  not  been  heard  of  since.  I 
am  informed  by  one  of  the  scouts  of  Colonel  Spaight  that  one  of  the 


*See  Series  I,  Vol.  IX,  p.  729. 


t Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 


817 


schooners  has  two  32-pounders  and  one  mortar  and  the  other  two  32- 
pounders  and  one  20-pounder  Parrott.  The  guns  are  supposed  by 
Major  Irvine  to  be  rifled.  They  have  each  50  men  on  board.  If  the 
enemy  intends  to  keep  the  two  schooners  permanently  inside  of  the 
bay  it  will  become  impossible  for  our  vessels  to  run  out.  If  so,  I sub- 
mit to  your  consideration  whether  it  would  not  be  advisable  to  throw 
obstructions  at  the  mouths  of  the  Sabine  and  Nechez,  to  prevent  the 
enemy  from  using  them  for  carrying  on  his  depredatory  expeditions. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

Jackson,  Miss.,  September  30,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Ya. : 

General  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  a moment  since  yours  of 
September  23,  and  proceed  to  reply: 

You  say  that  Major-General  Taylor  has  already  been  assigned  by 
the  President  to  the  very  responsible  duties  referred  to  therein.  To 
this  I reply  that  this  is  the  first  information  or  intimation  from  any 
source  whatever  I have  received  on  the  subject.  Major-General  Taylor 
having  been  assigned  to  the  Trans-Mississippi  command,  and  this  not 
being  within  his  military  jurisdiction,  I have  had  no  personal,  and  but 
little  official  intercourse  with  him,  none  touching  the  plan  which  I had 
the  honor  to  submit.  You  further  say,  “the  Secretary  is  at  a loss  to 
understand  why  Brigadier-General  Buggies,  who  commands  the  Dis- 
trict of  Mississippi,  should  propose  to  interfere  with  the  authority  vested 
in  Major-General  Taylor.’7  To  this  I reply  that  on  or  about  the  26th 
day  of  June  last  I was  assigned  to  the  command  of  East  Louisiana, 
it  being  District  No  1 of  the  four  sub-districts  comprised  within  the 
District  of  the  Mississippi,  commanded  by  Major-General  Van  Dorn. 
District  No.  1 embraces  all  that  part  of  Louisiana  lying  east  of  the 
Mississippi  Biver,  within  which  the  city  of  New  Orleans  is  located. 
About  the  1st  of  the  current  month  I was  transferred  from  the  com- 
mand of  the  Sub-District  No.  1 to  the  command  of  the  District  of  the 
Mississippi,  comprising  the  four  sub-districts,  without  change  of  lim- 
its. The  honorable  Secretary  of  War  will  probably  perceive  that  so  far 
from  my  having  transgressed  the  proper  limits  of  my  military  duties 
I have  been  prompt  in  meeting  their  supposed  obligations,  and  that  if 
there  has  been  any  violations  of  official  courtesy  it  has  not  been  on  my 
part.  The  city  of  New  Orleans  being  within  the  District  of  the  Missis- 
sippi comes  within  my  jurisdiction,  and  not  within  that  of  Major-General 
Taylor,  of  the  Trans  Mississippi  District,  who,  I am  now  for  the  first 
time  informed,  has  been  assigned  by  the  President  to  the  very  respon- 
sible duty  referred  to.  The  telegram  sent  by  me  amounted  at  most 
to  a suggestion,  and  if  the  agents  are  disloyal  the  plans  of  the  Govern- 
ment are  at  their  mercy. 

These  plain  facts  ought  to  have  protected  me  from  the  reproach  con- 
veyed in  the  Secretary’s  letter,  and  I now  submit  that  his  sense  of 
justice  should  induce  its  prompt  recall. 

• I cannot  permit  myself  to  close  my  reply  to  this  communication  with- 
out expressing  my  ardent  desire  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  Govern- 
ment in  this  great  war  aud  to  satisfy  the  zealous  promptings  of  a whole 
life  passed  in  my  country’s  service. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  BUGGLES, 

Brigadier-  General. 


52  r r — VOL  xv 


818 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVll. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjutant- General’s  Office, 

No.  132.  f Austin , Tex.,  September  30,  1862. 

Such  State  troops  as  may  have  been  or  may  be  called  into  active 
service  by  Brig.  Gen.  W.  Hudson,  Texas  State  Troops,  in  the  Twenty- 
first  Brigade,  for  the  protection  of  the  northwestern  frontier,  will  be 
reported  immediately  to  the  general  commanding  this  military  depart- 
ment, and  such  troops  from  the  date  of  their  entry  into  such  service 
will  be  subject  to  the  orders  of  the  department  commander  until  further 
orders. 

By  order  of  Gov.  F.  R.  Lubbock : 

J.  Y.  DASHIELL, 
Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Special  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Dist.  Tex.,  New  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

No.  264.*  j Sabine  Pass , September  30,  1863. 

# # # # # * * 

II.  Information  having  reached  the  major-general  commanding  that  it 
was  the  intention  of  a small  portion  of  this  garrison  to  leave  their  colors 
and  go  to  their  homes  because  they  had  heard  of  the  invasion  of  the 
northern  frontier  of  the  State  by  the  Federals  and  Indians,  the  major- 
general  commanding  announces  that  no  such  invasion  has  taken  place, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  that  he  has  received  information,  much  more  rapid 
and  direct  than  could  possibly  have  been  obtained  by  any  one  else,  to 
the  effect  that  the  enemy  has  been  driven  back  toward  Forts  Smith  and 
Gibson,  and  that  there  is  no  cause  of  uneasiness  whatever  at  this  mo- 
ment. 

He  takes  this  occasion,  however,  to  say  to  the  good  men  of  this  com- 
mand that  they  must  not  be  misled  by  the  base  cowards,  who  use  these 
means  but  as  a pretext  to  induce  brave  men  to  cover  their  cowardice 
on  the  plea  of  relieving  their  families  at  home. 

When  a country  is  invaded  if  every  man  left  his  regiment  to  go 
home  to  protect  his  family  the  Army  would  soon  be  dissolved  and  the 
country  and  every  family  in  it  would  become  an  easy  prey  to  a foe  who 
openly  declares  that  you  shall  not  inhabit  the  land  on  which  you  dwell 
except  as  slaves.  That  such  a base  and  despicable  design  should  have 
been  entertained  at  all,  and  especially  on  the  spot  made  sacred  and 
historic  by  the  most  brilliant  achievement  of  the  war,  is  almost  past 
belief,  and  that  any  considerable  portion  of  his  troops  would  hesitate 
to  inflict  the  most  dire  and  summary  punishment  on  the  dastards  and 
traitors  that  would  attempt  to  carry  out  such  a design  the  major-gen- 
eral commanding  scorns  to  believe.  Those  who  dare,  on  this  or  any 
other  pretext  whatever,  to  leave  their  colors  shall  be  shot  without 
mercy,  and  the  commanding  general  will  not  insult  the  patriotism  and 
loyalty,  the  intelligence  and  the  bravery,  of  his  men  by  entertaining  a 
doubt  of  their  readiness  to  obey  his  orders  for  the  execution  of  such 
miscreants. 

It  is  also  represented  that  some  craven -hearted  officers  have  spoken 
disparagingly  of  the  war,  and  that  a few  cowardly  traitors  in  the  ranks 
have  said  the  only  way  to  end  it  is  for  the  soldiers  to  go  home.  None 
but  those  who  feel  that  they  are  the  basest  of  cowards  and  fear  that  it 
will  be  known  to  their  comrades  in  the  day  of  battle  ever  feel  or  express 
such  sentiments. 

The  commanding  general  calls  upon  officers  and  men  of  this  army — 


Misplaced. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


819 


so  remarkable  for  its  gallantry  and  readiness  to  meet  the  enemy  that 
those  few  exceptions  but  serve  to  heighten  the  picture  of  their  devo- 
tion— to  bring  at  once  to  his  knowledge  any  who  are  guilty  of  this  con- 
duct subversive  of  good  order  and  military  discipline  and  affording 
aid  and  comfort  to  the  enemy,  in  order  that  they  may  be  punished  in 
the  severest  manner,  and  that  they  may  be  driven  from  the  ranks  of 
honorable  men,  to  hide  their  faces  in  confinement,  whilst  their  names 
shall  be  published  to  their  countrymen  for  execration,  and  go  down  to 
the  latest  posterity  branded  with  infamy  as  the  Arnolds  of  a revolution 
the  most  righteous  and  the  most  just  that  a people  has  ever  inaugurated. 

Forbearance  has  already  ceased  to  be  a virtue,  and  the  commanding 
general  tells  these  men  now,  and  for  the  last  time,  “the  sword  of  justice 
shall  fall.” 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Bankhead  Magruder: 

STEPHEN  D.  YANCEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  881.  ) Alexandria , September  30,  1862. 

I.  There  being  no  longer  necessity  for  the  militia  of  the  parishes  of 
La  Fourche,  Terre  Bonne,  Assumption,  Saint  Mary’s,  Saint  Martin’s, 
Ascension,  Saint  James,  Saint  John  Baptist,  and  Saint  Charles,  the 
same  is  hereby  disbanded,  and  will  be,  on  receipt  of  this  order,  ordered 
to  their  respective  homes. 

##*#### 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

M.  GBIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana, 


Headquarters  Sibley’s  Brigade, 

Marshall , Tex.,  October  1,  1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va.  : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communi- 
cation* of  September  1,  instructing  me  in  certain  contingencies  to  re- 
port with  my  brigade  to  Major-General  Taylor,  in  Louisiana.  I have, 
in  accordance  with  your  desire,  addressed  a communication  to  General 
Hubert,  commanding  the  Department  of  Texas,  desiring  him  to  inform 
me  whether  or  not  the  State  of  Texas  was  in  imminent  peril  of  invasion. 
Meanwhile  I have  ordered  the  reassembling  of  my  regiments  preparatory 
to  a rapid  march  in  the  direction  of  New  Iberia,  the  point  indicated  by 
General  Taylor. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  H.  SIBLEY, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Not  found. 


820 


W/FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYII. 

Headquarters  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Houston , Tex.,  October  1,  1862. 

Capt.  Samuel  Boyer  Dayis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  &c. : 

Sir  : I received  a report  from  Beaumont,  stating  that  on  Saturday, 
26th  instant,  in  the  evening,  the  Federals  came  with  two  launches, 
about  50  in  number,  inside  of  Taylor’s  Bayou  and  attempted  to  destroy 
the  railroad  bridge.  Their  attempt  was  unsuccessful ; the  bridge  was 
repaired  in  two  hours.  They  arrested  three  men  who  lived  near  the  j 
bridge,  probably  to  exact  information  from  them.  The  bridge  is  now 
guarded.  I shall  send  Major  Kellersberg  to  Beaumont  and  Orange  to 
erect  a field  work  for  the  protection  of  the  bridge  at  Beaumont  and  to 
command  at  Orange  the  navigation  of  the  river.  I must  protect  from 
an  attack  Xiblett’s  Bluff,  which  is  our  great  thoroughfare  to  Louisiana. 
Troops  ought  to  be  stationed  there,  but  I have  no  infantry  to  send,  and 
besides  it  is  situated  in  Louisiana.  If  I can  do  no  better  I shall  use 
at  Beaumont  and  Orange  three  mortars  which  are  here,  although  these 
pieces  can  be  of  little  advantage  agafnst  a moving  object  like  a launch. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBEAY, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston. 

p.  S.— The  yellow  fever  is  reported  at  Matagorda. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  73.  ) Richmond,  Va.,  October  1,  1862. 

I.  The  State  of  Mississippi  and  that  part  of  Louisiana  east  of  the 
Mississippi  Eiver  is  constituted  a separate  military  department,  the 
command  of  which  is  assigned  to  Maj.  Gen.  John  0.  Pemberton. 
******* 


By  order : 


S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Report  of  the  District  of  Western  Louisiana,  commanded  by  Maj 
Gen.  R.  Taylor,  October  l,  1862  ( headquarters  Alexandria,  La.). 


Troops. 

Present  for  duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

te  present 
absent. 

Infantry.  Cavalry.  | 

Artillery. 

Officers. 

Men. 

1 : 

Officers. 

§ 

j Officers. 

| 

! Men. 

1 

£§ 

3 1 

112 

1, 634  

1 

i 2,676 
1,  775 
246 

I 3, 425 
2,  033 
382 

| 83 

1,319 

6 

193 

Grand  total 

112 

1, 634  83 

1,  319 

6 

193 

4,  697 

5,840 

Military  Department  of  Texas, 

Galveston,  Tex.,  October  2,  1862. 

Galveston  Island,  Virginia  Point,  and  adjacent  bay  coast,  and  the 


[Special]  Orders, 
No.  20. 


Chaf.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  821 

peninsula  of  Bolivar  shall  constitute  one  command,  and  be  styled  the 
Military  District  of  Galveston,  Department  of  Texas. 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hubert : 

GEO.  R.  WILSON, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  October  3, 1862. 


General  S.  Cooper: 

The  following  has  just  been  received : 


Port  Hudson,  La.,  October  2,  1862. 

General  Ruggles: 

The  French  vice-consul,  who  is  just  from  New  Orleans,  informs  our  captain  (Girard) 
that  General  Butler  has  received  a re-enforcement  of  8,000  men. 

W.  R.  MILES, 
Colonel , Commanding. 


DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

Jackson , Miss.,  October  3,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  S.  Army , Richmond,  Va. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that  voluntary  enlistment  and  the  con- 
scription have  taken  into  the  military  service  of  the  country  such  a 
large  proportion  of  the  active  freemen  of  this  district,  including  the 
owners  of  slaves  and  other  persons  engaged  in  their  management,  that 
many  plantations  with  numerous  slaves  are  being  left  without  the  ordi- 
iiary  and  necessary  control  of  the  white  man,  and  daily  applications  are 
made  to  me  to  detail  or  to  authorize  the  retention  of  proper  persons  to 
superintend  them.  Pernicious  influences  have  already  been  manifested 
upon  many  of  these  plantations,  and  it  is  perhaps  not  without  reason  that 
fears  are  entertained  of  some  serious  disturbance  in  the  sections  most 
iensely  populated  by  the  servile  race,  which  are  in  most  cases  approach- 
able by  navigable  streams.  Having  no  authority  myself  to  provide  the 
aeeded  and  adequate  remedy  for  such  a state  of  affairs,  I am  constrained 
to  bring  the  subject  to  the  attention  of  the  War  Department  because 
rf  the  large  and  grave  interests  at  present  and  prospectively  involved, 
especially  should  there  be  opportunity  for  the  execution  to  any  extent 
)f  the  recently  enunciated  purpose  of  the  Federal  Government  with 
reference  to  our  slaves.  The  magnitude  of  this  interest  within  this  dis- 
trict is  such  that  some  speedy  remedy  and  indicated  line  of  future  policy 
seemed  to  be  imperatively  demanded. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding  District. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  October  7, 1862. 
Srigadier-General  Blanchard,  Monroe,  La. : 

General  Van  Dorn  attacked  the  enemy  and  drove  him  from  the  in- 
renchments  at  Corinth  on  the  3d  instant.  The  enemy  having  been 


822  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TLX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

re-enforced  on  the  4th,  our  army  fell  back  toward  Ripley  on  the  5th. 
Our  loss  reported  heavy.  The  enemy  reported  making  an  expedition 
from  New  Orleans,  4,000  strong,  against  Donald sonville  and  district 
surrounding. 

Forward  to  Major-General  Taylor. 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

Jackson , Mss.,  October  8,  1862. 

His  Excellency  John  J.  Pettus, 

Governor  of  Mississippi : 

Governor  : I have  the  honor  to  request  that  you  will  furnish  all  the 
available  State  troops  along  the  northern  border  of  the  State,  as  well 
as  along  the  Mississippi  River  as  far  as  the  southern  boundary,  to  co- 
operate with  the  Confederate  forces  in  those  sections. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 
Brigadier- General,  G.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  First  District  of  Texas, 

San  Antonio , Tex.,  October  8,  1862. 
Hon.  George  W.  Randolph,  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  to-day  of  your  com- 
munication, dated  June  17, 1862,*  inclosing  copy  of  letter  of  Mr.  W.  W. 
Frizzell,  complaining  of  outrages  committed  by  'Carter’s  brigade,  and  to 
inform  you  that  information  of  a similar  nature  from  private  sources, 
and  also  from  the  Governor  of  Louisiana,  reached  these  headquarters  in 
regard  to  outrages  committed  by  Carter’s  brigade.  At  that  time  the 
brigade  could  not  be  reached  in  the  Department  of  Texas,  as  it  was  near 
or  beyond  the  Red  River,  on  its  march  northward,  under  orders  from 
Major-General  Van  Dorn.  I inclose  copy  of  letter  to  Colonel  Carter, 
directing  him  to  investigate  into  the  matter  and  to  prefer  the  proper 
charges,  laying  them  before  Major-General  Hindman.  A stringent 
order  was  immediately  published,  of  which  please  find  a copy  inclosed. 

I have  the  honor  further  to  remark  that  it  has  been  found  impossible 
to  control  these  independent  corps,  raised  by  persons  under  direct  au- 
thority from  Richmond  and  with  orders  to  report  to  some  command  or 
general  outside  of  the  Department  of  Texas.  These  officers  had  no 
orders  to  report  to  the  general  commanding  this  department,  and  were 
in  fact  independent  organizations  within  it  and  acting  under  superior 
orders.  Still,  all  outrages  upon  private  property  would  have  been  sum- 
marily punished  could  the  parties  have  been  reached.  No  charges  oi 
the  kind  have  ever  been  preferred  against  the  troops  proper  of  the  De 
partment  of  Texas.  The  letter  of  Mr.  Frizzell  will  be  immediately  for 
warded  to  Major-General  Holmes  at  Little  Rock,  near  which  point 
Carter’s  brigade  is  now  supposed  to  be  stationed,  although  I have  nc 
information  of  the  movements  of  the  brigade  after  it  left  the  limits  oi 
this  State. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  O.  HUBERT, 

Brigadier -General,  Provisional  Army. 


Communication  from  the  Secretary  of  War  not  found. 


Chap-  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


823 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Alto,  Cherokee  County,  Tex., 

May  15,  1862. 

Hon.  John  H.  Reagan, 

Postmaster -General,  G.  S.  A.,  Richmond , Va. : 

Dear  Sir  : I have  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  official  report, 
which  came  to  hand  a few  days  since,  and  for  which  I am  very  grate- 
ful and  much  pleased.  But  I fear  from  present  indications,  with  the 
Federals  in  possession  of  the  Mississippi  River,  that  in  future  all  mail 
facilities  between  Richmond  and  this  country  will  be  cut  off  for  a 
time.  We  have  varied  rumors  of  a great  victory  for  our  forces  in  Vir- 
ginia and  at  Corinth,  but  for  want  of  through  mails  all  rests  on  rumor. 
Although  I am  now  writing  you  yet  doubt  whether  it  will  be  able  to 
reach  you ; but  at  all  hazards  will  risk  it  running  the  blockade  in  order 
that  I may,  through  you,  call  the  attention  of  the  Government  at  Rich- 
mond to  the  fact  that  notorious  outrages  are  at  this  time  being  practiced 
in  the  way  of  plunder  (through  this  section)  from  good  citizens  by  an 
armed  party  of  the  citizens  of  Texas,  professing  to  be  Confederate 
soldiers  and  under  the  command  of  one  Colonel  Carter,  from  Hempstead, 
near  Houston  ; but  all  of  those  professing  to  be  officers  acknowledge 
themselves  void  of  any  commissions  authorizing  them  to  draw  on  the 
Government  for  supplies  ; but  notwithstanding  they  are  marching  east- 
ward slowly  with  a force  of  from  1,500  to  3,000  men,  remaining  in 
each  neighborhood  just  long  enough  to  ravage  the  corn-cribs  and 
smoke-houses  of  the  defenseless  surrounding  country $ and  even  the 
defenseless  widow  meets  with  no  mercy  at  their  hands,  as  I am  cred- 
ibly informed.  They  on  yesterday,  with  ax  and  sledge-hammer,  broke 
into  the  smoke  house  and  corn-crib  of  Judge  Baxter,  near  the  Nechez 
(with  whom  you  are  acquainted),  and  took  therefrom  a quantity  of 
corn  and  meat,  as  I am  credibly  informed,  and  that  against  the  wishes 
and  kind  remonstrances  of  the  judge  and  family.  They  offer  pay  at 
their  own  price  by  draft  on  some  individual  at  city  of  Houston,  and 
in  all  probability  an  irresponsible  character.  They  on  yesterday  made 
their  boasts  that  they  found  an  old  widow  lady  in  possession  of  only 
280  pounds  of  bacon  j they  took  half.  The  good  citizens  left  at  home 
for  the  protection  of  families  of  those  gone  to  the  war  are  in  perfect 
dread  for  selves  and  families,  and  know  not  what  may  come  next.  In- 
stead of  our  own  citizens  being  a protection  they  have  become  our  hourly 
dread,  and  while  I write  I have  seen  them  prowling  about  from  house 
to  house,  evidently  seeking  whom  they  may  devour  next.  I trust 
your  Government  will  take  immediate  notice  of  such  conduct,  and  take 
measures  for  a speedy  suppression  of  all  such  unlawful  and  unwarrant- 
able conduct. 

Your  friend  and  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  FRIZZELL. 


[Indorsements.] 


Respectfully  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  W ar.  Mr.  Frizzell,  the  wri  ter? 
is  a respectable  citizen. 


JOHFT  H.  REAGAH, 


Postmaster-  General. 


Refer  copy  to  Brigadier-General  Hubert,  Texas,  and  call  for  report. 

[G.  W.  R.] 


824  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Hdqrs.  Trans-Miss.  District  South  of  Red  River, 

San  Antonio , Tex.,  July  12, 1862. 

Col.  M.  C.  Manning, 

Aide-de-Camp , Opelousas , La. : 

Sir  : I am  directed  by  the  general  commanding  to  acknowledge  the 
receipt  of  your  communication  * of  1st  instant  in  regard  to  offenses  com- 
mitted by  Taylor  and  others  of  Colonel  Wilkes’  command,  and  includ- 
ing affidavit  of  John  Pellevarjo,  and  to  say  that  instructions  have  been 
given  to  bring  the  offenders  to  speedy  trial,  and  orders  issued  to  prevent, 
as  far  as  possible,  any  recurrence  of  such  outrages,  copies  of  which  are 
herewith  inclosed.  The  general  commanding  deeply  regrets  that  such 
violations  of  all  laws  should  have  been  committed  by  any  troops  of  his 
command.  It  is  proper  to  state  that  the  regiment  of  Colonel  Wilkes  is 
a portion  of  a mounted  force  raised  by  Colonel  Carter  under  direct 
authority  from  the  War  Department,  and  only  within  a few  days  re- 
ported to  these  headquarters  in  compliance  with  General  Orders,  Ho. 
1,*  of  June  18  ultimo.  I am  further  directed  to  request  that  you  will, 
as  soon  as  possible,  collect  all  evidence  necessary  to  a strict  prosecution, 
prepared  in  such  shape  as  may  be  used  on  trial  before  a court-martial, 
and  forward  same  to  the  assistant  adjutant-general  of  Major-General 
Hindman  at  Little  Rock  and  a copy  to  these  headquarters.  ( 

# # * # # # * 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  M.  MASON, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Hdqrs.  Trans-Miss.  District  South  of  Red  River, 

Sa?i  Antonio,  Tex.,  July  12,  1862. 

Col.  G.  W.  Carter, 

Comdg.,  &c.  ( care  of  Major-General  Hindman),  Little  Rock,  Ark. : 

Sir  : I am  directed  by  the  general  commanding  to  inclose  a copy  of 
a communication*  from  the  Governor  of  Louisiana  and  to  call  your 
immediate  attention  to  the  outrages  therein  referred  to,  committed,  as 
alleged,  by  officers  of  your  command,  and  to  instruct  you  to  have  the 
same  promptly  investigated ; to  place  any  officer  therewith  connected 
in  arrest  until  charges  and  specifications  (which  you  will  cause  to  be 
prepared  without  delay)  are  laid  before  Major-General  Hindman  for  his 
orders.  I am  further  directed  to  instruct  you  to  take  speedy  measures 
to  prevent  any  recurrence  of  such  outrages.  The  charges  and  specifi- 
cations against  Colonel  Gillespie,  referred  to  you  from  these  headquar- 
ters June  17  ultimo,  will  also  be  laid  before  General  Hindman  for  his 
orders. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  M.  MASON, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  T.-Miss.  Dist.  S.  Red  River, 

No.  11.  j San  Antonio,  Tex.,  July  11,  1862. 

I.  With  much  concern  the  general  commanding  this  district  has 


Not  found. 


Chat.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  825 

learned  that  officers  of  the  Confederate  Army  have,  upon  divers  occa- 
sions, seized  and  appropriated  the  private  property  of  good  and  loyal 
citizens.  That  officers  in  the  service  should  perpetrate  such  outrage- 
ously illegal  acts  would  seem  incredible  were  it  not  for  the  irrefragable 
proofs  furnished.  Such  conduct  is  in  direct  violation  of  all  law,  of  the 
Regulations  and  Articles  of  War,  and  unbecoming  an  officer  and  a gen- 
tleman. 

II.  Any  officer  guilty  of  such  conduct  shall  be  promptly  arrested  by 
the  nearest  officer,  whether  he  ranks  him  or  not,  charges  preferred 
against  him,  tried  by  court-martial,  and  have  inflicted  upon  him  the 
severest  punishment  under  the  Articles  of  War  and  the  law  martial. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hubert : 

C.  M.  MASON, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  First  District  of  Texas, 

San  Antonio , Tex.,  October  8, 1862. 

Col.  X.  B.  Debray, 

Commanding , <&c.,  Houston,  Tex. : 

Sir  : The  information  received  from  you  in  regard  to  the  attack  on 
Galveston  leaves  the  general  commanding  in  doubt  as  to  the  result.  If 
compelled  to  evacuate  Galveston  before  a superior  force  of  the  enemy 
you  must  distribute  your  forces  in  accordance  with  previous  instruc- 
tions, so  as  to  hold  Virginia  Point,  the  railroad  bridge,  the  passages 
to  Houston  and  into  the  interior  (Dickenson’s  Bayou,  Buffalo  Bayou, 
Trinity  River,  &c.).  The  general  confidently  expects  that  none  of  the 
guns  have  been  sacrificed,  as  it  is  important  they  should  remain  in  our 
possession.  You  will  therefore  carry  them  off  with  you  if  compelled 
to  evacuate  under  the  circumstances  mentioned  above.  You  will  send 
your  reports  by  express.  You  will  establish  expresses  to  this  point  or 
to  meet  those  from  these  headquarters ; the  expresses  to  exchange  at 
Alley  ton.  I inclose  for  your  information  copy  of  instructions  to  Major 
Minter,  chief  quartermaster,  directing  him  to  establish  an  express  be- 
tween this  point  and  Alleyton,  Major  Moise  is  also  directed  to  estab- 
lish an  express  from  your  headquarters  to  Alleyton,  copy  of  which  is 
inclosed. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hubert : 

SAMUEL  BOYER  DAVIS, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Virginia  Point,  Tex.,  October  10,  1862. 
Capt.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis  ( through  Captain  Wharton) : 

No  change  in  the  movements  of  the  fleet.  Three  Yankee  soldiers 
brought  in  last  night  by  our  cavalry  pickets  give  themselves  as  de- 
serters. I will  examine  them  closely  and  send  them  to  Houston  to  the 
provost-marshal.  What  shall  I do  with  them  ? 

X.  B.  DEBRAY, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Captain  Wharton  : 

I cannot  come  to-day,  but  very  probably  I shall  be  at  Houston  to- 
morrow. 


826 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA. 


Special  Orders,  ) 
No.  237.  ( 


Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 
Richmond , Fa,,  October  10,  1862. 


VI  Mai  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder  will  proceed  to  San  Antonio,  Tex.,  and 
relieve  Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hdbert,  in  command  of  that  district,  reporting 
by  letter  to  Major-General  Holmes,  commanding  Trans-Mississippi  De- 
partment, Brigadier-General  Hebert,  on  being  relieved,  will  imme- 
diately proceed  to  report  in  person  to  Major-General  Holmes. 


By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 


JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 
Houston , Tex.,  October  13,  1862 — 10  a.  in. 

Capt.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis,  . 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  &c .,  San  Antonio , lex. : 

Your  dispatches,  through  Captain  Mason,  have  been  received.  I 
hope  that  my  reports  will  satisfy  the  general  commanding  that  his 
views  have  been  so  far  carried  into  execution.  I must  defer  issiimg 
the  order  for  the  court  of  inquiry  concerning  the  evacuation  ot  babine 
Pass.  Colonel  Cook  and  Major  Menard  cannot  now  be  spared.  The 
expresses  from  10  miles  to  10  miles  to  San  Antonio  will  oe  organized 
at  once.  I have  ordered  one  locomotive  to  be  always  in  readiness  here 
and  one  at  Alleyton.  I have  done  all  I could  for  the  protection  of  the 
Nechez,  Sabine,  Trinity,  and  San  Jacinto.  The  lesser  streams  are  at- 
tended to.  I regret  to  say  that  the  guns  at  Fort  Point  and  af  the 
southern  battery  on  Galveston  Island  had  been  spiked  before  1 knew 
anything  of  it.*  Please  find  herewith  a telegram  just  received  from 
Colonel  Cook.  I send  the  10-inch  columbiad  to  Fort  Hebert.  Colonel 
Cook  says  he  can  use  it.  May  I not  be  below  the  task.  All  that  zeal 
and  energy  can  do  shall  be  done. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBRAY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Sub- Military  District  of  Houston. 

[Inclosure.] 


Virginia  Point,  Tex.,  October  13, 1862. 

Col.  X.  B.  Debray: 

Colonel  : All  quiet.  Two  of  enemy’s  vessels  left  the  harbor  this 
morning — one  steamer,  one  sailing  vessel.  My  scouts  bring  me  word 
from  several  citizens  of  the  city  that  Captain  Renshaw  had  informed 
them  that  he  would  destroy  the  bridge  this  week,  and  that  he  had  sent 
for  Wilson’s  Zouaves  to  hold  the  city.  Will  you  send  the  10-mch  co- 


lumbiad ? 

Respectfully,  &c., 


JOS.  J.  COOK, 

Colonel. 


Orders,  1 Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  889.  ( Alexandria , October  13,  1802. 

I.  Maj.  Gen.  John  L.  Lewis,  commanding  the  State  Militia,  will,  on 


Chap.  XXVlI.j  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


827 


receipt  of  this  order,  disband  the  militia  of  the  parishes  of  Saint  Charles, 
Saint  John  Baptist,  Saint  James,  Ascension,  Assumption,  La  Fourche, 
Terre  Bonne,  Saint  Mary’s,  and  Saint  Martin’s,  unless  Brig.  Gen. 
Alfred  Martin  [Mouton],  C.  S.  Army,  and  in  his  absence  Col.  \\ . G. 
Vincent,  C.  S.  Army,  demands  that  a portion  thereof  or  the  whole  be 
retained  in  service,  in  which  event  the  portion  so  required  shall  remain 
in  the  service  until  no  longer  needed  by  the  Confederate  officer  in  com- 
mand. The  Militia  so  retained  shall  be  turned  over  to  the  Confederate 
officer  in  command  and  be  in  the  pay  and  subsistence  of  the  Confed- 
erate States.  „ „ 

******* 


By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 
J M.  GBIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana . 


General  Orders, 
No.  1. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  East  La., 

Jackson , Miss.,  October  14,  1862. 


I.  In  compliance  with  instructions  received  from  the  War  Depart- 
ment at  Bichmond,  Va.,  the  undersigned  this  day  assumes  command  ot 
the  Department  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana,  including  the 
forces  intended  to  operate  in  Southwestern  Tennessee.  For  the  present- 
headquarters  of  the  department  will  be  at  Jackson,  Miss. 

II.  Maj.  J.  Bi.  Waddy,  Adjutant-General’s  Department,  is  announced 
as  chief  of  staff  and  adjutant- general  of  the  department,  to  whom  all 
official  communications  intended  for  these  headquarters  will  be  ad- 


dressed. 


J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 

Lieutenant-General , P.  A.  G.  8 .,  Commanding  Department. 


Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  October  15,  1862. 

Maj.  E.  F.  Gray, 

A.  A.  A.  G .,  Sub- Military  District  of  the  Rio  Vrande : 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  416,  from  headquarters 
of  this  military  district,  I have  strengthened  and  repaired  the  old  bat- 
tery on  the  north  side  of  this  city ; constructed  a traverse  60  feet  long 
forprotection  of  its  armament  against  any  attempt  to  enfilade  it  from 
the  north  side.  The  old  platforms  to  the  number  of  three  have  been 
properly  leveled  and  thoroughly  repaired  and  two  additional  ones  con- 
structed. Four  pieces — one  an  18-pounder  siege  gun,  one  12-pounder 
siege  gun  (both  on  field  carriages),  and  two  12-pounder  ship  guns— are 
now  mounted  in  said  battery.  A subterraneous  magazine— 6 feet  by  8 
and  well  protected,  sufficiently  large  to  hold  ammunition  for  one  day’s 
fight— has  been  constructed  35  yards  in  the  rear  of  and  fully  protected 
by  the  embankment.  A well — equally  well  protected  and  affording  a 
sufficient  quantity  of  good  water — has  been  dug.  On  the  south  side  of 
the  city  I have  constructed  a very  strong  water  battery,  with  platforms 
for  four  guns,  a magazine  6 feet  by  8,  and  a well,  perfectly  protected 
and  affording  an  abundance  of  good  water.  The  magazine  in  this  bat- 
tery is  not  as  well  protected  as  might  be  desired,  owing  to  the  circum- 
stance that  wTater  is  encountered  here  within  3 feet  of  the  surface, 
thus  preventing  me  from  constructing  a subterraneous  magazine.  Two 


828  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [CHAr.  XXVII. 

24-pounder  howitzers  are  at  present  mounted  in  this  battery,  which  is 
designated  on  the  sketch  as  B No.  2.  On  the  bluff  two  batteries  have 
been  constructed,  entirely  sunk  into  the  ground,  and  using  the  face  of 
the  bluff  to  the  thickness  of  60  feet  as  epaulement.  In  the  battery  near 
the  flag-staff  two  24-pounder  siege  guns  on  field  carriages  are  mounted 
on  very  substantial  platforms ; a cistern  of  concrete,  50  yards  in  the 
rear,  has  been  transformed  into  a well-protected  magazine.  This  bat- 
tery is  designated  on  the  sketch  as  B No.  3.  In  the  battery  (B  No.  4) 
on  the  bluff  south  of  the  city  one  long  18-pounder,  on  a casemate  car- 
riage of  very  clumsy  construction,  is  mounted.  The  magazine  is  at 
the  south  end  of  the  battery,  entirely  subterraneous,  and  perfectly  pro- 
tected. I beg  leave  to  suggest  that  a suitable  barbette  carriage  be 
constructed  for  this  piece,  as  it  is  very  unmanageable  in  its  present 
condition. 

In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  417, 1 have  constructed  a cause- 
way, on  floating  piles,  across  the  bayou,  separating  the  rincon  from  the 
main-land  north  of  the  city,  it  being  impossible  to  obtain  lumber  of 
suitable  dimensions  for  the  construction  of  a bridge.  The  causeway  i 
is  sufficiently  wide  and  located  in  such  a place  as  to  enable  cavalry  and 
artillery  to  pass  into  the  rincon  without  having  to  traverse  marshy 
ground  and  exposing  them  only  for  a very  short  distance  to  the  fire 
from  vessels  in  the  bay.  I had  also  received  a verbal  order  from  Maj. 

E.  F.  Gray,  then  commanding  officer  at  this  post,  to  transform  into  a 
powder-magazine  a lime-kiln,  claimed  by  one  James  McMartin.  Upon 
my  commencing  the  work  this  person  objected  to  my  taking  possession 
of  the  kiln  unless  I paid  him  $150,  which  he  considered  the  value  of 
his  kiln.  I reported  this  difficulty  to  Captain  Willke,  who  had  suc- 
ceeded Major  Gray  as  commanding  officer  at  this  post.  Several  con- 
versations were  had  about  this  matter  but  no  action  taken.  When 
Major  Shea  assumed  the  command  at  this  post  I again  submitted 
this  matter.  We  examined  the  lime-kiln  together,  and  as  the  price 
asked  appeared  exorbitant,  and  the  size  and  shape  of  the  kiln  insuffi- 
cient and  unsuitable,  it  has  not  been  taken  possession  of.  I would 
recommend  that  a new  and  substantial  powder-magazine  of  sufficient 
dimensions  be  constructed  the  cost  of  which  will  not  exceed  $350.  The 
lumber  and  most  of  the  nails  required  for  the  construction  of  the  works 
hereinbefore  enumerated  had  to  be  obtained  in  small  quantities  from 
different  persons,  and  by  appropriating  several  unoccupied  buildings, 
which  was  done  with  the  approval  of  the  commanding  officer.  The 
statement  herewith  submitted,  and  marked  C,*  shows  the  amount  of 
purchases  made  for  this  purpose  and  remaining  unpaid.  The  tools — 
such  as  spades,  shovels,  pick-axes,  &c.,  necessary  for  the  work — I had 
to  borrow  on  my  own  responsibility  from  the  citizens  of  this  town. 
Some  of  the  articles  have  been  destroyed  and  a few  stolen  in  the  course 
of  the  work,  for  which  a compensation  is  due  them,  as  per  statement 
herewith  submitted,  marked  £).* 

I beg  herewith  to  submit  a sketch*  of  the  city  or  Corpus  Ohristi  and 
vicinity,  showing  the  localities,  the  position  of  our  troops,  and  the  ene- 
my’s vessels  at  different  periods  of  the  engagement  and  the  principal 
directions  of  their  fire. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

FELIX  A.  BLUCHEE. 

✓ 


* Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVII. J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE.  829 

[■Indorsement.  ] 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  District  of  the  Eio  Grande, 

San  Antonio , Tex.,  October  25,  1862. 
Respectfully  forwarded  to  the  general  commanding  for  his  informa- 
tion, with  the  request  that  a copy  of  the  same  may  be  sent  to  Richmond. 
The  sketch  mentioned  is  inclosed. 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier-  General , Provisional  Army. 


Headquarters  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Houston , Tex.,  October  16  [15],  1862. 

Capt.  Samuel  Boyer  Dayis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Ac.,  San  Antonio,  Tex.: 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  to  you  a letter*  from  His  Excellency  the 
Governor  of  the  State  to  the  general  commanding;  copy  of  a communh 
cation  directed  to  me  by  Capt.  H.  S.  Lubbock,  commanding  State 
steamer  Bayou  City;  copy  of  my  communication  in  answer  thereto; 
copy  of  letter  written  by  me  to  Mr.  W.  M.  Lubbock,  in  charge  of  ob- 
structions on  the  San  Jacinto.  These  copies  will  acquaint  the  general 
commanding  with  my  efforts  to  protect  our  waters  in  the  East  Bay.  I 
ordered  Captain  Chubb  to  dismantle  the  light-houses  on  Half-Moon 
Shoal  and  Red  Fish  Bar.  Both  of  them  have  very  spacious  rooms,  in 
which  the  enemy  might  station  a lookout  and  guard  to  survey  the  East 
Bay  at  a considerable  distance.  Governor  Lubbock  has  acquainted  me 
with  the  order  rescinding  martial  law  in  Texas,  which  he  and  our  good 
citizens  regret  much.  I shall  carry  martial  law  out,  until  otherwise  in- 
structed, between  Houston  and  Fort  Hebert.  Houston  is  my  base  of 
operations.  All  supplies  and  stores  are  derived  from  it.  I must  pre- 
vent the  demoralizing  effect  of  constant  visits  of  citizens  to  our  troops 
at  Virginia  Point.  I must  guard  against  spies  and  the  desertion  of 
citizens  and  negroes  to  the  enemy.  To  do  this  I must  keep  control  over 
the  means  of  communication — boats  and  skiffs.  The  Governor  is  dis- 
posed to  take  upon  himself  the  responsibility,  but  he  wishes  to  confer 
with  the  general  commanding  as  to  the  means  of  carrying  martial  law 
into  effect  along  the  coast  from  Orange  to  Roma,  on  the  Rio  Grande. 
The  whole  coast  should  now  be  considered  as  being  within  our  military 
lines. 

Colonel  Cook  reports  to  day  (8.25  a.  m.)  nothing  new.  He  sent  last 
night  a strong  reconnoitering  party  to  Galveston,  under  Lieut.  Col.  J.  J. 
Myers,  of  Debray’s  regiment,  but  the  Federals  had  landed  no  forces. 
Please  find  herewith  a plan*  of  Fort  Hebert,  with  increased  armament. 
No  changes  have  been  made  at  Eagle  Grove.  I send  also  a chart*  of 
Galveston  Bay,  on  which  the  light-houses  at  Red  Fish  Bar  and  Half- 
Moon  Shoal  are  marked  with  the  pencil.  I know  little  as  yet  of  the 
working  of  the  system  of  scouts  along  the  coast.  I shall  send  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Myers  to  inspect  and  link  together  the  scouting  parties 
from  Fort  Hubert  down  to  Trespalacios  Bay.  Major  Menard  is  now 
stationing  the  pickets  and  organizing  scouts  from  Lynchburg  to  Sabine 
Pass.  The  people  on  the  coast  seem  to  be  anxious  to  assist. 


* Not  found. 


830 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  IXTE 

October  15 — 4 p.  m. 
Please  find  herewith  copy  of  Col.  J.  J.  Cook’s  report*  on  the  evacu- 
ation of  Galveston ; also  copy  of  report!  of  Captain  Fulton,  of  Debray’s  i 
regiment,  on  scout  into  Galveston  in  search  of  a deserter. 

Bad  news  from  Corinth,  as  you  will  see  in  the  accompanying  papers.  ■ 
I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBRAY, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston. 

[In closure  Ho.  1.] 

Houston,  Tex.,  October  15, 1862. 

Col.  X.  B.  Debray, 

Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston , Tex. : 

Sir:  Your  written  communication  of  the  6th  instant, t authorizing 
me  to  place  obstructions  at  Clopper’s  Bar  and  elsewhere,  together  with 
your  telegrams  of  the  6th  and  7th  instant,  have  been  received.  Capt. 
W.  M.  Lubbock,  in  compliance  with  your  subsequent  order,  is  now  i 
making  all  possible  progress  with  the  obstructions  at  Clopper’s  Bar  | 
and  San  Jacinto  River,  but  a delay  of  some  twenty  days  must  intervene 
before  the  barrier  is  completed.  In  the  mean  time  the  work  would 
require  some  protection,  as  the  hands  employed  would  be  almost  ex- 
clusively negroes.  Allow  me,  colonel,  to  suggest  that  this  protection 
can  only  be  given  by  the  water  police,  for  which  purpose  a steam  ves-  ; 
sel  should  be  used.  A sailing  vessel,  being  entirely  dependent  on  the 
wind,  would  be  useless  in  the  bay,  except  as  a tender  to  the  steamer. 
While  the  work  of  obstructing  Clopper’s  Bar  and  San  Jacinto  River  is 
progressing  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  a guard-boat  should  cruise 
between  Edwards’  and  Smith’s  Points.  Such  boat  should  be  an  armed 
steam  vessel.  Should  the  enemy  show  himself  in  such  numbers  as  to 
make  retreat  necessary,  the  boat  being  propelled  by  steam  would  be  * 
able  to  save  herself,  the  negroes  engaged  at  work  on  the  bar  render 
assistance  to  parties  living  near  the  river,  notify  the  garrison  at  Mor- 
gan’s Point  and  at  Harrisburg  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  and  assist 
in  making  a stand  at  Morgan’s  [Point]  or  Harrisburg,  as  may  be  deemed 
best.  By  referring  to  the  Coast  Survey  you  will  perceive,  sir,  that 
between*  Ed  wards’  and  Smith’s  Points  is  the  narrowest  portion  of  the 
bay,  and  that  a steamer  could  cruise  from  point  to  point  several  times 
in  twenty-four  hours.  By  so  doing  it  would  be  safe  for  sailing  vessels  to 
carry  provisions  to  the  mouth  of  the  Trinity  River,  Dickenson’s  Bayou, 
and  all  points  above  Red  Fish  Bar.  At  present  there  is  but  one  boat 
adapted  to  this  service,  and  she  is  the  property  of  the  State  of  Texas, 
gotten  up  by  the  Military  Board  to  perform  the  exact  service  that  is 
now  required  of  a steamer.  The  boat  is  every  way  adapted  to  dis- 
charge the  duty.  The  State,  being  crippled  in  resources,  cannot  sustain 
this  boat  in  commission.  I will  now,  colonel,  as  the  agent  of  the  State, 
offer  the  steamer  Bayou  City  to  the  Confederate  States  for  the  amount 
she  has  cost  the  State,  which  is  $45,000.  This  boat  has  been  examined 
by  experts,  and  all  parties  have  decided  that  she  is  well  adapted  as  a 
guard-boat,  and  will  be  of  infinite  benefit  in  Galveston  Bay.  Should 
you,  colonel,  not  feel  disposed  to  purchase  the  boat,  the  State  will  give 
the  control  of  her  to  the  commandant  of  this  port,  the  C.  S.  Army  to 
provision  and  man  the  vessel,  and  in  all  respects  treat  her  as  a war 
vessel.  In  this  way  the  boat  will  be  effectual.  In  this  way  the  boat 


See  p.  151, 


t Not  found. 


831 


Chaf.XXVII.I  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

will  be  run  economically.  The  pay  of  the  Navy  will  regulate  her  pay 
roll.  Officers  and  men  being  regularly  enlisted,  they  cannot  expect  or 
demand  the  high-price  wages  given  by  the  merchant  marine. 

I would  here  remark,  colonel,  that  the  C.  S.  Army  has  one  energetic 
man  and  thorough  seaman  now  in  her  service  in  this  State ; I allude 
to  Lieutenant  Harby,  now  stationed  at  Harrisburg.  Should  the  C.  S. 
Army  accept  the  boat,  to  be  used  for  the  good  of  the  country,  I would 
advise  that  Lieutenant  Harby  be  transferred  to  the  steamer  either  as 
commandant  or  second  in  command,  whichever  position  he  may  prefer. 
The  compensation  for  the  use  of  the  boat  can  at  some  future  time  be 
arranged  between  the  Military  Board  of  the  State  of  Texas  and  the 
0.  S.  Army.  The  great  desire  of  the  State  is  to  have  the  vessel  put  in 
immediate  service,  and  such  survice  to  be  effectual  must  be  authorized 
and  commanded  by  the  Confederate  States.  Bumors  are  already  afloat 
that  the  enemy  have  been  up  the  bay  as  far  as  Half  Moon,  which  is 
midway  from  Galveston  to  Bed  Fish  Bar.  The  boat  cannot  be  at  work 
too  soon.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  enemy  be  prevented  from 
making  soundings  up  to  Bed  Fish  or  beyond. 

I am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  S.  LUBBOCK, 

Agent  State  of  Texas  and  Captain  of  Steamer  Bayou  City . 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Headquarters  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Houston , Tex.,  October  15,  1862. 

Capt.  H.  S.  Lubbock, 

Commanding  Steamer  Bayou  City , Hoiiston,  Tex. : 

Captain:  Your  communication  of  the  15th  instant  is  at  hand.  I 
shall  endeavor  to  organize  a naval  force  to  protect  the  estuaries  above 
Bed  Fish  Bar.  I will  request  Major  Massie,  provost-marshal,  to  place 
his  guard  vessels  in  service  in  that  portion  of  our  waters  for  the  pur- 
poses mentioned  in  your  communication. 

Being  a subordinate  officer,  subject  to  the  orders  of  General  P.  O. 
Hubert,  I cannot  make  a final  contract  for  chartering  the  steamer  Bayou 
City,  the  services  of  which  are  much  needed  for  protection  at  home  and 
from  abroad ; but  if  you  can,  without  contravening  the  orders  received 
by  you  from  the  Executive  of  the  State,  place  your  steamer  in  service 
to  cruise  over  Bed  Fish  Bar,  I shall  apply  immediately  to  General  Hu- 
bert for  authority  to  charter  her  on  such  terms  as  may  be  satisfactory  to 
the  Confederate  States  and  the  State  of  Texas. 

Please  accept  my  heartfelt  thanks  for  services  already  rendered,  and 
the  expression  of  the  high  esteem  and  condescension  of  your  obedient 
servant, 

X.  B.  DEBBAY, 

Colonel,  Comdg.  Sub -Military  District  of  Houston,  Tex. 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Headquarters  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Houston , Tex.,  October  15, 1862. 

Capt.  W.  M.  Lubbock, 

In  Charge  of  Obstructions  in  San  Jacinto  : 

Sir  : I understand  that  there  are  many  persons  engaged  in  fitting  out 
and  repairing  vessels  on  the  San  Jacinto.  You  are  authorized  to  use 
the  services  of  persons  so  employed  for  fair  compensation  for  their  labor, 


832 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chip.  XXvn. 

to  be  paid  by  the  Confederate  States  Government  upon  your  certificate. 
You  will  cause  the  persons  so  engaged  to  understand  that  the  service 
in  which  you  are  now  engaged  is  paramount  to  any  other  in  these  waters, 
and  their  own  safety  depends  on  their  exertions. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBRAY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Sub-Military  District , &c. 


Headquarters  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Houston , Tex.,  October  17,  1862. 

Capt.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  &c .: 

Sir:  Colonel  Cook  writes  to-day,  8.15  a,  m.,  “All  is  well;  no  change; 
hard  at  work.”  I sent  from  Harrisburg  to  Virginia  Point  50  tons  of 
railroad  iron  to  make  magazines  and  bomb-proof  shelter  for  gunners. 
The  iron  is  lying  near  the  depot  at  Harrisburg.  I do  not  know  yet 
where  it  is,  but  I leave  the  matter  to  be  settled  at  some  future  time.  I 
can  neglect  no  means  to  make  a good  fight  at  Fort  Hubert.  I 
have  ordered  Capt.  D.  C.  Richardson  to  remove  to  Alleyton  his  commis- 
sary stores,  keeping  at  Harrisburg  one  month’s  supplies.  Should  the 
general  commanding  deem  proper  to  maintain  martial  law  within  our 
lines  I would  request  the  appointment  of  Maj.  J.  C.  Massie  as  chief  pro- 
vost-marshal in  the  sub-district  and  Captain  McCoy  provost-marshal  at 
Fort  Hubert.  I would  wish  to  have  Major  Massie  clothed  with  authority 
to  visit  our  streams  and  take  the  control  of  the  vessels  and  skiffs  and 
to  have  the  supervision  over  travelers. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  you  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBRAY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston. 


p.  g.__ Xo  news  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Spaight  at  Beaumont. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  Department, 

Little  Rock , Ark .,  October  18,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert, 

Commanding  District  of  Texas , San  Antonio , Tex. : 

General  : I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Holmes,  commanding  the 
Trans-Mississippi  Department,  to  say  he  has  ordered  Maj.  G.  M.  Bryan, 
assistant  adjutant-general,  Confederate  States  Army,  to  Marshall,  lex., 
for  the  purpose  of  organizing  the  four  regiments  ot  Brigadier- General 
Sibley’s  brigade,  in  order  that  they  may  be  sent  to  Richmond  with  as  little 
delay  as  possible.  The  general  desires  that  you  will  give  all  necessary 
orders  to  facilitate  Major  Bryan  in  the  discharge  of  the  duties  thus 
assigned  him  and  the  speedy  forwarding  of  these  troops,  which  will  be 
sent  to  Richmond,  notwithstanding  any  order  you  may  have  received  to 
send  them  to  Louisiana.  If  four  regiments  cannot  be  organized  imme- 
diately in  General  Siblev’s  brigade  you  will  designate  four  others  to 
go  unarmed,  as  that  number  must  be  sent  from  your  district,  and  at  once. 
A copy  of  the  instructions  to  Major  Bryan  is  herewith  inclosed. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

S.  S.  ANDERSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


833 


3haf.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  Department, 

Little  Bock,  Ark.,  October  18,  1862. 

Maj.  G.  M.  Bryan, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General,  Little  Boclc,  Ark. : 

Major:  I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Holmes  to  say  you  will 
proceed  forthwith  to  Marshall,  Tex.,  and  superintend  the  organization 
)f  the  four  regiments  of  Brigadier-General  Sibley’s  brigade.  To  this 
md  you  will  draw  on  the  conscripts  for  the  purpose  of  filling  up  the 
ranks  of  those  regiments,  and  as  soon  as  they  are  organized  they  will  be 
sent,  under  the  command  of  their  respective  colonels,  to  Richmond,  Va., 
:o  report  to  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of  the  0.  S.  Army. 
Each  regiment  as  it  is  organized  will  be  sent  off  without  waiting  for  the 
)thers.  These  troops  will  be  sent  unarmed.  Having  performed  the 
luties  above  assigned,  you  will  return  without  delay  to  these  headquar- 
ters. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  S.  ANDERSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

P.  S. — If  the  regiments  are  mounted  they  will  leave  their  horses  and 
irms,  to  be  remounted  and  armed  on  their  arrival  in  Virginia.  Full 
liscretion  is  given  you..  Send  four  regiments  as  soon  as  possible. 

TH.  H.  HOLMES, 

Major- General. 


General  S.  Cooper: 


Mobile,  October  18,  1862. 


Indications  growing  of  intended  land  expedition  by  the  enemy  now 
tssembling  at  Pensacola.  Scouts  have  been  reporting  for  several  days. 
Pensacola  Bay  full  of  vessels ; 4,000  troops  stated  to  have  landed;  5,000 
nore  expected  immediately.  If  this  expedition  is  intended  for  the 
eastern  interior  of  Alabama  I cannot  strip  Mobile  to  cross  and  meet 
t.  Federal  steamers  are  sounding  at  Pascagoula.  Perhaps  troops 
vill  be  transported  from  Pensacola  there  to  move  by  land  against  Mo- 
)ile.  In  either  case  re-enforcement  is  essential.  Let  me  know  on  what 
i have  to  rely.  Rather  than  abandon  the  left  bank  of  the  Alabama  to 
aid  and  occupation  I have  directed  my  force  of  observation  toward 
Florida  to  fall  back  if  overmatched  in  such  manner  as  to  cover  ap- 
>roaches  to  Montgomery.  Relying  upon  re-enforcements  from  north, 
ess  than  5,000  men  should  be  at  Montgomery  to  meet  events,  and  I 
>ught  to  be  able  to  rely  on  re- enforcements  from  west  of  the  river  if  my 
ommunications  are  cut  off  left  bank. 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Mobile,  October  18,  1862. 

(Received  October  18.) 

fieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton  : 

The  following  dispatch  from  Pollard  to-day  : 


Butler  is  reported  by  scouts  in  Pensacola  with  about  4,000  men,  waiting  for  5,000 
lore  expected  in  a few  days.  Will  march  for  Mobile  and  the  Great  Northern  Railroad 
8 soon  as  the  men  arrive.  Has  spies  out  all  through  this  country  surveying  best 


53  R R— VOL  XV 


834 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA,,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


route  to  march.  Bay  full  of  vessels  ; more  expected ; only  one  vessel  outside.  The 
Yankees,  200  in  number,  were  at  Milton  the  15th  and  16th. 

NED.  LUTTREL, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


A vessel  is  also  sounding  off  Pascagoula  River.  Can  I rely  on  re- 
enforcements from  you  ¥ 


JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


Holly  Springs,  Miss.,  October  18,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Forney, 

Commanding  Mobile , Ala. : 

I have  directed  a force  of  4,000  to  be  concentrated  at  Meridian. 

You  must  arrange  that  transportation  be  forwarded  should  an  emer- 
gency arise,  and  notify  me  by  telegraph.  Your  information  must  be 
positive  of  the  enemy’s  advance. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General , Commanding . 


Engineer  Department, 
Harrisburg , Tex.,  October  18,  1862. 

Lieut.  R.  M.  Franklin, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General , Houston , Tex. : 

Sir:  In  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No.  219,  I proceeded  on  the  3d 
instant,  with  a detachment  of  five  men,  to  the  Sabine  River,  and  com 
menced  the  next  day  recon noitering  the  river  down  to  the  mouth  of  il 
and  the  Texas  side  of  the  shore.  The  country  being  very  flat  anc 
marshy  it  is  very  difficult  to  locate  a suitable  position  for  an  effective 
battery,  and  before  I came  to  a final  selection  news  had  reached  the 
town  of  Orange  which  obliged  me  to  put  a 32-pounder  howitzer  at  once 
in  position,  which  was  done  about  1£  miles  below  the  town,  where  £ 
small  canal  or  cut-off  forms  a considerable  island.  This  place  had  £ 
great  many  advantages,  but  it  was  too  low  and  would  have  cost  laboi 
and  time  for  its  construction,  both  of  which  being  beyond  my  control 
About  8 miles  below  Orange  there  is  a shell  bank  20  feet  high  am 
from  200  to  300  yards  long,  entirely  surrounded  by  a swamp;  has  ne 
drinking  water,  and  is  exposed  to  a concentrated  fire.  It  is,  however 
the  best  position  that  could  be  found,  and  I erected  there  a battery  o 
two  brass  32-pounder  howitzers,  well  protected,  and  will  stand  a heavj 
firing.  I also  had  a cistern  built  and  a road  made  to  the  town  of  Orange 
distant  from  the  battery  about  5J  miles,  so  as  to  keep  up  commuuica 
tion  both  by  land  and  water  for  supplies  and  in  case  of  re-enforcemen 
or  retreat.  Having  this  work  fairly  under  way,  I had  to  obstruct  th< 
mouth  of  the  river  that  no  vessel  could  come  up  to  the  battery  tha 
would  carry  heavier  metal  than  we  could  bring  to  bear  against  it. 

The  Sabine  River  is  very  sparsely  timbered,  and  is  from  20  to  30  fee 
deep,  about  250  yards  wide,  and  has  three  principal  outlets  into  th< 
Sabine  Lake ; the  western  channel  is  dug  out  to  a depth  of  from  6 to  ' 
feet.  The  deepest  water  on  the  bar,  which  is  about  one-half  mile  fron 
the  mouth  of  the.  river,  averages  3 to  3£  feet  at  high  tide  and  for  a widtl 
of  about  one-half  mile,  and  we  therefore  cannot  prevent  the  bugbea 


835 


Chap.  XXVn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


steamer  Dan  from  crossing  it.  To  guard  against  other  vessels  I had 
three  flat-boats,  60  to  80  feet  long  and  20  to  25  feet  wide,  sunk  in  the 
channel,  filled  with  shells  and  piled  on  both  sides.  This  obstruction 
will  stand  some  time.  It  has  the  defect  that  it  is  too  far  from  our  bat- 
tery, but  any  small  craft  that  can  cross  the  obstruction  or  go  around  it 
cannot  cope  with  our  battery.  It  is  also  of  the  utmost  importance  to 
have  a good  guard-boat  at  the  mouth  of  both  this  and  the  Nechez 
Rivers.  The  distance  from  Orange  to  the  battery  is  7 miles,  to  the 
mouth  9J  miles,  and  10  miles  to  the  obstructions  in  the  lake  (by  way  of 
the  cut-off).  From  here  it  is  about  5 miles  to  the  mouth  of  the  Nechez, 
which  to  all  appearance  is  a similar  river.  The  cut  or  canal  through 
the  bar  is  less  deep,  and  I had  it  filled  up  at  the  narrowest  place  by 
sinking  three  big  flat-boats  filled  with  shells.  I also  removed  all  signals 
and  marks  on  both  bars. 

Seven  miles  up  this  river,  and  17  miles  from  Beaumout  by  water  and 
11  miles  by  land,  is  a shell  bank  or  ridge,  known  as  Grigsby’s  Bluff, 
which  extends  to  the  Eastern  Texas  Railroad ; distance  4 miles.  On 
this  shell  bank  there  are  two  24-pounder  guns  on  barbette  carriages, 
put  up  temporarily  and  in  a very  primitive  manner.  I have  a detach- 
ment of  my  men  there  now  to  erect  a substantial  work,  new  powder- 
house,  and  bomb-proof  shelter.  This  battery,  if  ably  manned  and  de- 
fended, can  blow  anything  out  of  the  water  that  can  cross  the  bar. 
Within  3 miles  of  Beaumont,  and  where  the  dense  timber  begins,  the 
river  makes  a very  short  and  sharp  turn,  and  it  is  proposed  to  mount 
there  two  12-pounder  mountain  howitzers  in  case  of  a boat  attack  on 
the  railroad  bridge.  A small  road  is  also  cut  out  from  here  to  the  town 
for  the  easv  access  of  riflemen. 

Such  is  the  state  of  the  defenses  of  the  Sabine  and  Nechez  Rivers, 
with  its  railroad  bridge  and  transit  route  into  Louisiana,  and  I consider 
it  comparatively  safe  against  any  force  that  has  as  yet  made  its  ap- 
pearance on  our  coast  up  to  this  time.  I would  also  call  your  attention 
to  the  fact  that  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  have  some  good  books  dis- 


tributed among  the  artillery. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  KELLERSBERG, 
Major  and  Engineer  in  Charge. 


Richmond,  October  19,  1862. 

(Received  October  20.) 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

Mobile  is  in  danger.  Send  the  regiment  at  Columbus  back  to  Gen- 
eral Fornev  without  delay  unless  that  place  is  seriously  threatened. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Headquarters, 
Ponchatoula , La.,  October  19,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Ruggles, 

Commanding  District : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  yesterday  a scouting 
party,  under  command  of  Captain  Kirk,  of  my  regiment,  captured  two 
schooners,  to  wit:  Joinville,  of  New  Orleans,  and  General  Worth,  of  New' 


836 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  tCHAP.  XXVII. 


Orleans.  On  one  of  them  he  found  the  captain  and  5 men  and  on  the 
other  the  captain  and  3 men,  all  of  whom  stated  respectively  that  they 
had  taken  the  oath  as  required  by  General  Butler,  U.  S.  Army,  com- 
manding at  New  Orleans,  and  that  their  business  here  was  to  procure 
wood  and  take  it  to  New  Orleans.  The  schooners  and  crews  will  be 
detained  at  this  place  by  me  until  orders  relative  thereto  from  you. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

A.  R.  WITT, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post. 


Headquarters  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Houston , Tex.,  October  19,  1862. 

Capt.  Samuel  Boyer  Dayis, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Ac.,  San  Antonio,  Tex.: 

Captain  : I return  from  Fort  Hdbert,  whither  I went  with  Governor 
Lubbock  the  day  before  yesterday.  I found  works  of  defense  progress- 
ing finely ; the  troops  in  good  spirits  and  working  hard.  Colonel  Cook 
is  erecting  a battery  at  the  brick-yard  in  rear  of  Judge  Jones’  residence, 
where  he  intends  to  mount  the  10-inch  columbiad  removed  from  Hous- 
ton, to  cross  fires  with  Nelson’s  battery.  Three  vessels  only  are  now 
in  Galveston  Bay,  viz,  two  steamers  and  one  mortar-boat. 

The  delay  of  the  enemy  in  attacking  us  perplexes  me.  Will  he  keep 
us  in  check  with  that  small  force,  or  does  he  await  land  forces,  as  stated 
by  Commander  Benshaw  to  the  people  of  Galveston?  In  the  first 
alternative,  most  of  my  available  force  will  be  kept  idle  at  the  point 
while  he  may  make  some  attempts  on  other  parts  of  the  coast.  In  the 
second,  he  may,  with  his  launches,  land  a superior  force  on  my  rear,  at 
Dallas  Point,  Clear  Creek,  or  Dickenson’s  Bayou;  intercept  my  railroad 
communication,  thus  cutting  me  off  from  subsistence  stores,  water,  and 
fuel ; compel  me  to  fall  back  on  gimmes’  Bayou,  abandoning  all  the  artil- 
lery, and  exposed  to  a flanking  lire.  Such  a retreat  could  not  be  done 
through  that  marshy  country  without  losing  a considerable  portion  of 
my  force.  Then  again  could  not  the  enemy,  landing  at  Dickenson’s 
Bayou,  steal  a march  over  me  and  reach  Houston  before  assistance 
could  be  sent?  I have  no  troops  to  spare.  The  protection  of  the 
• Sabine  and  Nechez  (with  inadequate  artillery),  that  of  the  mouth  of 
the  Brazos  at  Velasco  and  Virginia  Point,  gives  employment  to  all 
the  infantry  in  this  sub-district.  My  twenty-two  companies  of  cav- 
alry, except  four,  are  scattered  over  an  extent  of  coast  of  over  200 
miles,  for  police  purposes  rather  than  military  operations,  and  the  bat- 
tery of  light  artillery  is  scarcely  of  any  avail  in  this  section  of  country, 
intersected  by  deep  streams,  and  most  of  which  is  marshy  in  the  rainy 
season.  Is  Virginia  Point  a strategic  position  worth  keeping  after 
Galveston  has  been  evacuated,  or  should  it  be  abandoned  and  our  artil- 
lery be  removed  if  the  enemy  gives  time,  to  protect  obstructions  at  the 
mouth  of  our  rivers 

I respectfully  submit  these  considerations  to  the  general  command- 
ing, with  observation  that  until  further  orders  I shall  blindly  stand  at 
Virginia  Point  and  try  to  cut  my  way  through  if  the  enemy  turns  my 
position ; but,  I repeat  it,  in  the  case  of  a retreat  through  the  enemy’s 
lines  I must  lose  all  the  artillery  and  ammunition  at  Fort  Hebert. 

The  Galveston  News  gives  in  its  number  of  the  18th  instant  an  ac- 
count of  a conflict  of  some  of  our  troops  with  the  citizens  of  Galveston, 
resulting  in  the  death  of  one  man  (not  Mr.  Westerlage,  as  stated).  I 


I/Hap.  XXVII.  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


837 


have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  a report  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Manly,  referring  to  the  occurrence,  which  is  now  undergoing  official  in- 
quiry. I shall  report  on  the  subject  by  next  mail. 

I received  a communication  from  three  gentlemen  still  living  at  Gal- 
veston, styling  themselves  a “ Committee  of  Eelief  for  the  Poor.”  They 
jpply  for  subsistence  from  the  interior  in  behalf  of  the  families  of  our 
soldiers.  I declined  complying  with  their  request,  but  stated  to  them 
that  the  families  of  our  soldiers  would  be  welcome  within  our  lines  and 
bheir  wants  attended  to  by  the  people  of  Texas  if  they  came  with  us. 
No  report  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Spaight  at  Beaumont. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBEAY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston , Tex. 

[Inclosure,] 

Headquarters,  Fort  Hubert,  Tex.,  Oct.  18, 1862. 
lol.  Joseph  J.  Cook,  Commanding : 

Colonel  : In  compliance  with  orders  I proceeded  to  Galveston  Isl- 
and on  the  night  of  the  17th  instant  with  one  company  of  cavalry? 
inder  command  of  Captain  Fulton  (Debray’s  regiment),  and  two  com- 
panies of  Elmore’s  regiment,  with  Company  C,  Cook’s  regiment  of  ar- 
tillery. We  left  Fort  Hebert  at  11  o’clock.  When  about  1J  miles  from 
Gralveston  City  we  met  a detachment  of  men  under  Captain  Clepper, 
lumbering  40  men,  returning  from  the  city.  Captain  Clepper  informed 
ne  that  he  had  been  ordered  to  Galveston  from  Eagle  Grove  Battery 
vith  his  detachment  for  the  purpose  of  arresting  certain  parties  who 
lad  contracted  to  deliver  marketing  to  the  Federal  fleet,  &c. ; that  in 
narching  through  Market  street,  near  Tremont,  he  discovered  a collec- 
ion  of  persons  on  the  sidewalk.  He  approached  them,  and  after  a few 
vords  of  conversation  Captain  Clepper  inquired  if  all  present  were 
dtizens.  The  answer  was,  “All  except  one.”  Immediately  one  of  the 
)arty,  dressed  apparently  in  Federal  undress  uniform,  and  who  had 
)een  dodging  to  conceal  himself,  started  on  a run  from  the  party 
oward  the  wharf.  He  was  ordered  to  halt;  refusing,  he  was  fired 
lpon  by  Captain  Clepper  (which  shot  was  not  intended  to  take  effect), 
lap  tain  Clepper  pursued  the  fugitive  the  length  of  one  block,  shorten - 
ng  the  distance,  when  he  fired  a second  shot,  at  which  the  fugitive 
staggered  and  screamed,  “Murder!  murder!”  He  was  pursued  no 
arther.  About  this  time  the  detachment  under  the  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant Brashear  came  up,  when  several  shots  were  fired  about  the 
irowd  of  citizens  before  spoken  of  by  parties  unknown,  but  certainly  not 
)y  Captain  Clepper’s  men.  Captain  Clepper,  returning,  found  a man 
nortally  shot,  being  about  half-way  across  the  street  from  the  party. 
Che  alarm  bells  were  immediately  sounded  in  the  city  and  signal  lights 
‘aised  on  the  fleet,  and  Captain  Clepper  and  party  retired  from  the 
'ity.  • 

The  objects  for  which  the  expedition  started  having  been  thus  un- 
ortunately  thwarted,  it  was  deemed  best  to  return  to  camp  without 
proceeding  farther,  which  was  accordingly  done,  and  we  reached  the 
ort  about  5 o’clock  this  morning. 

The  undersigned  regrets  that  the  interference  of  unauthorized  par- 
ies should  have  destroyed  the  results  of  an  expedition  which  with 
nudent  management  promised  results  beneficial  to  the  service. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  H.  MANLY, 

Lieut . Col.  GooFs  Regiment  Artillery , Commanding  Expedition. 


838 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA., 


Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 

Alexandria , La .,  October  19,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert, 

Commanding  District  of  Texas  : 

General  : When  I addressed  you  upon  the  subject  of  sending  troops 
from  your  command  to  this  I had  not  been  advised  of  the  contemplated 
movement  to  this  district  of  the  brigade  of  General  Sibley.  As  that 
brigade  is  probably  en  route  to  this  State,  I shall  probably  not  need 
immediately  the  two  regiments  and  the  battalion  from  your  command, 
unless  you  may  be  of  opinion  that  they  are  not  needed  by  you  and 
will  be  of  more  use  here.  Indeed  I do  not  think  that  I can  for  some 
time  arm  more  than  one  regiment  of  infantry,  unless  I receive  ordnance 
stores  at  an  earlier  date  than  there  now  seems  reason  to  expect.  Your 
very  kiod*  expressions  of  a willingness  and  desire  to  extend  to  me  all 
the  assistance  which  can  be  had  from  your  district  is  most  highly 
appreciated.  On  assuming  this  command  I found  almost  a total  want 
of  everything  necessary  for  troops  in  the  held,  with  the  fewest  imagina- 
ble facilities  for  creating  that  which  was  needed  in  the  several  depart- 
ments. Particularly  does  that  want  continue  in  the  quartermaster’s 
department,  the  greatest  scarcity  existing  of  iron,  harness,  leather,  teams, 
&c.,  so  indispensable  to  the  proper  organization  and  conduct  of  that 
department.  I have  therefore  to  request  that  you  will  send  to  me  such 
of  the  articles  above  enumerated  as  you  can  spare.  The  want  of  iron 
is  very  great,  and  I am  subjected  to  much  inconvenience  from  my 
inability  to  supply  it. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ * ’ R.  TAYLOR, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Houston , Tex.,  October  20,  1862. 

Capt.  Samuel  Boyer  Dayis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  &c .,  San  Antonio , Tex. : 

Captain  : Your  communication  of  the  17th  instant  has  just  come  to 
hand,  1.30  a.  m.  I had  already  done  all  I could,  with  my  limited  means 
of  action,  to  obstruct  the  streams  in  my  sub-district.  I will  to-day  ad- 
dress the  chief  justices  of  the  coast  counties  to  request  them  to  urge 
upon  the  citizens  the  necessity  of  exerting  themselves  for  their  own 
protection.  I will  also  request  the  Governor  of  the  State  to  issue  a 
proclamation  to  the  same  effect.  An  appeal  made  to  the  people  by 
their  Chief  Magistrate  will  have  more  weight  than  requisitions  by  the 
military  authority.  I will  urge  Major  Kellersberg  to  return  as  soon 
as  possible  from  the  Nechez  and  Sabine  and  send  him  to  the  Brazos, 
in  obedience  to  the  instructions  of  the  general  commanding.  I am  in- 
formed that  the  people  are  engaged  in  obstructing  the  Brazos,  but  1 
have  no  cannon  to  place  in  battery  there.  1 am  not  acquainted  with 
the  means  of  defense  adopted  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bates.  Some  mod- 
ifications in  the  establishment  of  his  batteries  might  perhaps  be  bene- 
ficial. I doubt  whether  obstructions  on  the  lesser  streams,  such  as 
Dickenson’s  Bayou,  Clear  Creek,  Hall’s  Bayou,  Highland  Bayou,  Cedar 
Bayou,  &c.,  could  be  of  great  advantage.  The  banks  of  most  of  them 
are  thinly  inhabited,  and  almost  every  point  of  the  bay  coast  affords 
easy  access  to  a force  landing  with  launches.  I shall  on  this  subject 
guide  myself  with  the  advice  of  Col.  E.  B.  Nichols  and  other  residents 


2HA1-.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


839 


of  the  bay  coast.  I have  already  ordered  all  steam  and  sail  vessels  to 
be  removed  as  far  up  streams  as  possible.  The  bridge  at  Liberty  is 
guarded  by  a company  of  cavalry,  and  I have  instructed  Major  Menard 
to  station  another  company  near  the  mouth  of  the  river.  Now  that  the 
enemy  is  in  possession  of  the  Calcasieu  he  may  without  much  difficulty 
send  a land  expedition  against  Orange  by  Niblett’s  Bluff,  at  which  lat‘ 
ter  point  we  have  several  steamboats,  which  could  not  run  higher  up 
the  river.  I am  not  aware  that  the  Sabine  is  defended  on  the  Louisiana 

8 I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBBAY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston . 

P.  s.— Colonel  Cook  telegraphs  7.15  a.  m.,  “All’s  right.” 


Jackson,  Miss.,  October  20, 1862. 

Brigadier-General  Forney, 

Commanding  at  Mobile: 

The  regiment  at  Columbus  has  been  ordered  to  report  to  you  at  once. 
6 J.  B.  WADDY, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Port  Hudson,  October  20,  1862. 

General  Buggles,  Commanding: 

General  Marigny  at  Covington  reports  that  400  Federals  have  landed 
at  Bonfouca,  and  are  trying  to  raise  twelve  schooners  sunk  in  bay. 
They  have  one  gunboat.  Can’t  a battery  be  sent  to  Colonel  Marigny 

from  Jackson  % _ T T 

WM.  X.  B.  BEALL, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  October  21, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  X.  B.  Beall, 

Port  Hudson : 

Mount  10-inch  gun  at  once.  I will  hold  4,000  men  here  to  aid  you  if 
necessary.  Make  every  effort  to  gain  further  information  and  inform 

me  by  telegraph.  

J J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 

Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Richmond , October  21,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Buggles,  Jackson , Miss. : 

Your  letter  of  30th  ultimo  has  been  received  and  submitted  to  the 
Secretary  of  War.  In  answer  I am  instructed  to  state  that  no  reproach 
was  intended  to  be  cast  on  you  by  the  Secretary  in  my  letter  of  Septem- 


840 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

ber  23.  When  that  letter  was  written  neither  the  Department  nor  this 
office  was  informed  of  the  extent  of  your  command ; otherwise  the  con- 
fidential instructions  to  General  Taylor  might  have  been  to  some  extent 
modified,  or  at  least  you  would  have  been  informed  of  the  general  tenor 
of  those  instructions. 

In  respect  to  your  telegraphic  communication  concerning  a measure 
which  was  regarded  here  as  strictly  confidential,  I would  state  that  the  ; 
reference  to  that  telegram  in  my  letter  was  intended  more  as  a caution 
than  a reproach. 

The  Secretary  trusts  that  you  will  be  satisfied  with  this  disclaimer  of 
any  intention  to  cast  reproach  on  you  by  reason  of  the  letter  of  23d 
September. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

[Addenda.] 

Richmond,  Va.,  November  5, 1862. 

A.  G. : 

General  Cooper  read  to  me  a letter  addressed  to  General  Buggies,  ex- 
planatory of  a former  letter  to  him.  I approved  of  it,  and  presume  that 
it  was  sent.  The  general  not  having  received  it,  a copy  will  be  fur- 
nished. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  East  La., 

No.  3.  1 Jackson , Miss.,  October  21, 1862. 

Hereafter  the  Department  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana  will  be 
divided  into  three  military  districts,  to  be  under  such  commanding  offi- 
cers as  are  herein  designated,  and  whose  boundaries  will  be  as  follows, 
viz: 

1st.  That  portion  of  the  State  of  Mississippi  east  of  the  Mississippi 
and  Tennessee  Railroad  and  the  New  Orleans  and  Jackson  Railroad, 
exclusive  of  the  counties  of  Mississippi  bordering  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico, 
Brigadier-General  Ruggles  commanding;  headquarters  at  Jackson, 
Miss. 

2d.  That  portion  of  the  State  of  Mississippi  included  between  the 
Mississippi  and  Tennessee  Railroad,  the  Mississippi  River,  and  the  Big 
Black  River,  Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith  commanding;  headquarters  at 
Vicksburg,  Miss. 

3d.  That  portion  of  the  State  of  Mississippi  included  between  the  Big 
Black  and  the  Mississippi  Rivers  and  the  New  Orleans  and  Jackson 
Railroad ; also  that  portion  of  Louisiana  east  of  the  Mississippi  River, 
together  with  such  counties  of  the  State  of  Mississippi  as  border  on  the 
Gulf  of  Mexico,  Brig.  Gen.  W.  N.  R.  Beall  commanding;  headquarters 
at  Port  Hudson,  La. 

The  military  districts  will  be  designated  as  herein  set  forth,  viz : 
First,  Second,  and  Third. 

Officers  commanding  military  districts  will  make  all  reports  direct  to 
department  headquarters,  and  will  see  that  such  be  promptly  made. 

By  order  of  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton : 

R.  W.  MEMMINGER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXVII,  | CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


841 


Port  Hudson,  October  22,  1862. 

Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Aggregate  present  for  duty. — Infantry : Thirtieth  Louisiana  Regiment, 
314;  Fourth  Louisiana  Regiment,  397;  Miles7  Legion,  721;  English’s 
company,  41;  Lewis’ company,  33.  Artillery:  First  Alabama  Regiment 
Heavy  Artillery,  312;  Twelfth  Louisiana  Battalion  Heavy  Artillery, 
157 ; Boone’s  company  light  artillery,  82 ; Fenner’s  company  light  artil- 
lery, 58;  Bradford’s  company  light  artillery,  76.  Cavalry  ; Hughes’ 
battalion  C.  S.  cavalry,  133;  Jones’  company  cavalry,  50;  Daigre’s 
company  cavalry,  11 ; 27  of  this  company  on  picket  duty. 

At  Baton  Rouge:  Ninth  Louisiana  Battalion  Infantry,  136;  one  sec- 
tion (two  guns)  Fenner’s  battery,  46. 

At  Covington:  Norman’s  company  Mounted  Rangers,  25;  Terrell’s 
company  Mounted  Rangers,  48;  Slocum’s  company  Mounted  Rangers,  91. 

At  Ponchatoula : Tenth  Arkansas  Volunteer  Infantry,  249;  Fourth 
Mississippi  Infantry,  279;  McRae’s  company  infantry,  46;  Garland’s 
battalion  Partisan  Rangers,  98 ; Stockdale’s  company  Partisan  Rangers, 
38;  Bredow  company  Partisan  Rangers,  43;  Hoskins’ company  light 
artillery,  81. 

At  Camp  Moore : Men  detached  as  provost  guard,  34. 

Many  of  the  troops  are  badly  armed.  The  First  Louisiana  Regiment 
has  small-arms,  but  no  equipments. 

WM.  N.  R.  BEALL, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  October  22,  1862. 
Brigadier- General  Beall,  Port  Hudson: 

Carry  out  these  orders  at  once : Intrench  by  detached  redoubts  and 
redans  the  approach  to  Port  Hudson  by  Springfield  at  or  near  intersec- 
tion of  Springfield  road  and  Port  Hudson  road;  also  at  or  near  inter- 
section of  Port  Hudson  road  and  Plain  Store  road ; also  between  Plain 
Store  road  and  Sandy  Creek ; also  the  works  on  broken  ground  between 
the  lakes.  At  present  you  cannot  intrench  the  approaches  to  Clinton 
or  Jackson. 

I will  endeavor  to  have  re-enforcements  ready,  if  they  are  actually 
needed,  when  the  time  arrives. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond , Va.,  October  23, 1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  N.  R.  Beall,  Port  Hudson , La. : 

General  : Your  telegram,  in  which  you  recommend  the  proclama- 
tion of  martial  law  in  Louisiana,  and  complain  that  some  of  the  planters 
in  that  State  refuse  to  furnish  slaves  to  throw  up  field  works  to  enable 
the  land  force  to  protect  the  batteries  and  save  valuable  guns,  has  been 
received.  The  subject  is  of  sufficient  importance  to  authorize  a special 
communication  to  you. 

It  is  the  desire  of  the  President  to  avoid  the  exercise  of  any  ques- 
tionable authority.  The  duty  of  providing  for  the  defense  of  the  sev- 


842 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 


eral  Confederate  States  from  destructive  invasion  and  to  repel  an  enemy 
whose  declared  object  is  to  subvert  our  social  and  political  institutions 
implies  that  whatever  resources  of  men  or  property  belonging  to  its 
citizens  are  needed  for  the  object  shall  be  employed.  Congress  has 
dedicated  a portion  of  those  resources,  but  has  not  attempted  to  provide 
for  all  the  varied  contingencies  of  the  war  as  affecting  particular  and 
limited  localities  ; but  in  recognizing  the  existence  of  a war  in  which 
every  interest  and  all  the  rights  ot  our  people  are  involved,  and  resolv- 
ing to  maintain  our  independence  at  all  hazards,  the  constitutional 
obligations  and  duties  of  the  President  in  such  unprovided  cases  cannot 
be  misunderstood. 

If  a master  of  a vessel  at  sea  may  cast  into  its  waters  the  cargo  com- 
mitted to  his  care  to  assure  the  lives  of  his  crew,  or  the  people  of  a city  j 
may  destroy  one  part  of  it  to  stop  the  spread  of  a conflagration  that 
menaces  all,  so  may  the  Executive,  in  case  of  a recognized  danger  to  the 
public  safety,  appropriate  private  property  or  restrict  the  exercise  of 
private,  and  under  ordinary  circumstances  acknowledged,  right  in  ful- 
filling the  supreme  duty  of  providing  for  the  common  defense. 

The  danger  must  be  apparent  and  the  necessity  constraining  to  jus- 
tify any  departure  from  the  ordinary  rules  of  administration,  and  when 
the  departure  from  them  takes  place  the  obligation  of  the  officer  to 
evince  this  necessity  arises.  You  will  therefore  use  all  the  resources 
committed  to  vour  control  by  this  Department  to  provide  for  the  de- 
fense of  the  post  under  your  charge,  and  you  will,  whenever  other  re- 
sources become  indispensable,  make  a peremptory  call  upon  the  people 
in  the  neighboring  counties  bordering  upon  the  river  to  contribute 
such  a number  of  their  slaves  as  may  be  needful  for  the  purpose.  You 
will  exercise  this  power  with  moderation  and  good  temper,  taking  care 
as  far  as  possible  to  allay  discontent  and  avoid  the  infliction  of  incon- 
venience. 

You  will  preserve  an  accurate  account  of  the  slaves  that  may  be  con- 
tributed or  taken  for  public  service  and  report  the  value  of  their  service 
during  the  period  of  their  detention ; and  in  the  treatment  of  the  slaves 
you  will  provide  for  the  exercise  of  the  care  and  consideration  of  a 
humane  master. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J J.  A.  CAMPBELL, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  October  23, 1862. 


Brigadier-General  Beall, 

Commanding  Port  Hudson : 
Ee-enforcements  are  being  sent  forward. 


J.  E.  WADDY, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  October  23,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  John  H.  Forney,  Commanding  Mobile  : 

Landing  at  Milton  does  not  indicate  a movement  upon  Mobile;  there- 
fore cannot  send  the  troops  asked  for.  The  troops  intended  for  Merid- 
ian the  general  has  found  it  necessary  to  send  to  P ort  Hudson  to  re- 


enforce  that  point. 


J.  R.  WADDY, 


O • il  . V V iAL/L'  X j 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


843 


Uhap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  October  24,  1862. 
General  Villepigue,  Gamp  Moore: 

Proceed  at  once  to  Port  Hudson,  La.,  and  leave  orders  at  13 amp 
Moore  for  the  troops  as  they  come  up  to  follow  you. 

J.  E.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  Department, 

Little  Rock , Ark.,  October  24,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hubert, 

Commanding , &c.,  San  Antonio , Tex. : 

General:  The  order  for  the  movement  of  the  Texas  regiments 
(Sibley’s  brigade)  to  Eichmond,  directed  in  my  letter  of  the  18th  in- 
stant, I am  directed  by  Major-General  Holmes  to  say  is  countermanded. 
Major  Bryan  has  been  advised  to  that  effect.  I inclose  you  a copy  of 
a letter  this  day  addressed  to  Brigadier-General  Sibley  by  direction  of 
General  Holmes. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

’ ’ 8.  S.  ANDERSON, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  Department, 

Little  Rock , Ark.,  October  24,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley,  Marshall,  Tex.: 

General  : I am  directed  by  Major-General  Holmes  to  say  that  the 
instructions  given  you  in  my  letter  of  the  20th  instant  to  report  to  the 
Adjutant  and  Inspector- General  at  Eichmond  are  countermanded,  and 
you  will  remain  at  Marshall  until  further  orders.  The  charges  preferred 
against  you  and  sent  to  Brigadier- General  Hebert  on  the  6th  instant 
were  sent  to  General  Holmes  from  Eichmond,  with  instructions  from 
the  President  that  he  would  cause  them  to  be  investigated.  At  the 
time  these  charges  were  forwarded  to  General  Hubert  General  Holmes 
was  not  aware  that  you  were  his  senior  j he  has  therefore  directed 
Maj.  G.  M.  Bryan,  assistant  adjutant-general  of  this  department,  to  put 
himself  in  possession  of  those  charges,  investigate  them,  and  report  the 
result  of  such  investigation  direct  to  these  headquarters. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ 8.  S.  ANDERSON, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  143.  f Austin,  Tex.,  October  24,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  B.  Howard  will  remove  from  the  island  ot  Gal- 
veston to  the  main-land  all  troops  in  the  service  of  the  State  and  all 
persons  liable  to  military  duty  under  the  law  approved  December  25, 
1861,  until  further  orders. 

Bv  order  of  Gov.  F.  E.  Lubbock. 

J.  Y.  DASHIELL, 
Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


344  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Report  of  condition  of  batteries  at  Port  Hudson , La.,  October  24,  1862. 

HEAVY  BATTERIES. 

These  are  located  along  the  bluff  at  Port  Hudson  at  points  command- 
ing extended  ranges  above  and  below  them,  with  elevations  above  the 
present  water  line  of  85  feet  at  the  highest  point  and  40  feet  at  the 
lowest  point. 

They  are  kept  in  good  order  generally,  but  are  in  some  instances 
equipped  with  defective  implements,  which  Captain  Girard,  who  has 
charge  of  the  heavy  artillery,  tells  me  can  be  replaced  at  the  post,  the 
necessity  for  which  was  named  by  me  to  him.  In  two  instances  I noticed 
carriages  and  chassis  defective,  the  chassis  of  one  gun  being  much  worn, 
and  the  chassis  and  carriage  of  another  have  shrunk,  they  having  been 
made  of  timber  not  well  seasoned.  I recommend  that  these  be  imme- 
diately replaced  by  others  from  the  arsenal  at  Jackson. 

The  water  battery  is  about  45  feet  above  the  present  water  line  of  the 
Mississippi,  and  is  pierced  for  three  guns.  At  present  but  one,  a rilled 
32-pounder,  is  mounted. 

In  one  of  the  lower  batteries  there  is  an  alteration  that  I respectfully 
suggest  should  be  made,  which  when  done  will  prove  of  decided  ad- 
vantage. The  work  referred  to  here  consists  of  two  24-pounder  rifled 
guns  upon  siege  carriages,  each  looking  through  direct  embrasures. 
These  are  quite  narrow,  and  restrict  the  field  of  fire  to  a line  perpen- 
dicular to  the  parapet.  I recommend  that  these  be  filled  and  the  guns 
served  over  the  crest. 

The  most  southern  of  the  batteries  is  for  two  24-pounder  rifles  upon 
siege  carriages.  From  the  formation  of  the  ground  the  place  selected 
for  the  upper  gun  by  the  engineer  officer  is  elevated  above  the  lower 
one  6 or  8 feet  and  not  more  than  30  feet  from  it.  In  serving  this 
upper  gun  when  the  enemy’s  vessels  are  below  the  battery  and  close 
to  it  it  must  be  depressed,  firing  over  the  lower  gun,  and  thus  endan- 
gering by  concussion  the  cannoneers  to  the  left  and  below  them.  I 
recommend  that  this  gun  be  removed  to  a position  more  upon  a level 
with  the  other  one.  Brigadier-General  Beall  spoke  of  making  this 
change. 

PLATFORMS. 


These  are  in  good  order. 


MAGAZINES. 

I did  not  examine  the  interior  of  all  the  magazines,  but  I did  exam- 
ine enough  to  satisfy  me  of  the  condition  in  which  they  are  kept.  They 
are  dry  and  clean,  but  are  without  ventilation.  They  are  in  quite  ex- 
posed positions,  with  the  entrances  to  some  of  them  open  to  the  front, 
so  that  the  enemy’s  fire,  if  it  do  not  entirely  destroy  them,  will  greatly 
endanger  free  ingress  and  egress.  General  Beall  is  having  all  such 
changed  to  more  secure  positions.  The  magazine  to  the  water  battery 
is  built  broadside  to  the  river  and  has  its  entrance  upstream.  This 
could  not  be  avoided  from  the  character  of  the  bluff.  Its  entrance 
should  be  made  more  secure  by  a traverse  thrown  across  it.  As  this 
magazine  lays  under  the  bluff  it  will  be  advantageous  to  revet  the  roof 
with  sods  or  fascines  to  prevent  washing. 

The  main  magazine  is  located  about  one-half  mile  from  the  river  in  a 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


845 


growth  of  wood.  Captain  Girard  informed  me  that  its  dimensions  are 
16  by  20  feet,  covered  with  4 feet  of  timber  and  9 feet  of  earth.  It  is 
cut  into  the  ground,  but,  like  those  at  the  batteries,  has  no  ventilation. 
It  is  in  a safe  place  and  is  dry  and  clean. 

AMMUNITION. 

By  the  accompanying  copy  of  a memorandum  given  me  by  Captain 
Girard,  ordnance  officer,  you  will  see  that  a wide  discrepancy  exists 
between  the  number  of  projectiles  and  cartridges  for  each  gun.  At  a 
point  so  important  as  Port  Hudson  I would  strongly  recommend  an 
increase  of  ammunition.  This  memorandum  is  marked  A. 

LIGHT  BATTERIES. 

Of  these  there  are  four : 

First.  Captain  Boone’s  battery,  upon  the  crest  of  the  ridge,  opposite 
to  and  distant  from  Troth’s  Landing  about  400  yards,  to  oppose  the 
Federal  forces  should  they  attempt  to  land  there.  The  position  is  a 
strong  one,  commanding  the  low  grounds  in  front.  In  connection  with 
this  battery  are  rifle  pits.  It  does  not  appear  that  Captain  Boone’s  bat- 
tery has  strict  attention.  The  horses  and  harness  are  good. 

Second.  Captain  Roberts’  battery.  In  fair  condition,  but  not  thor- 
oughly equipped.  The  horses  and  harness  are  in  fair  condition. 

Third.  Captain  Bradford’s  battery.  It  is  in  good  order.  The  horses 
and  harness  fair. 

Fourth.  Captain  Fenner’s  battery.  It  is  neatly  kept  and  the  most 
efficient  battery  of  the  post.  One  section  of  it  is  upon  detached  service 
at  Baton  Rouge.  Horses  fair ; harness  needs  repair. 

The  commanding  officers  were  directed  to  send  to  the  ordnance  office 
exact  returns  of  their  batteries,  so  that  deficiencies  may,  as  far  as 
practicable,  be  supplied.  They  all  need  horses,  and  the  harness  suffers 
much  from  want  of  oil. 

Bridges  over  which  batteries  may  have  to  pass  are  somewhat  in  need 
of  repair.  I would  strongly  recommend  to  the  lieutenant-general  com- 
manding that  a steamer  be  placed  at  the  disposal  of  Brigadier-General 
Beall  for  transporting  ordnance  and  other  stores  from  this  section  to 
Port  Hudson.  Such  can  easily  be  carried  from  here  to  Vicksburg  by 
rail  and  thence  down  the  river.  Transportation  by  way  of  Clinton  is 
tedious  and  uncertain,  and  as  the  season  advances  the  roads  become 
bad. 

Accompanying  this  report  I inclose  a note  from  Captain  Buckner,  of 
General  Beall’s  staff,  concerning  supplies.  It  is  marked  B.*  I could 
learn  nothing  definite  of  the  location  or  caliber  of  a spiked  gun  said  to 
be  at  Port  Hudson. 

Should  there  be  time  and  facilities  for  enlarging  the  magazines  I 
recommend  that  it  be  done. 

STRENGTH  OF  LIGHT  BATTERIES. 

Captain  Roberts’:  6-pounder  bronze,  3;  6-pounder  iron  howitzer, 
1 ; 6-pounder  rifles,  2. 

Captain  Boone’s:  6-pounder  bronze,  3;  12-pounder  bronze  howitzers, 
2 ; 6-pounder  bronze  rifle,  1. 


Not  found. 


846  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

Captain  Fenner’s:  6-pounder  bronze,  2;  12-pounder  bronze  howitzers, 
2.  Two  bronze  rifles  at  Baton  Rouge. 

Captain  Bradford’s:  6-pounder  bronze,  4;  12-pounder  bronze  howitz- 
ers, 2. 

Respectfully  submitted  by  your  obedient  servant, 

GEORGE  UPSHUR  MAYO, 
Major  Artillery  and  Chief  of  Ordnance. 


[Inclosure.] 

A .—Batteries  at  Port  Hudson , La.,  as  per  memoi'andum  of  Captain  Girard,  ordnance  officer, 

October  24,  1862. 


1 1 

Batteries. 

g 

O 

6 

A 

Caliber. 

Carriage. 

| Cartridge. 

Solid  shot. 

1 

d 

<Sj 

A 

Spherical  case. 

Grape. 

Canister. 

. 

Remarks. 

No.  1.. 

- 



Site  abandoned. 

.... 

42 

Barbette 

105 

390 

48 

20 

No.  2.. 

3 

24  rifled. 

do 

100 

60 

24 

15 

20' 

24  rifled. 

...  do  

125 

75 

34 

25 

No.  3.. 

"s’ 

32  rifled. 

108 

130 

50 

Only  one  mounted. 

No.  4.. 

1 

8-inch . . 

jColumbiad. 

110 

110 

125 

50 

No.  5.. 

1 

10-inch. . 

...do 

100 

49 

50 

No.  6.. 

1 

32 

Barbette 

115 

160 

42 

50 

No.  7.. 

1 

No  gun  mounted. 

No.  8.. 

2 

24  rifled . 

200 

80 

20 

One  mounted. 

No.  9.. 



None  mounted. 

32 

do  ... . 

100 

150 

No.  10. . 

3 

24  rifled . 

Siege 

205 

150 

100 

20 

40 

24  rifled. 

do 

100 

150 

100 

20 

40 

No.  11. . 

2 

24  rifled. 

— do 

200 

80 

1 

24  rifled 

...do  

Platform  for  this  gun  not  yet 

1 

complete,  October  24. 

In  Camp,  6 Miles  above  Matagorda,  on  Colorado, 

October  29,  1862 — 9 a.  m. 


Col.  X.  B.  Debray, 

Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston : 

Colonel  : The  last  communication  from  this  battalion  was  forwarded 
to  your  headquarters  from  battalion  headquarters  on  Peyton’s  Creek,  i 
and  dated  October  27.  Almost  immediately  on  receiving  the  intelli- 
gence forwarded  the  battalion  marched  to  Matagorda.  Arriving  there, 
we  found  all  quiet.  Two  gunboats  and  several  small  sail  were  lying  at 
anchor  in  the  bay,  outside  of  Dog  Island  Bar,  where  they  are  at  present. 
They  have  made  no  attempt  at  landing.  R.  H.  Chinn,  provost-marshal1 
of  Matagorda,  informed  me  that  there  were  about  1,100  pounds  of  pow- 
der in  the  town  belonging  to  the  county.  I have  ordered  the  same  re- 
moved and  have  furnished  transportation  to  some  place  of  security.  I 
have  taken  the  same  measures  in  regard  to  the  public  records.  Both 
will  be  conveyed  to  one  Judge  Talbot’s,  on  Caney.  Many  of  the  citi- 
zens of  Matagorda  would  leave  the  place  could  they  be  provided  for 
elsewhere.  At  my  request  the  negroes,  or  most  of  them,  are  to  be  re- 
moved. A day  or  two  ago  I detached  a commissioned  officer  and  30 
men  to  drive  all  the  live  stock  oft  Matagorda  Peninsula,  but  on  hearing  i 
the  enemy  had  possession  of  it  and  were  there  in  some  force  I ordered 
the  return  of  the  party,  and  concluded  to  attempt  it  again  and  when 
better  prepared.  I had  ordered  the  provost-marshal  to  see  that  the: 


Chap,  XXVH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


847 


residents  of  the  peninsula  removed  their  stock,  grain,  and  other  produce 
some  two  weeks  since.  He  notified  them  in  good  time  hut  they  failed 
to  comply,  and  from  all  I learn  from  reliable  sources  the  occupants  are 
generally  disloyal.  I do  not  know  what  the  enemy  intends  doing  in  this 

vicinity.  _ ^ ,, 

Inclosed  you  will  find  the  substance  of  an  interview  between  the 
mayor  of  Lavaca  and  the  commanding  officer  of  the  Federal  vessels  in 
the  bay.  I received  the  copy  from  Indianola  yesterday.  I shall  en- 
deavor to  keep  up  a line  of  communication  with  Port  Lavaca  and  will 
forward  all  intelligence  of  importance.  The  yellow  fever  is  still  epi- 
demic in  Matagorda,  although  there  are  but  few  cases  now;  so  from 
want  of  material.  There  are  more  effective  men  in  my  command  at  this 
moment  than  there  have  been  within  the  past  four  months.  Very  little 
sickness  and  none  of  a serious  nature. 

With  very  great  respect, 

R.  R.  BROWN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding  Battalion. 

Per  R.  M.  WALSH, 

Acting  Adjutant. 


[In  closure.] 

Indianola,  Tex.,  October  26,  1862. 

Maj.  D.  D.  Shea: 

Sir:  At  11.30  a.  in.  Woodward,  Captain  Sheppard,  and  myself  went 
on  board  the  enemy’s  vessel,  the  Westfield,  lying  at  the  lower  wharf, 
and  in  conversation  with  Captain  Renshaw  and  Captain  Paul,  of  the 
Clifton,  Captain  Renshaw  stated  in  substance  that  he  had  come  into 
the  bay  to  take  possession  of  all  the  towns  on  the  bay;  that  Indianola 
was  already  in  his  possession,  and  that  he  should  take  the  other  towns 
as.soon  as  the  wind  and  weather  favored ; that  he  had  three  rifled  guns 
and  six  9-inch  guns,  with  which  he  could  command  the  bay ; that  he 
did  not  come  to  interfere  with  the  citizens  of  Indianola ; that  he  had  no 
force  to  land  at  present,  but  that  he  should  take  and  hold  the  towns  by 
water;  that  the  citizens  could  come  to  Indianola  by  land  or  water  and 
go  out  when  they  pleased ; that  small  boats  bringing  wood  and  pro- 
visions to  Indianola  would  not  be  interfered  with,  and  he  hoped . the 
citizens  would  unite  with  him  in  preserving  the  order  and  peace  of  the 
town.  He  might  send  a few  men  on  shore  to  buy  provisions,  and  if  he 
did  and  they  were  interfered  with  he  might  fire  on  the  town.  He  hoped 
such  a collision  would  not  occur.  He  said  he  must  have  fresh  beef,  and 
if  he  could  buy  and  pay  for  it  he  would  do  so ; if  not,  he  would  take  it 
by  some  means  and  at  some  place. 

The  above  is  the  substance  at  the  interview  of  the  conversation  of 
any  importance. 

In  haste,  yours,  &c., 

’ H.  B.  CLEVELAND. 


Richmond,  Va.,  October  29, 1862. 
Governor  Shorter,  Montgomery , Ala.  : 

My  Dear  Sir : Your  letter  of  October  22  has  been  received,*  and  I 


# Not,  found. 


848 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chaf.  XXVTL 

have  given  it  my  earnest  consideration.  I entirely  concur  with  you  as 
to  the  immense  importance  of  Mobile  and  the  adjacent  country  and  the 
unfortunate  results  that  would  follow  its  fall.  I have  felt  long  and 
deeply  the  hazard  of  its  condition  and  an  anxious  desire  to  secure  it, 
but  have  vainly  looked  for  an  adequate  force  which  could  be  spared  j 
from  other  localities.  The  enemy  greatly  outnumber  us  and  have 
many  advantages  in  moving  their  forces,  so  that  we.  must  often  be  com-  j 
pelled  to  hold  positions  and  fight  battles  with  the  chances  against  us. 
Our  only  alternatives  are  to  abandon  important  points  or  to  use  our  { 
limited  resources  as  effectively  as  the  circumstances  will  permit. 

The  self-devoted  patriotism  of  the  city  of  Mobile  and  the  State  of j 
Alabama  assures  us  that  the  efforts  of  the  Confederate  States  will  be  | 
seconded  to  the  utmost  in  its  resistance  to  the  invaders. 

I have  directed  Brigadier- General  Slaughter  to  be  ordered  to  Mo- 
bile,  and  the  Secretary  of  War  is  endeavoring  to  get  some  troops  to  j 
send  there.  If  enough  conscripts  to  fill  up  the  Alabama  regiments 
now  there  can  be  promptly  sent  to  General  Forney  they  will  materially 
increase  his  strength  and  the  chances  of  a successful  resistance.  Your 
friendly  co-operation,  which  has  always  been  cheerfully  rendered,  is 
expected  to  render  valuable  aid  in  accomplishing  this  object. 

Directions  were  given  by  me  that  you  should  be  called  on  to  aid  en- 
rollment by  ordering  State  officers  to  perform  the  duty.  Thus  I hoped 
to  avail  myself  of  your  good  disposition  to  advance  the  service  and  to 
secure  the  greatest  efficiency  and  least  dissatisfaction.  Such  is  still 
the  policy  I prefer,  and  which  your  closing  remarks  lead  me  to  sup- 
pose would  be  most  acceptable  to  you. 

Yery  respectfully  and  truly,  vours, 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Ordnance  Office, 
Jackson , October  31,  1862. 

Maj.  J.  B.  Waddy, 

Assistant  A djutant-  General : 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  accompanying  report  of  the 
batteries  at  Vicksburg. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfullv, 

GEORGE  UPSHUR  MAYO, 

Major  Artillery  and  Chief  of  Ordnance. 


[Inclosure.] 

Office  of  Chief  of  Ordnance, 
Department  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

Jackson , Miss.,  October  31,  1862. 

REPORT  OF  HEAVY  BATTERIES,  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

(Beginning  at  Snyder’s  Bluff,  upon  the  Yazoo  River,  13  miles  above 

the  city.) 

The  first  battery  is  at  Snyder’s  Bluff,  sometimes  called  Haines’  Mill, 
upon  the  east  side  of  the  river,  and  intended  for  three  guns,  none  of 
which  are  mounted.  A landing  about  1 mile  below  it  is  protected  by  a 
light  battery,  commanded  by  Col.  W.  T.  Withers.  This  battery  does 
not  bear  the  least  evidence  of  care. 


vp.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC —CONFEDERATE.  849 

Second.  Captain  Parks’  battery,  usually  known  as  the  siege  battery, 
)unts  two  rifle  32s,  one  smooth  32,  and  one  42-pounder.  It  is  kept  in 
od  order,  but  Captain  Parks  complains  that  the  guns  can  only  be 
t-ved  with  much  labor,  from  the  structure  of  both  carriage  and  chassis, 
le  former  has  only  two  truck  wheels,  the  near  end  resting  upon  the 
assis,  thus  increasing  friction.  If  facilities  can  be  oftered,  I recom- 
ind that  rear  trucks  be  placed  upon  all  carriages  so  constructed,  as 
e complaint  made  by  Captain  Parks  is  general.  The  traverse  wheels 
the  chassis  are  small,  which,  taken  in  connection  with  the  indifferent 
>n  from  which  the  traverse  circles  are  made,  is  the  cause  of  the  diffi- 
lty  experienced  in  traversing  the  piece.  These  should  be  replaced 
' other  wheels  of  larger  diameter,  to  lessen  the  friction.  This  battery 
is  originally  embrasured.  These  are  still  open,  though  the  necessity 
r the  same  no  longer  exists,  and  to  this  extent  weakens  the  parapet 
id  exposes  the  gorge  of  the  battery.  They  should  be  closed. 
Louisiana  Battery  is  one  32-pounder  banded  rifle.  This  battery  is 
,t  yet  finished.  Trees  to  the  right  are  to  be  removed  and  earth  to  be 
rown  upon  the  magazine. 

Captain  Dismukes’  battery,  one  18-pounder  rifle  upon  naval  carriage 
id  one  8-inch  columbiad,  is  kept  generally  in  good  order.  The  carriage 
>eds  tightening.  This  occurs  in  one  or  two  instances,  and  when  told 
the  officers  commanding  that  this  was  necessary,  they  replied  that 
peated  applications  for  wrenches  have  been  unavailing. 

Lieutenant  Miller’s  battery,  one  8-inch  columbiad,  has  its  elevating 
rew  out  of  repair.  . 

Captain  Norman’s  battery,  of  one  9-inch  Dahlgren  gun,  is  in  good 
der.  It  is  worked  with  a quoin,  which  should  be  replaced  with  a 
rew. 

These  are  all  above  (north)  of  the  city. 

Captain  Durrive’s  battery,  two  42-pounders,  which  I am  informed 
t Lieutenant  Harrod,  who  accompanied  me  at  the  inspection,  are  use- 
ss  from  the  difficulty  of  serving  them. 

Captain  Todd’s  battery,  with  bomb-proofs,  mounts  four  guns  upon 
ivy  carriages,  two  32-pounder  rifles  and  two  42-pounder  smooth-bores, 
ept  neatly  and  with  care. 

This  is  the  last  battery  inspected  from  want  of  time. 

Those  below,  as  given  me  by  Lieut.  [B.]  Morgan  Harrod,  Brigadier- 
eneral  Smith’s  staff,  are — 

Butler’s  battery,  two  32s,  rifled. 

Ogden’s  battery,  two  10-iuch  columbiads  and  one  32-pounder  rifled. 
Upper  and  Lower  Gibb’s  battery,  two  8-inch  Dahlgrens  and  one  32 
le. 

Blakely  battery,  one  7-inch  Blakely  gun. 

The  next  two  are  not  mounted. 

Smeed’s  battery,  one  32-pounder. 

MAGAZINES. 

These  are  universally  too  small  and  without  ventilation.  The  am- 
unition,  from  the  former-named  circumstance,  is  closely  packed,  and 
e passage-ways  much  impeded  by  the  storing  or  budge-barrels,  pro- 
files, and  implements  of  various  kinds. 

In  some  of  the  batteries  42-pouiuler  guns  are  mounted  upon  32-pounder 
rriages.  These  are  too  light,  and  have  been  cut  in  the  cheeks  to  admit 

54  R R— VOL  xv 


850  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXvt 

the  gun.  They  should  be  mounted  without  loss  of  time  upon  carriag 
of  proper  size,  made,  if  not  already  in  the  department,  at  Jackson  A\ 
senal,  and  one  or  two  spare  ones  of  assorted  sizes  sent  to  supply  t 
place  of  any  that  may  be  damaged  by  the  fire  of  the  enemy. 
Respectfully  submitted, 

GEORGE  TJPSHUR  MAYO, 
Major  Artillery  and  Chief  of  Ordnance 4 


Abstract  from  report  of  troops  in  the  District  of  the  Gulf , commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  Ji\ 
H.  Forney , October  31,  1862  ( headquarters  Mobile,  Ala.). 


Organization  of  troops  in  the  District 
John  E.  Forney , 


ARMY  OF  MOBILE. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  E.  Slaughter  commanding. 

17tli  Alabama. 

18th  Alabama. 

36th  Alabama. 

38th  Alabama. 

40th  Alabama. 

Cavalry  (company). 

Marianna  Dragoons. 

Mobile  Dragoons. 

Partisan  Rangers  (battalion). 

Partisan  Rangers  (company). 

2d  Battalion  Alabama  Artillery,  Co.  A. 

2d  Battalion  Alabama  Artillery,  Co.  E. 
Gid.  Nelson  Artillery. 

CHOCTAW  AND  OWEN  BLUFFS. 

Col.  C.  D.  Anderson  commanding. 

21st  Alabama  Infantry,  First  Battalion. 


of  the  Gulf  commanded  by  Maj.  Gi 
October  31,  1862. 

DETACHMENT  OF  OBSERVATION 

Col.  J.  R.  F.  Tattnall  commanding 

29th  Alabama. 

19th  Louisiana. 

2d  Alabama  Cavalry. 

Florida  Cavalry  (battalion). 

Fowler’s  battery. 


FORTS  MORGAN  AND  GAINES. 

Col.  W.  L.  Powell  commanding.  |j 

21st  Alabama,  Second  Battalion. 

1st  Confederate  Regiment  Geora 
Troops. 

Arrington’s  company  cavalry. 

Barlow’s  company  cavalry. 

Alabama  Artillery,  First  Battalion. 


. xxvil.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE, 


851 


ract  from  Return  of  the  First  District  of  Texas,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  P.  0.  Hebert , 
for  October,  1862  ( headquarters  San  Antonio,  Tex.). 


imanding  officer. 

Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 



Aggregate  present  and 

absent. 

Horses. 

Pieces  of 
artillery. 

Officers. 

S 

a 

Serviceable. 

Unserviceable. 

Heavy. 

Mountain. 

Gen.  H.  P.  Bee.. 

Sub-District  of  the 

136 

2, 288 

2, 801 

3,  902 

1, 189 

5 

5 

1 

Rio  Grande. 

£.  B.  Debray 

Sub-District  of  Hous- 

196 

3,  042 

4,  020 

5, 403 

1,365 

13 

.... 

ton. 

J.  R.  Baylor 

Northern  frontier. 

Grand  total 

9 

332 

5, 330 

6,  821 

9,  305 

2,554 

5 

18 

1 

NOTE  FROM  ORIGINAL  RETURN. 


regate  present  and  absent 9,338 

P.  N.  Luckett 480 

t.  Col.  R.  R.  Brown 927 

b.  L.  C.  Rountree 102 


10, 847 


tement  of  forces  in  the  Sub-Military  District  of  the  Rio  Grande,  November  1,  1862. 


Rank. 


Number  of  companies  and  corps. 


Station. 


Force. 


?.  N.  Luckett 

?.  C.  Woods 

3.  L.  Pyron 

D.  D.  Shea 

A.  M.  Hobby 

W.  0.  Yager 

Joseph  Taylor 

James  Duff 

E.  Creuzbaur 

R.  B.  Maclin 

S.  Benavides 

R.  Benavides 

J.  M.  Penaloza 

H.  Willke 

B.  F.  Neal 

J.  A.  Ware 

John  Ireland 

J.  T.  Brackenridge.. 

A.  Navarro 


Ten  companies  3d  Regiment  Texas  Infantry. . 
Ten  companies  36th  Regiment  Cavalry 

Ten  companies  2d  Regiment  Texas  Mounted 
Rifles. 

Two  companies  artillery 

Four  companies  infantry 

Four  companies  cavalry 

Five  companies  cavalry 

Two  companies  Partisan  Rangers 

One  company  heavy  artillery 

One  company  light  battery 

One  company  Texas  Mounted  Rifles  (unat- 
tached). 

do 

One  company  infantry  (unattached) 

One  company  light  battery 

One  company  heavy  artillery  (unattached) . . 
One  company  Texas  Mounted  Rifles  (unat- 
tached). 

One  company  infantry  (unattached) 

One  company  Texas  Mounted  Rifles  (unat- 
tached). 


Rio  Grande 

Lavaca  River  and 
Fort  Clark. 
Columbus 

Lavaca 

Corpus  Christi 

Fort  Brown 

San  Antonio 

do 

Rio  Grande 

do 

do 

do 

San  Antonio 

Corpus  Christi 

do 

do 

do 

Lavaca 


do 


Atascosa. 


648 

823 

752 

204 

303 

404 

407 

142 

62 

52 

76 

79 

104 

87 

91 

83 

120 

79 

80 


Total. 


4.  596 


any  of  the  companies  are  still  recruiting,  and  the  force  may  safely 
onsidered  500  stronger  than  the  returns  for  October  show,  especially 
lany  conscripts  have  been  sent  to  the  commands  which  are  not  ac- 
ited  for  on  the  returns  for  October. 

E.  F.  GKAY, 

Major  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

OVEMBER  1,  1862. 


852 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  X3 


Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy, 


Jackson,  Miss.,  November  2,  186 


A.  A.  G.,  Dept.  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana,  Jaclcson: 

Major:  On  the  30th  ultimo  I proceeded  to  Vicksburg  and  mad  j 
inspection  of  the  main  approaches  from  the  Yazoo  River  to  the  Vaj 
road,  also  of  the  batteries,  and  respectfully  submit  the  following  : 

Lake’s  road,  which  runs  from  the  mouth  of  Chickasaw  Bayot 
Valley  road,  passing  by  Lake’s  house  and  through  abatis  1 and' 2,i 
good  road,  sufficiently  wide  for  troops  and  artillery.  A good  lane 
could  readily  be  made  at  the  river. 

Abatis  No.  1 is  not  strong.  No.  2 is  better ; still  could  be  gre} 
improved.  Where  the  road  passes  through  it  is  open  for  at  least  75 : 
The  abatis  are  about  300  yards  wide  and  200  long.  At  low  water] 
main  road  can  be  reached  by  passing  over  a good  road  along  the  hi 
of  Chickasaw  Bayou  and  crossing  a bar  in  Fishing  Lake.  For  artil 
to  pass  the  banks  of  the  lake  would  have  to'be  cut  down.  At  the! 
is  the  point  to  defend  the  road. 

About  one-half  mile  above  Chickasaw  Bayou  is  a good  levee,  rum  i 
from  the  river  nearly  to  the  main  road,  at  least  10  feet  wide  on  top.  V 
very  little  work  this  levee  could  be  made  a good  road.  It  could,  b 
ever,  be  easily  obstructed  and  defended,  particularly  at  the  points  w i 
it  runs  close  to  the  lake  and  has  the  swamp  on  the  other  side.  A ^ 
landing  can  be  made  at  the  river.  The  levee  can  be  used  when 
other  roads  are  overflowed.  The  distance  from  the  river  to  the  Val 
road  is  from  3£  to  4 miles. 

The  batteries  at  Vicksburg  are  generally  in  good  condition. 
amount  of  ammunition  on  hand  I respectfully  refer  you  to  the  ordmto 
officer’s  report. 


Battery  No.  1 (on  Captain  Lockett’s  plan  of  Vicksburg)  is  comp<:( 
of  three  32s  (two  rifled)  and  one  42-pounder.  The  magazine  is  not  c 
ficiently  protected. 

Battery  No.  2,  one  32  rifled,  in  a fine  commanding  position.  M| 
zine  well  protected. 


No.  3,  one  8-inch  columbiad  and  one  18-pounder  rifled.  The  maga  n. 
should  have  more  earth  upon  it. 

No.  4,  one  8-inch  columbiad.  Carriage  not  in  good  condition. 

No.  5,  one  9-inch  Dahlgren  ; has  but  21  rounds  of  shell,  28  of  gru 
and  200  solid  shot.  I would  not  recommend  using  solid  shot  out  of  n 
gun.  Magazine  badly  constructed. 

No.  6,  no  gun  yet  mounted. 

No.  7,  two  42s,  which  work  badly.  Magazine  not  sufficiently  ro 
tected. 

No.  8,  two  42s  and  two  32s,  rifled ; one  banded.  Magazine  reqire 
more  protection. 

No.  9,  two  rifled  32s. 

No.  10,  two  10-inch  columbiads,  one  32  rifled,  and  one  10-inch  mojai] 

No.  11,  one  32  rifled. 

No.  12,  one  8-inch  navy  shell  gun. 

No.  13,  one  7-inch  Blakely  gun  and  one  8-inch  Dahlgren. 

No.  14,  one  32-pounder  siege  gun.  This  gun  and  those  in  No.  lSw 
to  be  moved  nearer  the  city. 

I was  informed  by  the  ordnance  officer  that  at  Battery  No.  12  t3r< 
was  800  pounds  of  unserviceable  powder,  having  become  so  by  negle  o 
the  officer  who  had  charge  of  the  battery.  I would  respectfully  suges 
that  this  powder  be  sent  to  the  mill  at  Selma,  Ala.,  to  be  reworked  J 
number  of  the  carriages  are  too  light  for  the  guns  mounted  upon  tin* 


XVII  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


853 


msequently  will  not  stand  long-continued  firing.  I respectfully 
3t  that  others  be  made  to  replace  them  immediately.  Many  of  the 
*es  being  made  of  indifferent  material,  I respectfully  would  rec- 
od  that  there  be  at  least  one  spare  carriage  of  each  caliber,  none 
Bing  on  hand.  I would  also  respectfully  suggest  that  a depot  mag- 
be  built  as  far  to  the  rear  as  possible  within  the  line  of  works.  The 
ace  officer  informs  me  that  he  has  now  no  proper  place  for  keep- 
iwder  and  ordnance  stores. 

eral  Smith  reports  his  command  greatly  in  need  of  tents,  clothes, 
and  blankets  ; has  400  men  without  shoes. 

the  roads,  &c.,  indicated  in  this  report  I refer  you  to  the  plan 
is  herewith  respectfully  submitted. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  S.  LOVELL, 

Lieut.  Col.  and  Acting  Assistant  Inspector  General. 


[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

Jackson,  November  5,  1862. 

pectfully  referred  to  Brigadier-General  Smith,  commanding  Sec- 
lilitary  District,  who  will  make  requisition  for  all  the  gun-car  - 
: needed  and  one  extra  carriage  for  each  caliber.  General  Smith 
,lso  cause  the  magazines  to  be  strengthened.  His  attention  is 
to  the  importance  of  a depot  magazine.  If  the  officer  in  charge 
:tery  No.  12  is  to  blame  for  the  injury  of  powder  he  will  cause 
ficer  to  be  brought  to  trial.  The  powder  will  be  sent  to  Selma, 
to  be  reworked.  Clothing  will  be  furnished  as  soon  as  possible. 
3 return  this  report. 

order  of  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton : 

J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


[AL  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Department  No.  2, 

Ko.  30.  1 Knoxville , November  3, 1862. 

* * # # * * * 

The  limits  of  the  District  of  the  Gulf,  under  the  command  of  Brig- 
General  Porney,  are  extended  to  the  thirty-third  parallel. 

# # * # * * * 

command  of  General  Bragg : 

GEORGE  WM.  BRENT, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Engineer  Department, 
Harrisburg , Tex.,  November  3,  1862. 

. R.  M.  Franklin,  A.  A.  A.  G.,  Houston,  Tex. : 
i:  In  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No.  254,  dated  October  27, 
I proceeded  to  the  Brazos  River,  and  have  the  honor  to  report 
Mowing : 

) bar  at  the  mouth  of  that  river  will  admit  vessels  drawing  1\  feet 
4er  at  flood  tide  and  calm  weather,  and  once  over  the  bar  there 
m 20  to  30  feet  of  water  as  high  up  as  Columbia.  The  river  is 
ute  of  timber  for  some  4 miles  from  the  bar.  The  defenses  con- 


854 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap. 

sist  of  an  open  battery  in  front  of  the  town  of  Velasco,  on  the  left  p 
of  the  river,  and  has  two  18-pounder  guns  mounted  on  rather:  1 
barbette  carriages.  The  earthwork  was  recently  put  in  proper  s|® 
These  guns  are  too  small  for  defending  the  entrance  of  this  impel 1 
river,  but  will  serve  very  well  as  guard  guns  until  the  works  b 
up  the  river  will  be  finished.  The  towns  of  Velasco  and  Quin  tank 
of  course  exposed  to  the  shells  of  the  enemy,  and  might  be  takeii 
time,  if  worth  taking.  The  coast  from  here  to  the  San  Bernard  is 
defended,  as  there  exists  a series  of  lakes  about  1J  miles  inshorj 
tending  from  the  Brazos  to  the  San  Bernard.  The  mouth  of  this  j 
river  is  very  difficult  of  access,  having  but  feet  of  water  at  lov 
and  shifting  sand  bars  for  the  extent  of  half  a mile.  I found  tllj 
12-pounder  gun  served  by  a detachment  of  6 men,  which  I ordei 
be  removed  to  the  Brazos  River,  where  the  citizens  try  everythil 
put  it  in  a state  of  defense.  About  7 miles  up  the  Brazos  River,  1 
the  timbered  highland  commences,  the  county  of  Brazoria  is  erecl 
very  formidable  obstruction  across  the  river,  consisting  of  a solid 
of  live-oak  logs  from  12  to  20  feet  long.  The  river  is  there  29  feet  j 
and  piles  will  be  driven  on  both  sides  of  this  strong  barrier  to  * 
from  floating  oft*.  About  two- thirds  of  this  work  is  nearly  dor  JB 
vised  those  in  charge  to  provide  for  a suitable  opening  in  the  jj 
let  the  current  and  the  drift-wood  pass  through,  to  be  shut  by 
rafts  when  the  enemy  appears.  I have  no  faith  in  solid  obstr. 
mighty  rivers,  but  it  will  hold  out  till  spring,  I hope.  The  se  jH 
the  place  for  this  work  is  not  exactly  what  1 could  wish  for,  l * 
gone  already  I try  to  make  the  best  of  it.  Within  canister-shc^ 
veritable  blockade  is  a battery  of  two  8-inch  siege  howitzers,  V 
order  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bates.  This  work  is  exposed  to  the 
range  guns  of  hostile  ships.  1 ordered  some  alterations  to  be  ms 
it,  both  for  strength  and  protection,  and  located  a new  battery  <] 
12-pounder  siege  guns  on  the  opposite  (left)  river  bank,  out  of  sil 
the  ascending  boats,  and  commanding  the  dam  within  canister-]! 
The  planters  here  will  furnish  me  with  laborers  and  most  of  the  nna 
free  of  charge  to  the  Government,  and  I therefore  will  erect  for  t a 
casemated  battery  for  those  two  guns.  All  this  work  properbl 
cuted,  nothing  can  pass  this  place ; of  this  I have  the  fullest  confioi 
We  have  but  to  look  out  that  the  works  are  not  flanked  by  a land  )i 
At  this  post  there  is  also  a section  of  light  artillery — some  50  ia 
with  two  iron  6-pounders  and  good  horses,  intended  to  act  again!] 
demonstration  on  the  San  Bernard,  which  river  can  be  reached! 
here  in  one  and  three-quarter  hours. 

To-morrow  I leave  for  the  Trinity,  and  as  soon  as  the  work  tlri 
under  way  I will  return  to  the  more  important  Brazos  and  su peril 
that  work  personally.  Finally,  I request  that  the  sum  of  $5,000  3l 
aside  by  the  quartermaster  for  the  engineer  department. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  KELLERSBERG,  J 
Major  and  Engineer  in  Chap 


Headquarters  First  District  of  Texas,  l 
San  Antonio , Tex.,  November  3, 1)2 
Col.  X.  B.  Debray,  Commanding , &c.,  Houston , Tex.: 

Colonel:  I am  directed  by  the  general  commanding  to  wte 
follows  for  your  information  and  guidance:  i 

When  Virginia  Point  was  fortified,  Galveston  being  deemed  u ei 


ap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.  CONFEDERATE- 


855 


e with  the  guns  at  our  disposal,  the  object  was  with  the 
hold  the  bridge  and  annoy  the  enemy  on  the  island,  and  thus  oblige 
m to  keep  a large  force  there.  This  plan  was  based  upon  a reseive 
troops  at  Houston,  on  the  railroad,  and  at  other  points  commanding 
,e  streams  leading  into  Galveston  Bay.  The  troops  that  were  raised 
,r  this  purpose  have  been  ordered  to  other  fields  ot  action.  Under 
tese  circumstances  Virginia  Point  and  the  tete-de-pont  became  as  urn 
•nable  as  the  island.  The  general  commanding  had  hoped  that  he 
ould  have  been  able  to  send  some  troops  from  this  district  in  the 1 direc- 
on  of  Houston,  but  the  recent  demonstration  and  attacks  011  the  coast 
ive  rendered  it  impossible.  , , , 

I h„,  the  honor  to  be.  eery  *S3T’ 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  First  District  of  Texas, 

San  Antonio , Tex.,  November  3,  lSo^. 

r U X.  B.  Debray, 

Commanding , &c.,  Houston , Tex. : 

)LONEL : The  general  commanding  directs  that  should  you  have 
n e to  apprehend  an  attack  upon  your  line  of  communication  with 
1S,  Jston  you  will  evacuate  Virginia  Point,  bringing  away  all  guns 
t aunition,  platforms,  &c.,  and  take  position  with  your  troops  on  the 

t aston  side  of  Simmes7  Bayou.  All  means  in  your  power  must  be  used 

keep  the  enemy  from  penetrating  into  the  interior. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very 

A ssistant  A djutant-  General. 


Jackson,  November  6, 1862. 

eneral  J.  0.  Pemberton  : . _ 

The  following  telegram  has  just  been  received  from  Major-General 

a^°r  New  Iberia,  November  4, 1862. 

We  have  been  driven  out  of  the  La  Fourche  country.  The  ®f 

iouton  is  west  of  Berwick  Bay.  Can  you  send  me  one  f ehable  infantry 

y way  of  mouth  of  Red  River?  The  salt-works  may  be  endangered. 

J.  H.  MOEEISON, 

Aide-de-camp. 


Jackson,  November  6, 1862. 

Major-General  Taylor,  Alexandria,  La. : 

General  Pemberton  absent.  I telegraphed  him.*  This  is  his  answer : 

Under  existing  circumstances  I cannot  send  a regiment  unless  of  vital  importance, 
d which  event  I will  do  my  best. 


J.  H.  MORRISON, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


*See  General  Taylor's  dispatch  of  November  4,  telegraphed  by  Lieutenant  Morrison 
t,o  General  Pemberton  November  6, 


856 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXVII.  I 


Headquarters  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Houston , Tex.,  November  6,  1862. 

Capt.  Samuel  Boyer  Dayis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Ac.,  San  Antonio,  Tex. : 

Sir  : I received  to-day  your  communication  of  the  3d  instant,  direct- 
ing me  to  evacuate  Virginia  Point  should  I apprehend  an  attack  upon 
my  line  of  communication  with  Houston.  I have  stated  this  appre- 
hension in  my  communications*  to  you,  dated  19th  and  25th  instant 
[ultimo].  I felt  then,  as  I do  now,  the  difficulty  of  my  position  at  Vir- 
ginia Point  in  the  absence  of  a supporting  force,  and  the  dangers  that 
might  result  for  Houston  and  the  railroad  lines  converging  at  Harris- 
burg. However,  to-day’s  mail  brings  us  the  happy  tidings  of  counter- 
orders given  to  Sibley’s  brigade  and  Baylor’s  command,  which  were 
preparing  to  march  out  of  the  State.  If  the  news  is  true,  and  if  the 
general  commanding  can  spare  some  troops,  I could  not  only  hold  Vir- 
ginia Point,  but  even  reoccupy  Galveston. 

My  plan  is  as  follows : One  thousand  men  at  Simm’s  Bayou  to  cover  Har- 
risburg, with  advanced  posts  at  the  railroad  bridges  at  Clear  Creek  and 
Dickenson’s  Bayou;  300  gunners  at  Virginia  Point  and  Eagle  Grove  to 
man  the  guns,  with  ample  provisions  for  casualties  of  war;  700  men  to  sup- 
port the  guns  at  Virginia  Point,  and  600  men  to  be  thrown  into  Galves- 
ton Island ; total,  2,600  men.  Add  to  these  300  men  of  cavalry  to  scout 
upon  the  flanks.  The  enemy  has  failed  to  occupy  the  city;  he  dare  not 
keep  his  flag  waving  over  it  more  than  fifteen  minutes;  he  leaves  the 
population  in  a starving  condition;  the  fences  are  being  destroyed  for 
fuel,  and  the  people  are  every  day  applying  to  us  for  means  of  existence. 
Except  a handful  of  foreigners  who  seek  shelter  from  our  scouts  on  the 
wharves  under  the  guns  of  the  enemy  the  popi  lation  will  welcome  our 
return.  We  could  quarter  the  troops  in  rear  of  the  city,  intrench  our- 
selves against  a landing  force,  and  should  the  enemy  open  his  fire  he 
would  be  compelled  to  bombard  a city  he  has  pledged  himself  to  defend. 
In  the  absence  of  railroad  communications,  which  would  be  impractica- 
ble under  the  enemy’s  guns,  supplies  could  be  furnished  to  the  garrison 
by  wagons  coming  over  the  bridge  at  night.  I am  even  told  that  by 
bridging  or  shelling  a small  stream  a wagon  road  could  be  made  with 
little  labor  beyond  reach  of  the  enemy’s  fire.  One  month  ago,  when 
the  enemy  had  entered  the  bay,  we  had  but  two  24-pounders  left,  to 
answer  to  from  thirty -six  to  forty  guns,  all  of  superior  range.  A de- 
fense would  have  been  useless,  and  a position  in  which  a large  amount 
of  property  can  be  injured  or  destroyed,  without  any  possibility  of  in- 
flicting injury  to  the  enemy,  ought  not  to  be  held.*  Moreover,  Virginia 
Point  was  not  sufficiently  garrisoned  and  the  bridge  could  easily  have 
been  destroyed  by  the  enemy,  in  which  case  the  garrison  of  Galveston, 
even  in  the  absence  of  an  enemy’s  landing  force,  was  doomed  to  starva- 
tion or  surrender. 

The  position  of  the  garrison  of  Virginia  Point  is  at  present  nearly  as 
critical,  with  exception  that,  if  outflanked,  starvation  and  surrender 
may  be  avoided  by  a dash  through  the  enemy’s  lines;  but  should  the 
the  general  commanding  deem  expedient  to  order  re-enforcements  to 
this  point  both  Galveston  and  Virginia  Point  can  be  held.  Our  posi- 
tion would  even  be  better  than  it  was  one  month  ago,  because  should 
the  enemy  open  a bombardment  he  would  bear  before  the  civilized  world 
the  opprobrium  of  having  destroyed  a city  of  which  he  had  taken  nominal 
possession  without  being  able  to  hold  it.  It  would  be  a wanton  destruc- 


* Not  found. 


857 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

tiou.  because  it  is  well  known  by  him  that  all  the  inhabitants  are  non- 
combatants  and  the  immense  majority  of  them  Northern  men  and  aliens. 

There  is  one  serious  inconvenience  attending  the  operation  above  sug- 
gested. It  is  the  extreme  difficulty  and  heavy  expense  of  supplying 
the  troops  at  Virginia  Point  with  water  and  fuel  5 also  the  country 
around  is  so  low  that  in  the  rainy  season  it  becomes  a swamp,  m which 
troops  must  suffer  much  when  deprived  of  quarters.  Should,  however, 
a permanent  occupation  be  resolved  upon,  the  barracks  now  erected 
along  the  beach  could  be  removed  beyong  the  range  of  the  enemy’s 
guns  to  shelter  the  troops  of  support.  The  evacuation  of  Virginia 
Point  being  left  to  my  discretion,  I shall  defer  it  until  I am  acquainted 
with  the  pleasure  of  the  general  commanding  upon  the  plan  just  sub- 
mitted to  him.  In  case  of  the  approach  of  a landing  force  threatening 
mv  rear  I shall  endeavor  to  save  all  the  artillery  and  ammunition  I 
can.  I would  further  respectfully  state  that  Reily’s  and  Greens  regi- 
ments are  at  Hempstead  and  Millican,  and  could,  if  ordered,  march 
promptly  to  Houston.  Although  cavalry,  they  have  served  as  infantry 
in  New  Mexico,  and  could  still  be  used  as  such.  Nothing  new  within 

this  sub- district.  , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBBAY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Pa.,  November  7,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder, 

Commanding , &c. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  invite  your  attention  to  the  inclosed  copies 
of  papers  filed  in  this  office,*  and  request  you  to  communicate  with 
Colonel  Baylor,  and  inform  him,  in  consequence  of  his  order  with  re- 
gard to  the  Indians,  that  the  authority  to  raise  troops  granted  him  by 
the  Department  is  revoked.  The  authority  was  to  raise  troops  111  Ari- 
zona Territory,  and  if  deemed  necessary  it  may  be  conferred  on  some 
other  person.  Yrou  will  proceed  as  soon  as  practicable  to  take  such 
steps  as  may  be  necessary  to  recover  the  Territory  of  Arizona.  You 
will  also  inform  Colonel  Baylor  that  the  President  desires  a report  from 
him  in  reference  to  the  inclosed  order. 

Your  obedient  servant,  _ 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  898.  j Alexandria , November  7, 1862. 

I.  Col.  F.  H.  Farrar,  of  the  Pointe  Coup6e  Regiment;  Col.  J.  M.  Por- 
ter, of  the  Saint  Landry  Regiment,  and  Lieut.  Col.  W.  F.  Cheney,  of 
the  Avoyelles  Regiment,  will  order,  on  receipt  of  this  order,  into  active 
service  50  picked  men  from  each  of  their  regiments,  to  be  armed  with 
rifles.  Each  detachment  to  be  placed  under  competent  militia  offi- 
cers, to  be  selected  by  the  colonels ; these  detachments  to  be  placed  at 

*Not  found.  But  see  Baylor  to  Magruder,  December  29,  1862,  and  McWillie  to 
Secretary  of  War,  January  10,  1863. 


858 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


stated  distances  along  the  Atchafalaya  Eiver,  and  will  operate  on  the 
enemy’s  gunboats  should  they  attempt  to  pass  up  that  river. 

* * * * # # # 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

M.  GRIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana. 


Headquarters  First  District  of  Texas, 

San  Antonio , Tex.,  November  8,  1862. 

His  Excellency  F.  E.  Lubbock, 

Governor  of  Texas , Austin , Tex. : 

Governor  : The  State  of  Texas  is  threatened  with  invasion.  The 
troops  I had  raised  for  the  defense  of  the  State  have  been  ordered  to 
other  fields  of  action.  It  becomes  necessary  to  call  out  a portion  of 
the  militia  of  the  State  to  make  such  defense  as  we  may.  I therefore 
have  the  honor  to  call  upon  you  for  not  less  than  5,000  militia  soldiers, 
to  serve  for  three  months  unless  sooner  discharged.  The  troops  to  be 
armed  and  as  far  as  possible  equipped.  The  troops  to  go  immediately 
into  camp,  drilled,  and  disciplined.  To  rendezvous  as  follows : At  camp 
near  Hempstead,  a force  of  2,000;  at  camp  near  Houston,  1,000;  at 
camp  near  Columbus,  1,000;  at  or  near  Beaumont  500,  and  at  Goliad 
1,000.  The  troops  to  be  received  by  companies  of  not  less  than  64 
privates.  Company,  battalion,  and  regimental  officers  to  be  elected  in 
accordance  with  the  laws  and  regulations  governing  the  Army  of  the 
Confederate  States.  Also  to  authorize  Gov.  J.  E.  Baylor,  placed  in 
immediate  command  of  the  Indian  and  northern  frontier  of  the  State, 
to  call  out  from  the  frontier  counties  such  a force  of  the  militia  as  he 
may  deem  necessary  for  the  defense  of  that  frontier.  This  call  upon 
you  is  of  course  subject  to  the  sanction  and  approval  of  Major-General 
Magruder,  who  I am  officially  informed  is  ordered  to  relieve  me  in  this 
command. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  O.  HEBERT, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  First  District  of  Texas, 

No.  26.  1 San  Antonio , November  8,  1862. 

I.  Gov.  John  E.  Baylor  is  assigned  to  the  immediate  command  of  the 
northern  and  Indian  frontier  of  Texas. 

II.  Gov.  John  E.  Baylor  will  keep  such  forces  as  may  be  under  his 
command  and  not  needed  on  the  immediate  frontier  in  such  a position 
as  to  be  available  to  resist  invasion  from  any  quarter. 

III.  Governor  Baylor  is  authorized  to  employ  two  or  three  companies 
of  Chickasaws  or  Choctaws  as  spy  companies,  and  such  other  persons  as 
spies  as  he  may  need. 

TV.  Should  the  Texas  frontier  regiment  be  accepted  by  the  Confed- 
erate Government  for  the  war  or  three  years,  unless  sooner  discharged, 
it  will  be  under  the  immediate  command  of  Governor  Baylor,  who  will 
report  to  Brigadier-General  Bee  so  much  of  the  regiment  as  can  be 
spared  for  such  service  as  General  Bee  may  direct. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  859 

V.  Sucli  militia  and  partisans  as  may  be  called  out  on  the  frontier 
will  be  under  the  command  of  Governor  Baylor. 

******* 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert : 

J SAMUEL  BOYER  DAVIS, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  November  9,  1862. 
Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  Abbeville , Miss. : 

General  Villepigue  has  been  very  ill  for  several  days $ is  not  expected 
to  recover.  Shall  General  Beall  take  command  of  General  V.’s  forces"? 

They  want  a general  officer.  j R WADDY, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  November  9,  1862. 

General  Beall,  Port  Hudson : 

Assume  command  at  once  of  the  reserve  corps  near  your  post  for- 
merly commanded  by  Brigadier-General  Villepigue^  yyyj)j)Y 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Richmond,  November  10,  1862. 
General  John  H.  Forney,  Mobile , Ala.  : 

The  suspension  of  writ  of  habeas  corpus  in  Mobile  and  10  miles  around, 
including  the  fortifications  in  that  harbor,  is  not  to  be  considered  as 
authorizing  the  trial  by  military  courts  of  civilians  for  offenses  com- 
mitted, but  only  as  holding  them  in  duress  for  those  offenses. 

’ S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 

Bayou  Teche,  November  10,  1862. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Department , Jackson , Miss. : 

General  : I seize  the  first  opportunity  to  write  you  concerning  the 
condition  of  affairs  in  this  locality. 

I heard  nothing  from  General  Mouton  relative  to  the  landing  of  the 
enemy  and  operations  on  the  La  Fourche  until  the  31st  October,  although 
the  enemy  landed  at  Doualdsonville  on  the  25th,  and  by  reason  of  the 
established  line  of  couriers  and  telegraph  I could  have  received  infor- 
mation from  the  La  Fourche  in  thirty-six  hours. 

As  soon  as  I heard  of  the  state  of  affairs  in  this  portion  of  the  State 
I hastened  to  the  Teche.  On  the  road  I met  numbers  of  citizens  remov- 
ing their  families  and  negroes,  and  alarm  and  confusion  amounting  to 
a panic  seemed  to  have  seized  the  public  mind.  On  my  arrival  I found 


860 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

our  troops  occupying  a position  on  the  Teche  above  the  confluence  with 
the  Atchafalaya,  where  earthworks  were  being  constructed  and  heavy 
guns  (24  and  32  pounders)  mounted.  These  works  are  nearly  completed 
and  four  guns  now  in  position.  About  2 miles  below  these  intrench- 
ments  obstructions  have  been  placed  in  Bayou  Teche.  The  steamer 
Cotton,  formerly  a Mississippi  Biver  passenger  boat,  on  which  three 
guns  have  been  placed,  engaged  and  succeeded  in  driving  out  of  the 
Teche  four  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  which  had  gotten  into  Berwick  Bay. 
These  boats  of  the  enemy  were  formerly  river  and  sea  steamers,  which 
have  been  somewhat  strengthened,  but  are  by  no  means  formidable. 
Their  light  draught,  however,  enables  them  to  navigate  the  bayous  and 
streams  in  the  interior  of  the  State.  I am  satisfied  if  the  Mobile  and 
St.  Mary,  the  two  boats  which  were  removed  from  Berwick  Bay  on  the 
fall  of  New  Orleans  and  carried  to  the  Yazoo,  had  been  here,  they,  with 
the  Cotton,  even  in  her  unfinished  state,  would  have  sunk  the  enemy’s 
boats. 

I am  about  to  construct  a work  on  the  Atchafalaya  Biver  with  a view 
to  the  protection  of  that  stream.  The  importance  of  keeping  the  Atchaf- 
alaya open  cannot  be  overestimated,  from  the  fact  that  it  aftords  the 
only  water  transportation  for  the  salt  from  the  mines  on  Avery’s  Island 
to  the  Bed  and  Mississippi  Bivers.  By  a short  land  portage  from  the 
Teche  this  salt  can  be  transported  to  boats  navigating  the  Atchafalaya. 
The  presence  of  the  Mobile  and  St.  Mary  would  conduce  greatly  to  the 
protection  of  that  important  stream. 

I am  of  the  opinion  that  the  proper  cencentration  of  the  troops  un- 
der command  of  Brigadier-General  Mouton  at  some  point  on  the  La 
Fourche  would  have  enabled  him  to  defeat  the  enemy  in  their  land  attack 
by  way  of  the  Bayou  La  Fourche,  but  the  division  of  his  force  in  guard- 
ing remote  points  and  fear  of  being  cut  off  by  the  enemy’s  gunboats 
and  forces  at  Berwick  Bay  rendered  his  force  inadequate  to  contend 
with  the  enemy  on  the  bayou  and  induced  him  to  hasten  his  evacuation 
of  the  La  Fourche  country.  Subsequent  events  showed  that  ample  time 
would  have  been  afforded  General  Mouton  to  have  concentrated  his 
forces  as  above  mentioned  and  cross  the  bay  before  the  enemy’s  boats 
could  have  reached  it.  With  the  enemy,  however,  at  Berwick  Bay  it 
would  have  been  impossible  for  our  troops  to  have  occupied  the  La 
Fourche  section,  as  communication  with  this  portion  of  the  country 
and  our  supplies  would  have  been  cut  off. 

Nearly  all  the  troops  of  General  Mouton’s  command  are  men  who 
have  been  raised  in  this  neighborhood  and  whose  families  reside  here ; 
hence  at  all  times,  and  especially  under  circumstances  like  those  which 
have  just  taken  place,  much  straggling  occurs,  and  the  strength  of  the 
command  is  thus  materially  lessened.  One  good  regiment  ol  infantry 
not  subject  to  such  influences  would  be  of  incalculable  service  to  me, 
and  if  you  can  s^iare  me  such  a regiment  I should  feel  much  strength- 

ened.  ' . 

If  the  enemy  sends  any  very  considerable  force  against  the  salt  mines 
my  force  would  be  inadequate  to  its  defense.  Against  such  as  is  now 
probably  at  his  disposal  I feel  that  there  is  no  danger  of  their  being 
cut  off,  but  their  importance  to  us  is  doubtless  well  known  to  the  enemy, 
and  may  induce  an  attack  with  a large  force. 

I have  just  heard  that  Sibley’s  brigade,  which  was  ordered  to  report 
to  me,  has  had  its  destination  changed,  and  is  now  ordered  to  Bichmond, 
Ya.  I had  confidently  expected  at  least  the  accession  of  that  brigade 
to  my  command. 

I regret  exceedingly  that  the  steamer  Newsboy,  laden  with  salt  tor 


861 


Chap.  XXVlI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

the  State  of  Mississippi,  was  unable  to  get  out  before  the  enemy’s  gun- 
boats got  info  the  bay.  I shall  endeavor,  however,  at  the  earliest  moment 
possible  to  have  this  salt  transported  by  land  to  a point  on  the  Atchat- 
alaya  where  it  may  be  reshipped  and  forwarded  to  its  destination. 

If  by  any  means  you  can  spare  me  the  two  Whitworth  guns  now  at 
Vicksburg,  with  a sufficient  supply  of  ammunition,  I think  I can  drive 
the  enemy  from  Berwick  Bay  and  recover  the  entire  control  of  the 

Atchafalaya.  . 

I am  informed  that  there  are  some  siege  guns  at  Vicksburg.  Can 

you  spare  a few  of  them  ? 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  TAYLOR, 

Major - General. 


Richmond,  November  10,  1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I have  come  direct  from  New  Orleans  to  this  city  to  lay  before  the 
Government  here  the  following  tacts  for  its  information  and  benefit  : 

A short  time  since  I made  application  to  the  State  Bank  of  Louisiana 
for  a loan  of  $100,000,  for  which  I proposed  to  give  a mortgage  on  plan- 
tation and  slaves  in  the  Confederacy.  The  bank  was  willing  to  give 
me  the  sum,  but  inasmuch  as  General  Butler’s  orders  prohibited  the 
dealing  with  or  payment  of  money  to  rebels  his  special  assent  to  the 
transaction  was  necessary.  For  the  purpose  of  getting  it,  and  also  to 
learn  if  he  would  permit  me  to  pass  his  lines  with  the  money,  the  pres- 
ident of  the  bank,  J.  M.  Lapeyre,  esq.,  called  upon  him  and  made  known 
my  intention  of  going  into  the  country  to  purchase  cotton.  He  gave 
his  assent  to  the  transaction,  and  in  the  course  of  conversation  told 
Mr.  Lapeyre  that  if  I wished  to  ship  the  cotton  to  New  Orleans  he 
would  guarantee  its  protection  to  do  with  it  as  I pleased,  and,  further, 
if  I wished  to  take  supplies  from  the  city  to  the  planters  in  lieu  of 
taking  the  money  he  would  give  the  permission. 

On  learning  this,  and  on  reflecting  on  it,  I determined  to  see  how  far 
he  was  authorized  by  his  Government  to  give  such  guarantee,  and  also 
to  learn  what  articles  he  would  prohibit  from  leaving  the  city  and  to 
what  extent  his  Government  would  allow  the  barter. 

In  order  to  gain  this  information  I prevailed  on  Mr.  Lapeyre  to  call 
on  him  again  and  get  his  reply  to  the  following : 

First.  What  articles  will  you  not  allow  to  leave  the  city  ? 

Second.  To  what  extent  will  you  allow  the  exchange  ? 

Third.  Will  the  cotton  or  other  produce  be  allowed  to  be  shipped  to 
foreign  ports  if  desired 

Fourth.  Have  you  the  authority  of  your  Government  and  will  you  in 
the  name  of  your  Government  give.a  written  pledge,  provided  the  con- 
sent of  the  Confederate  States  Government  is  obtained  ? 

To  which  he  answered  as  follows : 

To  first.  He  said  cotton  or  other  produce  can  come  to  New  Orleans 
without  restriction ; the  port  is  open,  and  everything  except  munitions 
of  war  go  out. 

To  second.  The  extent  of  shipments  to  the  interior  will  not  be  limited 
further  than  at  least  an  equal  value  of  the  same  be  returned  either  in 
cotton  or  other  produce,  viz,  sugar,  tobacco,  or  naval  stores. 

To  third.  The  cotton  or  other  produce  can  and  may  be  shipped  to  any 
port  in  the  world. 


862 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVtt. 


To  fourth.  He  said  he  had  not  the  authority  from  Washington,  hut 
that  he  had  no  doubt  he  could  get  it.  He  had,  he  said,  permitted  some 
limited  traffic,  and  his  course  had  been  approved  at  Washington.  He 
would  give  a written  promise,  and  would  also  get  General  Shepley, 
military  governor,  to  join  him  in  it. 

All  this  seemed  to  be  so  very  good  and  kind  (being  equivalent  to 
running  the  blockade  with  their  aid  and  consent)  that  I could  only 
suppose  they  had  some  hidden  designs  under  it,  and  I determined  to 
call  upon  Butler  myself.  I did  not  see  him,  but  saw  General  Shepley, 
who  in  his  capacity  of  Governor  seems  to  be  clothed  with  greater  pow- 
ers than  Butler  concerning  all  matters  not  strictly  military. 

I gathered  from  him  that  his  Government  wished,  if  possible,  to  pre- 
vent the  burning  of  any  more  cotton ; that  they  desired  as  fast  as  pos- 
sible to  occupy  the  country,  but  if  they  sent  forces  in  the  interior  the 
cotton  would  all  be  burned  as  fast  as  they  approached  it  ; that  they  had 
been  strongly  advised  not  to  send  forces  near  the  cotton  districts  until 
they  had  first  tried  the  effects  of  offering  them  peaceable  trade;  they 
believe  the  bitter  feeling  in  the  country  will  gradually  subside  if  they 
can  only  begin  trade  with  the  country,  and  that  when  planters  find 
they  can  sell  their  cotton  in  small  quantities  for  supplies  they  will  be 
less  inclined  to  burn  it.  The  fact  is  they  have  met  with  considerable 
success  above  and  below  the  city  in  conciliating  the  sugar  planters, 
and  they  expect  the  same  or  greater  success  with  the  cotton  planters, 
but  in  which  they  will  find  themselves  mistaken.  People  generally  in 
Louisiana  advocated  from  the  first  the  sale  of  sugar  and  molasses  to 
them,  but  no  one  scarcely  wished  them  to  have  one  bale  of  cotton.  I 
may  be  wrong,  but  I believe  such  ate  the  reasons  for  their  liberal  offers. 

I closed  my  interview  with  General  Shepley  with  this  understanding: 
That  he  would  immediately  send  to  Washington  for  authority  from  his 
Government  in  the  premises  and  that  I would  lay  the  matter  before  the 
Government  here  for  their  consideration. 

Now,  here  is  what  can  be  done  under  this  arrangement  if  the  Govern- 
ment consents  to  any  cotton  leaving  our  territory.  If  permission  was 
granted  me  to  make  the  agreement  with  the  Federals,  under  it  I could 
deliver  , to  planters  on  the  Mississippi  not  far  from  Vicksburg  such 
things  as  our  army  are  suffering  for.  Another  boat  from  that  city  could 
easily  get  them  to  Vicksburg  and  from  thence  where  you  wish  them. 
Large  quantities  of  salt,  bagging  and  rope,  provisions,  shoes,  blankets, 
&c.,  could  be  given  to  the  planters  at  comparatively  low  prices,  which 
at  this  time  would  greatly  strengthen  them  in  their  ability  to  aid  the 
Government. 

They  will  not  object  to  cotton  being  shipped  anywhere  so  long  as  it 
is  for  private  account.  Consequently,  whilst  I might  bona  fide  carry 
out  my  arrangement  with  the  planters,  I could  easily  place  one-half 
or  two-thirds  of  the  whole  amount  sent  out  in  Liverpool  or  Havre  and 
have  the  proceeds  of  the  same  placed  to  the  credit  of  the  Confederate 
States  there. 

Any  portion  of  the  machinery  of  the  arrangement  that  might  not  work 
smoothly  in  New  Orleans  could  be  undoubtedly  made  to  work  by  a lit- 
tle greasing,  and  I should  have  no  compunctions  of  conscience  in  using- 
such  means,  considering  the  parties  and  the  ends  to  be  gained. 

At  present  the  stock  of  blankets  in  New  Orleans  is  very  small. 
They  would  have  to  be  procured  elsewhere  and  sent  there.  There 
is  a tolerable  stock  of  shoes  there,  and  more  could  easily  be  got- 
ten. Salt  and  provisions  are  plenty,  and  in  three  to  four  weeks  any- 
thing required  could  be  purchased  in  New  York  and  sent  there.  My 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


863 


plan  of  transportation  would  be  with  boats  belonging  in  the  Confed- 
eracy and  manned  by  crews  of  our  own  people.  All  my  employes  should 
be  personally  known  to  me,  and  no  one  should  know  of  my  understand- 
ing with  the  Confederate  States  Government. 

I have  an  arrangement  with  the  State  Bank  of  Louisiana  which  will 
enable  me  to  carry  out  my  proposition  without  any  advance  of  money 
on  the  part  of  the  Government.  Such  articles  as  I should  bring  out 
and  indirectly  deliver  to  the  Government  would  only  be  required  to  be 
paid  for  when  they  were  delivered. 

Cotton  that  I might  ship  for  the  Government  would  have  to  be  paid 
for  first  and  would  have  to  be  advanced  by  the  Government. 

When  I left  New  Orleans  I was  not  aware  Congress  had  adjourned. 
I expected  to  have  met  the  whole  of  our  Louisiana  delegation  here, 
through  whom  I believe  I could  have  most  fully  satisfied  the  Govern- 
ment regarding  myself.  If  the  proposition  is  entertained  there  will  be 
no  difficulty  in  this  respect.  I flatter  myself  I can  give  as  high  testi- 
monials of  integrity  as  any  citizen  of  New  Orleans,  of  which  place  I 
have  been  a citizen  for  thirty-one  years. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

F JNO.  A.  STEVENSON. 


[Indorsements.] 

November  13,  1862. 

Respectfully  submitted  to  the  President  for  his  consideration.  Mr. 
Stevenson  comes  well  recommended. 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War . 

November  15,  1862. 

The  only  objection  to  the  within  proposition  is  that  it  would  author- 
ize the  shipment  of  cotton  to  a port  in  possession  ot  the  enemy.  This 
is  qualified  by  the  offer  of  a guarantee  that  it  should  not  stop  there. 

If  the  arrangement  could  be  made  so  as  to  avoid  the  above  objection 
it  would  be  well  to  accept  the  proposition. 

The  condition  in  relation  to  placing  funds  abroad  is  very  important, 
and  gives  this  a claim  to  preference  over  any  other  offer  which  has  been 
before  me. 

J.  D. 


[In  closure.] 

Louisiana  State  Bank, 

New  Orleans , October  28,  1862. 

John  A.  Stevenson: 

Dear  Sir:  The  project  you  have  communicated  to  me  has  had  due 
consideration. 

You  propose  to  attempt  to  obtain  the  consent  of  the  Confederate 
States  Government,  as  also  that  of  the  Federal  Government,  to  be  al- 
lowed to  supply  provisions  and  other  articles  of  prime  necessity  to  the 
planters  in  the  interior  and  to  be  permitted  in  return  to  purchase 
cotton  from  them  and  to  ship  the  same  through  this  port  to  Europe. 

It  affords  me  pleasure  to  say  to  you  that  this  bank  will  make  you  the 
advances  required  to  enable  you  to  carry  out  your  object  when  you  shall 
have  obtained  said  permission  on  the  terms  proposed. 

This  bank  will  also  purchase  your  bills  of  exchange  drawn  against 


864 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xXvil. 

any  shipments  of  cotton  you  may  be  enabled  to  make  to  any  usual  port 
in  England,  France,  or  Spain. 

I am,  respectfully,  dear  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

7 7 J.  M.  -LAPEYRE, 

President . 


Richmond,  Va.,  November  12, 1862. 

General  Richard  Taylor, 

[Via  Jackson , Miss.] : 

See  that  the  salt  mines  on  the  Teche  are  adequately  protected. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 


War  Department, 
Richmond , November  12,  1862. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton, 

Commanding , Jackson , Miss. : 

General  : This  Department  is  still  annoyed  with  complaints  of  seiz- 
ures of  private  property  at  Vicksburg  and  in  Louisiana  by  the  agents 
and  officers  of  the  quartermaster  and  commissary  departments.  Letters 
and  oral  communications  describe  an  Algerine  administration  there 
rather  than  one  of  a Government  acting  under  a constitution  that  guar- 
antees rights  of  property. 

The  Department  does  not  adopt  these  statements  as  exact,  tor  they 
disclose  a good  deal  of  temper  and  irritation.  But  they  authorize  the 
Department  to  state  anew  its  principle  of  action,  and  to  ask  you  for  cir- 
cumspection and  vigilance. 

Necessity  alone  will  authorize  an  interference  with  private  property 
or  the  freedom  of  commerce  among  the  citizens  of  the  States.  The 
necessity  should  be  apparent,  and  the  use  of  other  means  for  supply 
than  the  invasion  of  private  right  difficult  and  precarious.  It  is  not 
enough  that  you  may  attain  your  ends  more  conveniently  by  taking 
private  property.  The  taking  of  private  property  must  be  a necessary 
means  of  reaching  the  object.  It  is  the  duty  of  quartermasters  and 
commissaries  to  use  the  ordinary  means  to  procure  their  supplies.  Ac- 
tivity, energy,  and  fidelity  would  probably  enable  them  to  do  this.  But 
one  would  conclude  from  the  letters  and  statements  that  come  to  this 
Department  that  they  repose  quietly  and  lazily  on  the  highways  until 
private  enterprise  brings  the  resources  they  stand  in  need  of,  and  then 
they  use  the  strong  hand  in  securing  them  for  the  Government.  Vio- 
lence is  represented  as  the  principal  instrument  employed  to  carry  on 
the  administration.  Hot  only  do  the  charges  impugn  the  order  of  the 
administration,  but  its  fidelity  likewise.  . 

The  subordinates  are  charged  as  being  in  league  with  certain  traders 
and  dealers,  and  as  lending  the  power  of  the  Government  to  obstruct 
those  who  compete  with  them  and  in  advancing  the  interests  of  their 
Confederates. 

This  Department  looks  to  you  to  impose  upon  the  administration  ot 
that  department  the  impress  of  personal  honor,  and  that  injustice,  op- 
pression, and  partiality  shall  appear  in  no  portion  of  it. 

With  consideration  and  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  CAMPBELL, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War , for  the  Secretary  of  War. 


865 


hap.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.  — CONFEDERATE. 

Headquarters  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Houston , Tex .,  November  12,  1862. 

!apt.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  <Ssc.,  Austin,  Tex. : 

Sir  : Your  communication,*  dated  Austin,  November  8,  was  received 
3-day  at  2 p.  m.  Agreeably  to  the  instructions  of  the  general  com- 
landing  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  under  the  supervision  of  Maj. 
f.  Menard,  of  Debray’s  regiment,  preparations  have  been  made  and 
laterial  collected  to  throw  obstructions  at  the  mouth  of  the  Trinity, 
nd  that  the  works  have  been  delayed  owing  to  the  absence  of  Major 
[ellersberg,  detained  at  other  points  by  his  duties.  That  officer  must 
e by  this  time  at  the  mouth  of  the  Trinity  to  complete  the  works  of 
bstruction  and  to  erect  fortifications  to  protect  these  works.  So  soon  as 
receive  his  report  1 shall  lay  it  before  the  general  commanding.  Four 
ompanies  of  cavalry  are  stationed  on  the  Trinity,  of  which  there  are 
free  near  the  mouth  and  one  at  the  bridge  at  Liberty.  The  San  Jacinto 
\ now  nearly  obstructed.  The  works  will  be  completed  in  a very  few 
ays  under  the  supervision  of  Mr.  W.  M.  Lubbock.  They  are  defended 
y a fortification  with  two  24-pounders,  manned  by  a company  of  Cook’s 
3giment.  Three  companies  of  cavalry  are  stationed  on  that  stream 
nd  Buffalo  Bayou  between  the  mouth  and  Simmes’  Bayou.  At  Harris- 
urg  there  are  two  small  forts,  manned  by  Captain  Bickley’s  company, 
f Griffin’s  battalion,  whose  men  are  being  trained  in  artillery  practice 
y Lieutenant  Harby.  There  are  also  near  Harrisburg  three  companies 
f my  regiment,  who  were  compelled  to  move  from  Virginia  Point 
wing  to  want  of  water  for  stock  in  the  vicinity,  but  I intend  to  order 
aem  down  again  so  soon  as  rain  has  filled  up  the  pools  and  ditches. 
For  the  obstructions  thrown  at  the  mouth  of  the  Sabine,  Nechez,  and 
irazos  I have  the  honor  to  refer  the  general  commanding  to  the  reports 
f Major  Kellersberg,  forwarded  by  me  to  your  headquarters  last  week, 
he  Sabine  and  Nechez  are  defended  by  about  800  men  and  the  Brazos* 
y about  640  men.  The  San  Bernard  will  be  protected  by  a battery  of 
ght  artillery  from  Bates’  battalion.  A raft  at  the  mouth  of  the  Colo- 
ido  prevents  the  navigation  of  that  river  by  vessels  of  any  size. 
Town’s  battalion  of  cavalry  is  stationed  in  the  vicinity.  I am  pre- 
ared  to  defend  the  New  Orleans  Bailroad  so  far  as  means  allow.  It 
ould  require  a considerable  force  to  take  possession  of  its  head  at 
•range  or  of  the  bridge  at  Beaumont,  and  if  the  troops  stationed  there 
old  their  ground,  as  I hope,  I can  in  a few  hours  re-enforce  them  with 
lmore’s  regiment,  now  at  Virginia  Point.  The  electric  telegraph  is 
spected  to  be  completed  up  to  Beaumont  in  a very  few  days,  and  will 
e very  useful  for  movements  of  troops  at  short  notice.  I would  wish 
) have  a stronger  guard  at  the  bridge  at  Liberty  and  one  at  the 
ridge  on  the  San  Jacinto,  but  I have  now  no  troops  to  spare.  Works 
F defense  and  obstruction  have  been  made  by  slave  labor,  hired  or  con- 
futed by  the  citizens.  It  would  be  useless  to  obstruct  the  lesser 
Teams  emptying  in  Galveston  Bay.  They  are  guarded  by  pickets  and 
atrols  of  cavalry  against  small  landing  parties.  A large  force  would 
nd  good  landing  ground  at  any  point  of  the  shore.  The  bridges  on 
lear  Creek,  Dickenson’s  Bayou,  and  Simmes’  Bayou  are  guarded  by 
ickets  of  cavalry. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBKAY, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Sub- Military  District  of  Houston . 


55  R R— ' vol  XV 


Not  found. 


866 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII.  j 

Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 
Alexandria , Z&.,  November  13,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert, 

Commanding  District  of  Texas  : 

General  : In  the  absence  of  Major-General  Taylor  to  the  lower! 
portion  of  the  State  I respectfully  beg  leave  to  call  your  attention  to 
a subject  upon  which  it  was  his  attention  to  have  addressed  you,  but 
in  which  he  was  prevented  by  the  many  and  urgent  calls  upon  hisj 
time.  In  reply  to  an  application  to  the  War  Department  for  a few! 
guns  of  heavy  caliber  for  the  defense  of  the  Red  and  Washita  Rivers 
I received  a few  days  since  a telegraphic  dispatch  stating  that  there 
was  not  a gun  to  be  had  at  the  present  time.  General  Taylor  has  beenj 
informed  that  there  are  in  your  district  (at  Houston  or  elsewhere)  sev- 
eral large  guns  (8  or  10  inch)  which  are  out  of  use.  If  this  is  so  and 
you  can  spare  them,  I beg  to  request,  in  the  name  of  General  Taylor,] 
that  the  necessary  orders  be  issued  that  they  may  be  transported  tc 
this  district.  I have  spoken  to  Major  Moise  on  this  subject,  and  hi 
expresses  his  ability  and  willingness  to  undertake  the  transferring  ol 
the  guns,  provided  he  can  obtain  the  requisite  authority.  The  defensi 
of  the  rich  country  bordering  on  this  river  is  a matter  of  the  first  im 
portance,  and  fortifications  are  already  in  process  of  erection,  but  ] 
fear  the  efforts  of  General  Taylor  will  be  of  no  avail  unless  he  can  gel 
the  guns  above  alluded  to,  which  appears  now  to  be  our  only  chance. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  SURGET, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


• War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va .,  November  14,  1862. 

Maj.  Simeon  Hart, 

Assistant  Quartermaster : 

Major  : The  Department  desires  to  have  an  agent  in  Texas  to  pui 
chase  army  supplies  from  Mexico,  and  having  confidence  in  your  energ 
and  intelligence,  has  determined  to  detail  you  for  that  duty.  You  wi 
be  furnished  with  money,  which  you  can  deposit  with  the  public  dt 
positary  in  San  Antonio,  and  draw  as  your  necessities  may  require 
You  will  probably  find  it  advantageous  to  make  your  payments  i, 
cotton.  Should  this  be  the  case,  you  will  purchase  and  transport  th 
cotton  to  the  most  favorable  points  on  the  Mexican  frontier.  You  wi 
call  on  the  general  commanding  the  District  of  Texas  for  such  assis. 
ance  as  you  may  require,  and  the  necessary  transportation  may  h 
impressed  if  it  cannot  be  otherwise  acquired. 

The  Chief  of  Ordnance  and  the  Quartermaster  will  furnish  lists  < 
the  articles  required  in  their  respective  departments,  and  will  indical 
the  points  at  which  they  wish  them  deposited. 

Should  you  find  it  practicable  to  purchase  horses  fit  for  cavalry  an 
artillery  service,  and  to  get  them  across  the  Mississippi  River,  you  wi 
purchase  such  number,  not  exceeding  1,000,  as  you  can  obtain.  Tt 
prices  should  not  exceed  those  paid  east  of  the  Mississippi  River. 
Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


867 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

Engineer  Office, 
Mobile , November  14,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond: 

General  : I liave  the  honor  to  report  my  arrival  here  on  the  4th 
instant,  though  in  very  bad  health  from  cold  and  jaundice.  I have 
made  an  examination  of  all  the  works  intended  for  the  defense  of  the 
place  and  am  taking  measures  for  strengthening  them. 

The  time  allowed  for  this  is  not  likely  to  be  very  long,  and  the  means 
available  in  anchors  and  chains  for  rafts  and  in  iron  for  general  use  is 
extremely  limited. 

I propose,  however,  to  make  every  effort  to  obstruct  the  channels,  so 
as  to  detain  the  enemy  under  the  fire  of  Forts  Morgan  and  Gaines,  and 
also  at  the  batteries  near  the  city  should  the  outer  line  be  broken 
through. 

The  land  defenses  around  the  city  are  as  yet  incomplete  and  weak, 
but  are  being  pressed  forward  to  completion,  and  those  already  built 
will  be  strengthened  as  opportunity  may  offer. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  LEADBETTER, 

Brigadier- General  and  Major  of  Engineers. 


Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 
Alexandria , La .,  November  17,  1862. 

(Received  at  Richmond,  Va.,  December  11.) 

Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith, 

Comdg.  Confederate  tStates  Forces  at  Vicksburg , Miss.  : 

General:  In  the  absence  of  Major-General  Taylor  I have  the  honor 
oO  inform  you  that  I received  to-day,  through  General  Blanchard,  your 
etter  of  the  9th  instant,  with  accompanying  copy  of  telegraphic  dispatch 
rom  the  Secretary  of  War,  relative  to  certain  Government  cloths  that 
vere  at  this  point  in  transitu  for  the  east.  In  view  of  the  great  need 
hr  clothing  among  the  troops  here  General  Taylor  retained  a sufficient 
quantity  of  the  cloth  to  serve  about  6,000  men,  and  the  greater  portion 
>f  this  has  already  been  distributed.  Under  the  impression  that  the 
doth  was  in  Texas,  General  Holmes  issued  an  order  to  General  Hubert 
o forward  immediately  to  Arkansas  all  that  he  did  not  himself  require, 
vith  further  instructions  that  if  the  cloth  had  left  Texas  to  send  an 
igent  after  it,  and  if  overtaken  anywhere  west  of  the  Mississippi  River 
o send  it  all  to  Arkansas.  This  order  reached  here  before  Captain 
Sharkey  succeeded  in  shipping  the  cloth,  and  consequently  it  was 
-urned  over  to  one  of  General  Hebert’s  quartermasters,  who  was  here 
it  the  time  (Major  Moise),  who  (by  order  of  General  Hebert  issued  to 
he  agent  in  search  of  the  cloth)  sent  100  bales  of  it  back  to  Texas,  the 
emainder  to  Arkansas.  I have  forwarded  to  Major  General  Holmes 
b copy  of  your  letter,  with  the  dispatch  of  the  Secretary  of  War ; also  to 
Brigadier-General  Hubert. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  SURGET, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


868 


W.  FLA., 


S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.'MEX. 


[Chap.  XXVII. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

Jackson , November  20,  1862. 


General  Richard  Taylor, 

Commanding , &c .,  Alexandria , La,: 

General:  I have  ascertained  on  close  inquiry  that  the  boats  St. 
Mary  and  Mobile  cannot  get  out  of  the  Yazoo  River,  there  being  only 
3 feet  water  on  the  bar.  I am  utterly  unable  to  afford  you  any  assist- 
ance in  the  way  of  re-enforcements,  except  probably  at  a particular  mo- 


ment and  then  for  a short  time,  as  I regard  the  defense  of  this  valley 


of  much  greater  importance  than  that  of  YTest  Louisiana,  and  have  an 
inadequate  force  to  insure  the  successful  accomplishment  of  the  first 
object.  I have  no  siege  guns  whatever  5 those  promised  have  not  ar- 
rived, and  I have  no  heavy  guns  that  can  be  spared  from  the  defense  of 
the  Mississippi.  I will  write  you  more  at  length  when  I have  an  oppor- 
tunity. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant - General , Commanding. 


Houston,  Tex.,  November  20, 1862. 


His  Excellency  President  DAVIS,  Richmond , Va.  : 

Mr.  President:  On  my  arrival  at  home  I found  a state  of  affairs 
worse  than  I had  anticipated,  though  Texas  has  not  suffered  from  the 
ravages  of  war  as  some  of  her  sister  States  have.  Public  confidence 
in  you  and  in  your  administration  remains  unimpaired,  because  the 
people  are  not  ready  to  impute  to  you  the  errors  and  omissions  of  sub- 
ordinates 5 yet  I fear  there  is  a growing  feeling  that  the  Government 
is  too  far  off  to  know  all  that  is  done  here  or  does  not  look  after  the, 
defense  of  the  State  with  as  vigilant  an  eye  as  could  be  desired.  There; 
has  been  great  dissatisfaction  with,  and  want  of  confidence  in,  the  mil- 
itary officers  of  this  department.  The  feeling  of  the  people  was  grow- 
ing stronger  against  General  Hubert  every  day,  and  I regard  the  change 
of  commanders  as  a most  fortunate  event  at  this  juncture.  It  may  be 
that  General  Magruder  may  not  prove  more  efficient,  but  any  new  man 
now  can  accomplish  far  more  than  General  Hubert  could.  Had  he 
remained  in  command  I fear  it  would  have  been  extremely  difficult  tc 
arouse  the  people  to  respond  to  any  call  he  might  have  made  until  toe 
late  to  make  proper  defense.  Popular  feeling  amounted  to  absolute 
resentment  and  condemnation  in  reference  to  the  abandonment  of  Gal- 
veston. 1 know  well  that  popular  feeling  is  often  wrong  and  based  or 
ignorance  of  facts  and  is  at  best  an  unsafe  guide  in  such  matters.  It 
this  instance,  however,  there  appears  to  be  some  foundation  for  it. 

It  appears  that  as  far  back  as  last  May  all  the  guns  for  the  defense  o 
Galveston  save  one  or  two  were  removed  from  the  batteries  or  eartl 
fortifications  commanding  the  channel  and  entrance  to  the  bay,  and  fron 
that  time  General  Hubert  has  acted  as  if  he  regarded  the  place  wholly 
indefensible  against  any  force.  The  appearance  of  preparation  alorn 
served  to  keep  off  the  enemy,  for  soon  after  they  had  information  fron 
several  deserters  who  escaped  to  the  vessels,  and  not  very  long  afte:, 
the  traitor  Hamilton  had  been  in  New  Orleans  they  entered  the  har 
bor.  Little  or  no  resistance  was  made,  and  now  two  small  vessels  ar< 
in  the  harbor  and  command  the  city,  though  they  have  not  yet  sui 
ficient  force  to  land  and  keep  possession.  The  batteries,  constructe< 


869 


’hap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

it  large  expense,  liave  been  destroyed,  and  should  we  be  able  to  drive 
die  vessels  off  again  the  work  of  defenses  would  have  to  be  begun 
ilmost  afresh.  The  withdrawal  of  the  guns  from  the  batteries  and 
aeglect  of  the  defenses  on  the  island  is  justified,  I understand,  as  hav- 
ng  been  done  by  orders  from  the  War  Department.  This  I can  hardly 
3onceive  possible.  I know  that  the  Government  cannot  undertake  to 
lefend  every  point  on  our  coast  against  a formidable  invading  force, 
3ut  Galveston  and  its  harbor  was  the  most  important  point  on  our  coast 
n this  State,  affording  the  enemy  more  facilities  as  a basis  of  opera- 
ions  than  any  other — perhaps  than  all  others.  They  can  break  up  a 
arger  population,  “destroy  more  of  our  communications  and  of  our 
productive  resources,  and  spread  greater  destruction  over  the  same 
space  of  country  than  from  any  other  point.  It  therefore  ought  to 
aave  been  defended  more  completely  and  determinedly  than  any  other. 

[ am  loath  to  believe  that  it  has  ever  been  ordered  that  no  defense 
should  be  made  or  no  risk  of  losing  guns  allowed  to  make  defense 
igainst  such  a force  as  the  enemy  has  yet  had  on  this  coast,  nor  that 
means  at  hand  should  not  be  used  where  there  was  a reasonable  pros- 
pect of  success.  Now,  there  were  four  10-inch  and  two  8-inch  colum- 
biads,  two  64-pounder  rifled  guns,  and  four  32-pounders  sent  to  Gal- 
veston about  a year  since.  There  were  other  32  and  24  pounders  there, 
brought  from  Brownsville  long  before.  Some  of  these  guns — most  of 
them,  I think — had  been  mounted  and  in  position,  and  all  could  have 
been  before  July.  There  was  a regiment  of  artillery,  under  Colonel 
Dook,  on  the  island  and  adjacent,  besides  infantry  at  various  points 
within  distance  to  come  to  their  support  within  a day  or  two.  There 
is  also  a large  supply  of  ammunition  and  ball.  These  means,  actively 
and  rightly  used,  it  does  seem  to  me,  would  have  been  sufficient  to 
repel  any  force  which  the  enemy  have  yet  had'on  our  coast.  I under- 
stand that  the  officers  in  command  of  this  district  think  so,  and  that 
they  would  have  prepared  for  a contest  had  their  orders  allowed  it. 

At  Corpus  Christi  and  Lavaca,  with  much  smaller  means,  defense  was 
successfully  made ; the  places  were  bombarded,  but  the  vessels  were 
driven  off.  It  is  reported  that  at  both  places  a fight  was  made  with- 
out, if  not  contrary  to  the  tenor  of,  orders  from  headquarters.  The  only 
order  from  the  department  which  I have  heard  cited  as  the  ground  of 
General  Hebert’s  non-action  is  one  made  by  Mr.  Benjamin,  as  Secretary 
of  War,  on  February  23  last  [following],  when  masses  of  the  enemy  were 
pressing  on  us  in  Virginia  and  Tennessee.  Parts  of  that  order  have 
been  shown  to  me,  but  I do  not  think  that  it  was  intended  to  be  con- 
strued as  it  has  been,  and  I have  little  doubt  that  the  whole  document 
would  sustain  my  view  of  the  parts  which  I have  seen.  While  it  clearly 
called  for  all  the  troops  that  General  Hubert  had  at  command  to  be 
sent  to  other  States  to  re-enforce  our  armies,  yet  it  distinctly  excepted 
those  on  the  Bio  Grande,  and  also  “ such  as  are  necessary  to  man  his 
batteries.”  It  announced  the  necessity  of  massing  our  troops  in  the 
field,  and  said  that  “if  Texas  is  invaded,  its  effects  must  be  hazarded 
and  our  entire  troops  sent  forward,”  &c. ; yet  I infer  that  it  meant  a 
formidable  invasion — an  invasion  in  larger  force  than  we  could  reason- 
ably resist,  but  that  it  did  not  anticipate  such  an  invasion  would  occur ; 
uor  did  it  require  that  no  defense  should  be  made  and  no  preparation 
to  resist  an  attack  of  such  a character  as  has  been  made  or  as  might 
reasonably  be  expected  for  a long  time. 

I sincerely  trust  that  my  view  of  the  matter  is  right,  for  not  only 
myself  but  the  most  patriotic  and  reliable  men  in  this  State  will  be 
disappointed  if  it  be  otherwise.  I trust  also  that  General  Magruder 


870 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.XXVIL  1 

lias  different  orders  and  larger  discretion  allowed  him  to  provide  for  < 
the  defenses  of  this  State,  so  that  our  loyal  people  may  not  have  cause  1 
to  believe  that  the  Government  is  neglectful  or  intends  to  abandon  their 
coast  defenses. 

The  effect  of  the  possession  of  Galveston  by  the  enemy  and  their 
late  movements  on  the  coast  and  the  information  acquired  by  them  of  ! 
our  condition  from  Hamilton  and  others  will,  I feel  assured,  induce  1 
them  to  send  a large  expedition  against  Texas  this  winter.  Our  young 
men  are  nearly  all  in  the  Army  (all  liable  to  military  duty)  and  most  1 
of  them  in  distant  States.  The  number  of  troops  now  in  this  State,  1 
including  Sibley’s  brigade,  can  hardly  exceed  8,000  men,  and  these  are 
scattered  along  our  Indian  frontier,  the  Bio  Grande,  on  the  coast,  and  1 
in  camps.  Your  call  under  the  conscript  extension  can  hardly  do  more 
than  recruit  old  regiments  by  next  spring.  In  view  of  the  emergency,  j 
General  Hebert  and  Governor  Lubbock  had  a consultation,  I hear,  and 
I see  that  on  General  Hebert’s  authority,  or  call,  the  Governor  has 
issued  his  call  for  5,400  militia  for  ninety-days’  service,  including,  as  ! 
I understand  its  language,  those  liable  to  conscription,  but  not  yet 
enrolled  or  in  actual  service.  I fear  this  may  produce  some  collision 
or  confusion ; certainly  it  will,  unless  it  be  changed  or  the  execution 
of  the  new  conscription  be  suspended  or  postponed  for  the  present  in 
Texas.  I am  inclined  to  think  that  this  would  be  a wise  measure. 
The  season  is  now  so  far  advanced  that  new  conscripts  cannot  be  en- 
rolled and  sent  forward  to  our  distant  regiments  in  time  for  active  serv- 
ice in  Virginia,  Tennessee,  or  Arkansas,  for  I suppose  that  active  opera- 
tions will  soon  cease  for  the  winter  in  those  latitudes.  Indeed,  taking 
new  levies  to  camps  there  in  the  winter  season  from  this  climate  would 
kill  more  of  them  by  disease  than  would  be  by  the  enemy  in  a summer 
campaign.  During  the  winter,  however,  they  might  do  good  service 
here,  and  at  the  same  time  acquire  some  measure  of  discipline  prepara- 
tory to  being  placed  in  service  in  the  army  next  spring.  I suppose  of 
course  that  the  subject  has  been  presented  to  you  already  by  General 
Hebert  or  Governor  Lubbock.  They  doubtless  thought  the  emergency 
too  pressing  to  await  advices  from  you  or  Generals  Magruder  or  Holmes. 
By  the  way,  if  the  general  of  this  department  of  Texas  is  subject  in 
all  things  to  General  Holmes  at  Little  Bock,  and  can  do  nothing  of 
importance  without  his  sanction,  I fear  that  arrangement  will  be  found 
inconvenient.  I supposed  that  the  main  purpose  of  uniting  Texas  and 
Arkansas  in  one  department  was  to  provide  for  the  emergency  of  our 
communication  with  the  seat  of  government  being  interrupted,  so  that 
there  might  be  west  of  the  Mississippi  one  head  or  chief  with  large  dis- 
cretional powers,  but  not  that  at  all  times  he  should  have  absolute 
control  over  movements  in  Texas. 

The  new  conscript  act  does  not  meet  much  opposition,  or  at  least 
little  is  manifested  by  the  people.  They  cheerfully  acquiesce,  having 
entire  confidence  in  you  and  not  doubting  that  it  will  be  no  further  en- 
forced than  necessity  requires.  In  such  case  they  are  as  loyal — as  ready 
to  submit  to  privation  and  sacrifice — as  the  people  of  any  State.  The 
first  act  met  very  general  approbation,  though  the  rigor  and  unneces- 
sary harshness  shown  in  the  manner  of  its  execution  created  some  clamor, 
which  was  mistaken  for  opposition  to  the  law  itself.  The  opponents  of 
the  measure  in  Congress  meet  little  approval,  and  some  of  their  senti- 
ments receive  unqualified  condemnation.  A case  is  now  before  our 
supreme  court  at  Austin  on  habeas  corpus,  instituted  to  test  the  con- 
stitutionality of  the  law.  I have  addressed  a letter  to  our  chief  justice, 
at  his. instance,  on  the  subject,  and  sent  him  copies  of  your  letter  to 


iap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


871 


overnor  Brown  and  of  the  opinion  of  the  Attorney  General.  I confi- 
3ntly  expect  a decision  sustaining  it. 

Onr  currency  is  the  subject  which  causes  anxiety,  it  not  excites  alarm, 
i thoughtful  men.  It  is  surrounded  by  difficulties  on  every  side.  The 
ay  through  them  in  this  time  of  war  is  not  clear  to  me.  I can  only 
ope  that  some  wiser  head  may  devise  an  adequate  remedy.  Everj 
av  I am  inquired  of  as  to  the  prospect  of  peace  or  of  foreign  recogm- 
on  or  aid.  My  uniform  answer  is  that  while  the  indications  seem  more 
tvorable,  and  reasonably  so,  than  heretofore,  there  is  no  ground  to 
xpect  immediate  aid  nor  an  early  peace;  that  we  must  gird  up  our 
>ins  and  put  forth  our  strength  to  meet  more  formidable  efforts  of  the 
oemy  ; that  we  must  fight  through  another  year’s  campaign  at  least  be- 
>re  we  can  hope  for  a cessation  of  hostilities  and  before  foreign  nations 
an  bring  any  negotiation  to  an  issue.  In  short,  that  while  we  may 
ave  hope  of  recognition,  and  that  that  is  the  beginning  of  the  path  to 
eace  yet  to  insure  it  we  must  not  relax  our  efforts  in  any  direction, 
nd  if  we  do  we  will  be  deceived.  I hope  that  I may  be  agreeably  dis- 
ppointed,  but  I fear  that  I am  more  hopeful  than  facts  justify ; yet  I 
ave  full  confidence  that  a just  Godwill  aid  and  provide  for  those  will- 
ig  to  do  what  they  can,  and  that  our  cause  must  triumph  under  His 

uidance.  T . ,,,  ,, 

With  highest  esteem  and  kind  regards,  I am,  sir,  very  respectlully, 

our  friend  and  servant, 


[Indorsement.] 

January  4, 1863. 

Secretary  of  War  for  consideration  and  reference  to  the  order  [folio w- 
Dg]  to  which  reference  is  made. 


[Addenda.] 

War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Fa.,  February  23,  1862. 

Irig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert,  Galveston , Tex. : 

Sir  : Our  recent  disaster  in  Tennessee  has  greatly  exposed  our  line 
>f  communication  with  the  West,  and  the  importance  of  this  line  is  so 
•Teat  that  it  must  be  held  at  any  sacrifice.  You  are  therefore  in- 
fracted at  once  to  send  forward  to  Little  Bock,  there  to  report  to  Maj- 
len.  Earl  Yan  Dorn,  all  the  troops  in  your  command  for  the  defense 
>f  the  coast,  except  such  as  are  necessary  to  man  your  batteries. 

Bo  invasion  of  Texas  is  deemed  probable,  but  if  any  occurs  its 
'fleets  must  be  hazarded,  and  our  entire  forces  must  be  thrown  toward 
he  Mississippi  for  the  defense  of  that  river  and  of  the  Memphis  and 
charleston  Bailroad. 

I do  not  desire  that. you  withdraw  such  troops  as  you  may  have  on 
he  Bio  Grande  or  western  frontier,  but  only  the  troops  you  may  have 
gathered  for  defending  the  Gulf  coast.  If  at  any  point  where  you  have 
mtteries  you  deem  there  is  danger  of  losing  the  guns  by  the  withdrawal 
if  the  land  forces  you  will  remove  the  guns ; but  the  troops  are  to  be 
nished  forward  with  all  possible  rapidity  to  Little  Bock  by  such  routes 
\s  you  deem  best. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 


J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


872 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXTO. 

Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 
Alexandria , La.,  November  21, 1862. 

Hon.  George  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va.  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communi- 
cation of  October  15,  relative  to  the  suspension  of  the  conscript  law  in 
certain  parishes.  In  the  last  report  which  I had  the  honor  to  render  to 
the  Department  I set  forth  the  difficulties  existing  in  many  parishes 
against  the  action  of  this  law,  and  the  list  of  exemptions  is  now  so  much 
increased  by  the  recent  exemption  bill  as  almost  to  nullify  the  operation 
of  the  extension  act.  The  parishes  in  which  it  has  been  found  most  dif- 
ficult to  execute  the  conscript  law  are  the  river  parishes  from  Carroll 
down  and  the  Gulf  parishes  from  New  Orleans  to  the  Sabine  River. 
Acting  upon  the  authority  recently  granted  to  me  I have  empowered 
parties  possessing  local  influence  to  raise  volunteer  organizations  in 
several  of  these  parishes,  but  thus  far  with  very  limited  success.  Ini 
many  instances  it  becomes  necessary  to  scour  the  country  with  cavalry 
in  order  to  bring  the  conscripts  to  the  camps  of  instruction. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  TAYLOR, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 
Alexandria , La .,  November  21,  1862. 

(Received  December  4,  1862.) 

General  S.  Cooper,  C.  S.  A., 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

General  : A telegraphic  dispatch  from  the  honorable  Secretary  of 
War,  dated  November  3,  to  Brig.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith,  relative  to  cloth 
and  wool  in  charge  of  Captain  Sharkey  which  have  arrived  at  Alexan- 
dria, has  been  forwarded  to  me.  Some  weeks  since,  finding  a large 
supply  of  cloth  at  this  place  in  charge  of  no  officer,  Captain  Sharkey 
not  having  arrived,  the  condition  of  the  troops  in  this  district  was  such 
that  clothing  was  absolutely  necessary  to  render  them  efficient  or  even 
available  in  the  field,  and  I therefore  directed  my  chief  quartermaster 
to  take  of  the  cloth  enough  to  clothe  these  troops.  This  he  did,  and  it 
has  been  cut  out  and  distributed  throughout  the  parishes  to  be  made 
up,  a portion  having  already  been  given  out  to  the  troops.  On  the  ar- 
rival of  Captain  Sharkey  the  cloth  and  wool  (with  the  exception  of  the 
simall  quantity  taken  for  the  use  above  mentioned)  were  placed  upon 
steamboats  to  be  transported  to  the  east  bank  of  the  Mississippi  River, 
when  an  order  from  Major-General  Holmes,  commanding  the  Trans- 
Mississippi  Department,  was  received,  directing  all  the  cloth  to  be  car- 
ried to  Little  Rock,  Ark.  Every  facility  has  been  afforded  Captain 
Sharkey  by  me  toward  effecting  the  transportation  of  the  stores  in  his 
charge,  as  also  to  other  officers  passing  through  my  district  with  army 
supplies. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  TAYLOR, 

Major-General , Commanding . 

[Indorsement.] 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office, 

December  8,  1862. 

Respectfully  returned  to  the  Secretary  of  War.  I beg  to  call  his  at’ 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


873 


tention  to  this  as  being  one  of  numerous  instances  in  which  department 
commanders  assume  to  exercise  authority  over  subjects  the  responsi- 
bility for  and  control  of  which  belong  exclusively  to  this  department. 
The  injury  to  the  service  and  the  great  inconvenience  resulting  Irom 
such  conduct  are  most  apparent,  and  I submit  that  the  adoption  ot 

some  mode  to  prevent  its  repetition  is  indispensable. 

A.  U.  MxJii-tCb, 
Quartermaster-  General, 


Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 

Alexandria , November  21, 1862. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  Comdg.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  : 

General  : I reached  this  place  last  night  from  below,  and  found 
your  communication  of  the  12th  instant,  which  had  missed  me  on  the  road. 
Tho  communication  I had  the  honor  of  addressing  you  from  the  Bayou 
Teche,  and  which  you  have  doubtless  received,  explains  the  position  ot 
affairs  in  the  lower  part  of  this  State.  The  enemy  could  not  use  the 
river  without  first  driving  me  from  Donaldsonville  and  La  I ourche 
country,  and  I presume  this  is  but  the  first  step  against  Port  Hudson. 

I sent  a courier  to  General  Beall  to  throw  a force  over  the  river  to  oper- 
ate on  the  enemy’s  rear,  if  he  could  possibly  do  so,  as  this  would  have 
enabled  me  at  the  time  to  crush  Weitzel,  and  thus  delay  operations 
against  Port  Hudson.  Now,  with  the  enemy  in  full  possession  ot  Ber- 
wick Bay  and  firmly  established  on  the  La  Pourche  the  task  would  be 

From  my  present  position  west  of  the  Teche  I cannot  reach  the 
without  making  a long  detour  to  the  north  to  avoid  the  impracticable 
country  between  the  Atchafalaya  and  Mississippi  Elvers  and  striking 
the  latter  above  Port  Hudson. 

To  defend  the  lower  part  of  this  district  against  an  enemy  supreme 
on  the  water  is  simply  an  impossibility.  The  country  is  penetrated  m 
every  direction  by  large,  deep  bayous  and  lakes,  the  deiense  ot  which 
would  require  a large  army.  But  I have  no  idea  the  enemy  can  spare 
troops  at  this  time  for  serious  operations  in  this  quarter.  His  flank  is 
now  clear  to  Port  Hudson,  and  the  great  campaign  must  be  to  open  the 
Mississippi  Eiver.  Were  it  not  for  the  salt  mine  I would  feel  like  tak- 
ing the  responsibility  of  going  over  to  you  with  every  man  and  gun. 
Great  as  my  necessities  were  I would  not  countermand  the  order  lor 
Morrison’s  regiment  to  join  you,  so  deeply  impressed  am  I with  the  im- 
portance of  strengthening  you  to  the  utmost. 

I have  commenced  erecting  a work  on  the  Atchaialaya  at  the  _butte-a- 
la-Eose.  This  is  the  only  point  on  that  stream  at  which  all  the  numer- 
ous branches  and  arms  unite  in  one  channel.  If  it  can  be  held,  it 
secures  us  the  free  use  of  the  Upper  Atchafalaya,  and  gives  us  a means 
of  transporting  salt,  &c.,  to  Vicksburg  so  long  as  we  control  the  Mis- 
sissippi. In  asking  for  a regiment  from  your  side  of  the  river  it  was  tor 
the  purpose  of  giving  some  confidence  and  backbone  to  the  raw  levies, 
composing  the  principal  part  of  my  little  force.  Even  the  temporary 
loan  of  a regiment  I would  not  have  asked  for  had  I known  at  the 
time  of  the  enemy’s  movement  from  above.  Of  course  under  the  cir- 
cumstances of  your  present  position  you  have  need  of  every  man,  and 
you  ought  to  have  25,000  men  from  Holmes. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E,  TAALOE, 
Major-General , 


874 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL  ! 

Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  903.  ) Alexandria , November  21,  1862. 

I.  The  Governor  and  commander-in-chief  has  received  the  following 
communication  from  Major-General  Taylor,  commanding  District  of  i 
Western  Louisiana : 


Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 

Alexandria,  November  21,  1862. 

Hon.  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor : 

Sir  : It  is  notorious  that  a large  number  of  persons  liable  to  military  service  in  the 
armies  of  the  Confederate  States,  deserters,  enrolled  conscripts  who  have  failed  to  re- 
port, and  others,  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  thirty-five,  are  to  he  found  through- 
out the  State.  I would  suggest  and  urge  that  you  cause  the  arrest  of  all  such  persons 
who  are  unable  to  furnish  evidence  that  they  are  legally  exempt  from  service  or  that 
they  have  permission  from  competent  authority  to  he  absent  from  the  camp  or  com- 
mand to  which  they  may  respectively  belong. 

The  necessities  of  the  service  and  justice  to  those  who  are  faithfully  serving  their 
country  in  the  field  alike  demand  that  this  course  should  he  promptly  and  vigorously 
pursued. 

Officers  of  the  militia  or  sheriffs  of  the  parishes  making  the  arrest  should  confine  the 
parties  in  jail  and  report  to  the  nearest  Confederate  or  State  officer  in  command,  and 
the  usual  reward  for  the  arrest  of  deserters  will  he  paid  by  the  Government. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

R.  TAYLOR, 

Maj or-  Genera  l,  Commanding. 


In  conformity  with  the  foregoing  request  commanders  of  regiments 
and  sheriffs  of  parishes  will  cause  the  immediate  arrest  of  all  deserters, 
enrolled  conscripts  who  have  not  reported,  and  all  others,  between  the 
ages  of  eighteen  and  thirty-five,  who  may  be  found  within  the  limits  of 
their  respective  regiments  or  parishes,  and  who  are  unable  to  furnish 
evidence  that  they  are  legally  exempt  from  service  or  that  they  have 
permission  from  competent  authorities  to  be  absent  from  the  camps  or  i 
command  to  which  they  may  respectively  belong,  and  will  confine  the 
parties  arrested  in  the  parish  jail. 

II.  Commanders  of  regiments  or  other  militia  officers  or  sheriffs 
making  arrests  will  report  the  fact  forthwith  to  these  headquarters,  or 
to  the  nearest  Confederate  officer  in  command,  should  there  be  one  in  ! 
the  neighborhood.  The  usual  reward  for  deserters  will  be  paid  by  the  I 
Confederate  States. 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief:  ! 

M.  GBIYOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va .,  November  23,  1862. 

Major-General  Forney, 

Commanding , Mobile , Ala.  : 

General:  Several  letters  have  come. to  this  Department  complain- 
ing of  the  administration  of  military  power  in  Alabama  and  Mississippi 
as  affecting  the  interests  of  the  people  injuriously.  A letter,  which  the 
President  has  referred  to  this  Department,  contains  the  following  para- 
graph : 

Here  (Mobile)  things  look  had  enough.  The  most  immediate  enemy  in  Mobile  is 
starvation,  and  unless  there  can  be  some  change  ih  the  administration  of  the  military 
authority  here  the  people  must  suffer.  No  one  will  bring  wood  for  fear  his  boat  will 
be  seized  ; no  one  corn  or  meal.  Corn  meal  is  $4.25  per  bushel ; wood  $15  per  cord, 
and  not  to  be  had  at  that.  These  are  some  of  our  troubles.  They  are  hard  at  work 


!AP.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  875 

• fix  the  defenses,  which  they  now  discover  to  he  insufficient.  We  have  foreigners 
3re  as  quartermaster  and  engineer;  none  others.  The  people  suffer  from  it. 

The  burden  of  this  correspondence  is  to  show  the  existence  of  vio- 
qice  and  infidelity  in  the  subordinate  departments,  and  as  a necessary 
uollary  laxity  among  the  heads  of  the  department.  Some  of  the 
stters  are  characterized  by  temper,  and  the  Department  hold  its 
pinion  suspended  as  to  the  justice  of  the  complaints.  In  the  letter 
efore  quoted  it  is  said  ano  one  will  bring  wood  for  fear  his  boat  will 
e seized.”  This  habit  of  seizing  private  property  for  the  common  uses 
f the  Government  is  unquestionably  a great  grievance,  and  probably 
lere  have  been  cases  in  which  officers  have  manifested  but  little  con- 
ideration  for  the  interests  or  feelings  of  the  owner. 

General  Orders,  No.  56,  declare  that — 

Necessity  alone  can  warrant  the  impressment  of  private  property  for  public  use; 
ad  whenever  the  requisite  supplies  can  ho  obtained  by  the  consent  of  the  owners  at 
fir  rates  and  without  hazardous  delay  the  military  authorities  will  abstain  from 
le  harsh  proceeding  of  impressment. 

There  is  no  better  evidence  of  a feeble  and  incompetent  administra- 
ion  than  is  exhibited  by  a habitual  resort  to  impressment  as  a source 
f supply.  It  is  the  duty  of  officers  to  employ  forecast  to  provide 
laterial  for  the  Army  by  the  ordinary  and  usual  methods  of  fair  com- 
ierce.  They  are  not  to  frustrate  private  enterprise  in  its  efforts  or  in 
-,s  fruits  by  a violent  appropriation  of  its  instruments  to  the  public  use. 
'hey  are  not  allowed  lazily  to  await  the  efforts  of  private  energy  and 
ctivity  to  collect  for  them  the  means  of  doing  their  duty.  They  should 
epend  upon  their  own -activity,  energy,  and  forethought  to  carry  on 
lie  administration.  When  an  unforeseen  necessity  arises  impressment 
5 justified;  but  if  negligence  and  supineness  have  occasioned  the  ne- 
essity  for  a resort  to  this  method  the  officer  is  blameworthy. 

Some  of  these  letters  complain  in  strong  terms  of  the  action  of  the 
nlitary  authorities  in  the  management  of  the  railroads  and  steamboats 
l Mississippi  and  Alabama.  They  charge  that  they  have  mingled 
rivate  and  personal  interests  with  matters  of  public  concern  and  that 
references  have  been  given  to  individuals  in  conducting  their  com- 
lerce  by  the  interposition  of  official  influence.  These  naturally  awaken 
uspicion  of  corruption  and  infidelity.  This  Department  has  no  au- 
hority  to  regulate  commerce  on  the  highways  or  agencies  of  com- 
lerce.  Whenever  a necessity  exists  it  claims  that  Government  sup- 
lies  and  the  transfer  of  troops  shall  have  a preference  over  other 
emands  for  transportation,  but  no  officer  is  justified  in  making  any 
se  of  this  control  to  advance  any  personal  or  private  interest. 

The  Department  is  mortified  at  the  apparent  discredit  in  which  the 
Quartermaster’s  and  Subsistence  Departments  seem  to  have  fallen 
mong  the  people  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  railroads  from  Mobile  to 
ricksburg.  It  is- the  earnest  wish  of  the  Department  that  fidelity,  ex- 
actness, and  personal  honor  should  appear  in  all  the  acts  of  public  ad- 
linistration  by  officers  of  the  Army.  Last  summer,  upon  some  seizure 
hat  took  place  in  Mississippi,  the  property  of  regular  dealers  was  re- 
sased,  while  that  fraudulently  marked  and  that  belonging  to  specula- 
ors  was  retained.  But  the  Department  does  not  desire  impressment  as 
. means  of  supply  to  be  used  at  all  except  under  the  condition  before 
tated.  It  claims  no  power  to  control  trade,  and  in  the  permissions 
hat  have  been  issued  to  individuals  it  has  not  designed  to  discriminate 
n their  favor.  The  principle  of  its  interference  with  private  property 
f any  kind,  whether  railroads,  steamboats,  or  supplies,  has  been  ex- 
»lained. 


876 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVn- 

The  Department  desires  a report  in  answer  to  this  letter,  showing  tin 
precise  extent  to  which  there  has  been  any  seizure  of  private  property 
or  appropriation  of  railroads  or  steamboats  to  the  public  use  since 
October  1 and  the  necessity  that  existed  therefor,  and  whether  there 
exists  any  ground  for  censure  of  the  officers  or  agents  of  the  Govern 
ment  in  their  management  of  that  business. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  CAMPBELL, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War . 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond , Va.,  November  24,  1862. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon^ 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  return  herewith  the  letter  of  Maj.  Gen.  R 
Taylor,  in  reference  to  the  defense  of  the  Red  and  Washita  Rivers  ancj 
the  appointment  of  Col.  L.  G.  De  Russy  as  superintendent  of  the  works 
As  early  as  the  14th  instant  Capt.  W.  H.  James,  just  then  appointed  ai 
officer  in  the  Provisional  Corps  of  Engineers,  was  ordered  to  report  tc 
Major-General  Taylor  for  the  duty  of  constructing  defenses  on  the 
above-named  rivers  and  the  Atchafalaya,  but  a few  days  ago  I received 
by  telegraph  his  non-acceptance.  As  soon  as  possible  another  officer  o 
the  Provisional  Corps  of  Engineers  will  be  assigned  to  the  duty  ancj 
orders  directing  him  to  report  to  Major-General  Taylor  applied  fori 
Until  such  officer  can  report  in  person  to  General  Taylor  I respectfully 
recommend  that  Colonel  De  Russy  be  retained  as  superintendent  of  the 
proposed  works,  and  after  that  as  a civil  assistant,  should  his  services! 
in  the  opinion  of  the  engineer  officer  assigned  to  the  charge,  be  needed 
Major-General  Taylor’s  letter  is  returned  herewith  with  the  following 
indorsement  by  Colonel  Gorgas,  Chief  of  Ordnance,  viz : 

November  22,  1862. 

Col.  J.  F.  Gilmer,  Chief  Engineer,  <fc. : 

There  are  no  8 or  10  inch  guns  now  disposable.  A month  hence  a couple  of  guns  o: 
this  class  may  he  disposable.  Two  24-pounder  guns  on  siege  carriages  and  two  32 
pounders  on  barbette  carriages  are  disposable  at  Charleston,  S.  C. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  GORGAS, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Ordnance. 

I would  respectfully  recommend  that  the  Chief  of  Ordnance  be  directed} 
to  send  the  guns  disposable  at  Charleston  to  Major-General  Taylor  fox 
the  defense  of  Red  and  Washita  Rivers. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  GILMER, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau . 

[Indorsements.] 

Let  Colonel  Gilmer’s  suggestions  be  carried  out. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 

Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond , Va.y  December  11,  1862. 

Two  24-pounders  on  siege  carriages  and  two  32-pounders  on  barbette 


-hap.  xxvn.j  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  877 

carriages,  with  ammunition  and  fixtures  complete,  were  sent  by  the 
Ordnance  Department  to  General  Taylor  on  November  27. 

J.  F.  GILMER, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau. 


[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 

Alexandria , Xu.,  November  1,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond  Va. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that,  to  meet  the  just 
wishes  of  the  citizens,  I have  determined  to  erect  on  Red  and  Washita 
Rivers  works  for  defense.  There  is  no  suitable  point  below  the  junc- 
tion of  Black  and  Red  Rivers  at  which  to  build  a defensive  work ; con- 
sequently the  two  rivers  must  be  defended  separately,  if  at  all.  As 
superintendent  of  the  work  on  Red  River  I have  appointed  Col.  L.  G. 
De  Russy,  formerly  colonel  of  the  Second  Louisiana  Volunteers,  an  en- 
gineer officer  of  reputed  ability.  Colonel  De.  Russy  served  for  some  time 
in  the  engineer  corps  of  General  Polk  at  Fort  Pillow  and  elsewhere, 
during  which  time  he  informs  me  that  he  was  allowed  and  received  the 
pay  of  a major  of  staff.  I therefore  respectfully  request  that  he  be 
allowed  the  same  pay  during  the  period  that  he  shall  be  actively 
engaged  in  the  work  above  mentioned.  I have  appointed  Colonel  De 
Russy  to  this  position  in  default  of  another  engineer  officer  already  in 
service  in  the  district  not  otherwise  engaged.  For  the  defense  of  these 
rivers  I shall  need  eight  10  or  8 inch  guns,  and  respectfully  request  that 
this  my  application  for  them  may  meet  the  favorable  consideration  of 
the  War  Department,  and  that  the  guns  be  sent  out  to  me. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  TAYLOR, 

Major-General , Commanding. 

[Indorsements.] 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

November  14,  1862. 

Respectfully  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

JASPER  S.  WHITING, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

November  18, 1862. 

Referred  to  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  to  report  upon  the  matter  herein 
contained  and  to  suggest  whatever  may  be  suitable  in  reference  to 
them. 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

J.  A.  CAMPBELL, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War. 

Engineer  Bureau,  November  22,  1862. 

Will  the  Chief  of  Ordnance  please  to  inform  me  if  the  guns  applied 
for  by  Major-General  Taylor  for  the  defense  of  Red  and  Washita  Rivers, 
viz,  eight  10  or  8 inch  guns,  can  be  supplied?  If  not,  what  guns  can 
be  furnished  ? 

J.  F.  GILMER, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau. 


878 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xXVD 

November  22,  1862. 


Col.  J.  F.  Gilmer,  Chief  Engineer , &c. : 

There  are  no  8 or  10  inch  guns  now  disposable.  A month  hence 
couple  ot  guns  of  this  class  may  be  disposable.  Two  24-pounder  gum 
on  siege  carriages  and  two  32-pounders  on  barbette  carriages  are  dis" 
posable  at  Charleston,  S.  C. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  GOBGAS, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Ordnance. 


Headquarters 
General  H.  P.  Bee: 


Sub -Military  District  of  Houston, 
Houston , Tex.,  November  25,  1862. 


My  Dear  General  : I have  received  (yesterday)  your  letter  of  the 
21st  instant.  If  General  Hebert  desires  me  to  evacuate  Virginia  Point 
why  in  the  world  does  he  not  give  me  an  order  to  that  effect?  I give 
you  below  copies  of  the  two  communications  I have  received  concerning 
that  operation.  The  first,  dated  November  3,  reads  as  follows: 


The  general  commanding  directs  that  should  you  have  cause  to  apprehend  an  at- 
tack  upon  your  line  of  communication  with  Houston  you  will  evacuate  Virginia 
Fomt,  bringing  away  all  guns,  ammunition,  platforms,  &c.,  and  take  position  with 
your  troops  on  the  Houston  side  of  Simmes’  Bayou.  All  means  in  your  power  must  be 
used  to  keep  the  enemy  from  penetrating  into  the  interior. 

I am,  &c., 


SAMUEL  BOYER  DAVIS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


The  second  letter,  dated  November  21,  reads  as  follows: 

I am  instructed  by  the  general  commanding  to  say  to  you  that  the  guns  at  Virginia  I 
Point  and  the  tete-de-pont  must  run  no  risk  of  being  lost.  They  must  be  saved  at  all 
hazards,  as  they  are  necessary  for  inland  batteries. 

I have,  &c., 

SAMUEL  BOYER  DAVIS, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

You  see,  my  dear  general,  that  the  whole  matter  is  subject  to  the  fact 
that  I shall  have  cause  to  apprehend  an  attack  upon  my  line  of  com- 
munication with  Houston.  Now,  Pyron’s  regiment  at  Columbus,  Green’s 
at  Hempstead,  and  Beily’s  at  Millican  can  without  difficulty  be  con- 
centrated at  Harrisburg  or  below  within  sixty  hours’  notice  of  the 
arrival  of  a landing  force,  and  I apprehend  no  longer  fatal  results  from 
an  attempt  to  outflank  me  at  Virginia  Point.  The  evacuation  of  the 
point  must  have  a disheartening  influence  upon  our  people.  You  are 
aware  of  their  feelings  at  the  news  of  the  abandonment  of  Galveston, 
which  was  a movement  dictated  by  plain  common  sense.  When  the 
general  was  informed  of  it  I received  a letter  from  his  adjutant-general, 
dated  October  8,  from  which  I quote: 

If  compelled  to  evacuate  Galveston  before  a superior  force  of  the  enemy  you  must 
distribute  your  forces  in  accordance  with  previous  instructions,  so  as  to  hold  Virginia 
Point,  the  railroad  bridge,  the  passage  to  Houston  and  into  the  interior  (Dickenson’s 
Bayou,  Buffalo  Bayou,  Trinity  River,  &c.). 


This  was  an  order  which  the  suggestions  above  copied  cannot  rescind. 
I wish  to  do  my  duty  irrespective  of  personal  considerations.  Did  I 
believe  that  the  interests  of  the  country  and  policy  should  require  the 
evacuation  of  Virginia  Point  I would  proceed  to  it  at  once,  shrinking 
from  no  responsibility  and  regardless  of  public  censure,  to  which  I attach 


!hap.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


879 


little  importance  when  I believe  I am  doing  right  in  opposition  to  public 
opinion;  but  at  this  day  to  withdraw  the  guns  from  a position  in  which 
they  are  expected  to  inflict  injury  to  the  enemy,  to  lay  them  on  the  ground 
at  some  one  of  our  railroad  depots  without  any  actual  use  for  them,  would 
cause  our  people  to  believe  that  there  will  be  no  end  to  our  retreating 
movements,  and  Houston,  Washington,  La  Grange,  &c.,  will  leel  as 
insecure  as  Galveston  now  is,  and  little  by  little  our  people  will  give  up 
all  hope  and  yield  to  apathy.  Would  the  general  write  to  me,  “Evacuate 
Virginia  Point  at  once,  send  your  guns  to  such  or  such  a place,  and 
assume  upon  yourself  the  whole  responsibility,”  I would  not  hesitate  one 
moment;  but  as  it  now  is,  and  as  I have  already  stated  the  matter, 
being  left  at  my  discretion  upon  the  contingency  of  an  attack  upon  my 
rear,  which  I do  not  apprehend  at  present,  I cannot  act  in  accordance 
with  the  suggestions  I have  received. 

Very  respectfully,  [X,  j>  DEBEAY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston.] 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  Department, 

Little  j Rock,  Ark.,  November  26,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder, 

Prov.  Army  Confed.  States , Comdg .,  &c.,  Disk  of  Texas: 

General:  I am  instructed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to 
inform  you  he  has  ordered  the  brigade  of  General  Sibley  to  the  vicinity 
of  Vicksburg,  under  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  W.  R.  Scurry.  The  gen- 
eral requests  me  also  to  inform  you  he  has  never  been  able  to  get  a 
report  or  return  of  troops  in  the  Texas  District,  and  wishes  you  would 
furnish  one  so  soon  as  you  can. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

’ 8 ’ S.  S.  ANDERSON, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 
hTo.  906.  ) Alexandria , November  27,  1862. 

I.  Major-General  Taylor,  commanding  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 
having  no  longer  necessity  for  the  detachments  called  out  under  Orders, 
No.  898,  from  Avoyelles,  Pointe  Couple,  and  Saint  Landry,  these  de- 
tachments will  be  disbanded  on  receipt  of  this  order  and  ordered  to 
their  respective  homes. 

* * ***** 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

M.  GRIVOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  District  of  Texas, 

No.  9.  1 San  Antonio , Tex.,  November  27,  1862. 

Until  further  orders  Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee  is  placed  in  command  of 
the  District  of  Texas,  and  will  turn  over  the  command  to  Maj.  Gen. 
John  Bankhead  Magruder  upon  his  arrival. 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert: 

SAMUEL  BOYER  DAVIS, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


880 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond , November  27,  1862. 

Capt.  Ed.  Gotheil, 

Engineer  Corps,  P.  A.  C.  $.,  Richmond , Va. : 

Captain  : You  will  proceed  without  delay  under  the  orders  herewith 
to  Alexandria,  La.,  and  report  in  person  to  Maj.  Gen.  R.  Taylor,  com- 
manding Department  of  Western  Louisiana,  for  duty  as  an  engineer 
officer  on  the  defenses  of  Red  River  and  other  approaches  now  open  to 
the  enemy. 

The  importance  of  defending  the  water  channels  penetrating  Western 
Louisiana  from  the  Mississippi  River  is  fully  appreciated  by  the  War 
Department,  and  it  is  hoped  something  may  be  done  to  this  end  at  an 
early  day. 

It  may  be  possible  to  obstruct  the  channel  of  the  Red  River  at  some 
point  near  its  mouth — if  not  at  a higher  point — with  timber  made  into 
rafts,  cribs,  or  driven  as  piles.  Such  obstructions  should  be  commanded 
if  possible  by  guns  placed  on  a commanding  position,  making  it  difficult, 
if  not  impossible,  for  the  enemy  to  remove  them.  Batteries  should  be 
built  for  the  guns,  giving  as  good  shelter  and  cover  as  possible,  and  the 
batteries  should  be  connected  with  land  fronts  of  sufficient  strength  if 
possible  to  resist  assault,  thus  enabling  a small  garrison,  say  400  or  500 
men,  to  hold  the  position  for  a time  and  until  they  could  be  relieved  by 
the  mobilized  forces  of  the  department.  Of  course  the  trace  of  each 
work  must  be  of  small  development  to  fulfill  these  conditions. 

Careful  reconnaissances  of  the  Atchafalaya  and  Washita  should  be 
made,  with  a view  to  decide  upon  a proper  defense  should  it  be  deemed 
desirable  by  the  general  commanding.  For  the  want  of  guns  of  heavy 
caliber  field  batteries  alone  may  have  to  be  relied  upon  for  protecting 
the  obstructions.  What  is  to  be  done  should  be  done  promptly;  there- 
fore much  must  be  left  to  your  judgment.  I have  just  learned  that  the 
Chief  of  Ordnance  can  furnish  two  24-pounders  on  siege  carriages  and 
two  32-pounders  on  barbette  carriages  for  the  defense  of  the  rivers  in 
question,  and  that  they  will  be  ordered  at  once  from  Charleston,  S.  C., 
to  Major-General  Taylor. 

Funds  will  be  placed  to  your  credit  at  Shreveport,  La.,  for  defraying 
the  expenses  of  the  contemplated  works.  You  will  keep  the  usual  dis- 
bursing accounts,  and  forward  the  same  to  this  bureau  at  the  end  of  each 
quarter,  viz,  31st  March,  30th  June,  30th  September,  and  31st  Decem- 
ber. A monthly  cash  statement  for  each  month  of  the  year  will  also  be 
sent  to  this  office,  with  a report  of  your  operations. 

Yery  respectfully,  yours, 

J.  F.  GILMER, 

Colonel  of  Engineers , in  Charge  of  Bureau . 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,H.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

Ho.  1.  J Houston , Tex,,  November  29,  1862. 

I.  Major-General  Magruder  hereby  assumes  command  of  this  district. 
Commanding  officers  of  sub-districts  and  of  separate  commands  will 
forthwith  forward  to  these  headquarters  field  returns  of  their  troops, 
accompanied  by  letters  giving  such  detailed  information  in  relation  to 
their  commands  as  may  be  necessary  for  the  information  of  the  major- 
general  commanding. 

II.  The  chief  quartermaster,  commissary,  ordnance  officer,  medical 


hap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


881 


.fficer,  and  engineer  officer  recently  under  the  immediate  orders  of 
Brigadier-General  Hubert  will  forward  without  delay  to  these  headquar- 
ers  a general  statement  of  the  operations  of  their  departments  and  of 
heir  present  condition. 

III.  The  commanding  officer  of  the  troops  raised  for  service  in  Ari- 
;ona  and  the  commanding  officer  of  what  is  known  as  Sibley’s  brigade 
nil  report  by  letter  without  delay  the  numbers  and  condition  of  their 
roops,  how  armed,  and  the  amount  of  ammunition  on  hand,  sending 
ield  returns  if  practicable. 

IV.  The  superintendent  of  conscripts  and  officers  commanding  camps 
>f  instruction  will  also  furnish  without  delay  to  these  headquarters  de- 
ailed  reports  of  their  operations  and  of  the  state  of  their  commands. 

Y.  The  following-named  officers  will  constitute  the  staff  of  the  major- 
general  commanding  the  district,  and  will  be  obeyed  and  respected 
iccordingly : 

Adjutant  and  inspector  general’s  department:  Maj.  A.  G.  Dickinson, 
lapt.  E.  P.  Turner,  assistant  adjutant-generals. 

Maj.  B.  Bloomfield,  quartermaster’s  department. 

Maj.  E.  B.  Pendleton,  commissary  department. 

Maj.  J.  B.  Eustis,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  acting 
ordnance  officer. 

First  Lieut.  George  A.  Magruder,  artillery,  Provisional  Army  of  the 
Confederate  States,  First  Lieut.  H.  M.  Stanard,  cavalry,  Provisional 
Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  aides-de-camp. 

Ali  communications  will  be  addressed  to  Maj.  A.  G.  Dickinson,  assist- 
mt  adjutant-general,  through  the  regular  channel. 

YI.  For  the  present  the  headquarters  of  the  district  are  established 
it  Houston,  Tex. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder: 

A.  G.  DICKINSON, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 


Headquarters  First  District  of  Texas, 

San  Antonio , Tex.,  November  30,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  S.  S.  Anderson, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Trans-Miss.  Dept.,  Little  Roclc,  ArJc.  : 

Sir  : In  view  of  the  speedy  departure  for  Arkansas  and  the  delay 
n the  arrival  of  Major-General  Magruder  Brigadier-General  Hubert 
turned  over  the  command  of  this  district  to  me  on  yesterday.  Having 
jeen  specially  charged  by  the  War  Department,  under  the  direction  of 
General  Hebert,  with  the  maintenance  of  peaceful  relations  with  the 
idjoining  States  of  Mexico,  I have  from  time  to  time,  through  that  officer, 
nformed  the  authorities  at  Richmond  of  current  events  in  that  connec- 
:ion,  and  now  avail  myself  of  my  present  position  to  forward  such  in- 
formation as  seems  interesting. 

Considerable  anxiety  has  been  felt  for  the  last  two  weeks  from  rumors 
reaching  me  that  the  Abolition  consul  at  Matamoras  was  enlisting  and 
organizing  the  citizens  of  Mexico,  as  well  as  the  renegade  traitors  from 
Texas,  with  a view  of  joining  the  forces  of  the  enemy  when  they  landed 
it  the  mouth  of  the  Rio  Grande  and  depredating  on  the  settlements  of 
Western  Texas.  From  intercepted  letters  I ascertained  that  the  said 
consul  had  promised  his  allies  all  the  country  to  the  Nueces  as  a reward 

56  R R— VOL  xv 


882 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 


for  their  services.  Immediate  steps  were  taken  to  dispose  of  my  cavalry 
force  so  as  to  crush  out  this  movement  as  soon  as  it  was  made,  and 
representations  were  made  to  the  Governors  of  the  adjoining  States  of ; 
Mexico  as  to  the  ill  effects  which  would  ensue  from  such  a movement.  I 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  state  that  answers  have  been  received  to 
my  communications,  assuring  me  that  the  rumors  had  been  exaggerated  | 
and  that  the  disposable  force  of  those  States  (supposed  to  be  ample)  will 
be  promptly  used  to  prevent  any  such  movement. 

Through  the  influence  of  Mr.  Corwin,  United  States  minister  to  Mex- 
ico, the  tone  of  the  Juarez  Government  in  Mexico  has  been  hostile  to  our 
cause,  and  at  his  dictation  various  measures  have  been  initiated  cal- 
eulated  to  annoy  and  injure  us.  Finding  that  the  decrees  of  the  Supreme 
Government  were  unnoticed  and  disobeyed  by  Governor  Vidaurri,  of  the 
States  of  Nuevo-Leon  and  Oohahuila,  who  has  upon  all  occasions  evinced 
the  most  friendly  spirit  toward  our  cause  and  people,  they  have  finally 
decreed  martial  law  on  their  frontiers,  forbid  the  export  or  import  of 
any  article  whatever  from  Texas,  and  closed  their  custom-houses,  &c. ; 
and  knowing  that  Governor  Vidaurri  would  not  obey,  they  named  a 
new  governor  and  sent  him  out  to  displace  him.  Vidaurri  has  set  this 
order  at  defiance,  and  the  people,  in  the  face  of  it,  have  re-elected  him  I 
Governor,  the  elections  coming  on  just  at  that  time.  General  Cornou- 
fort,  who  marched  to  Mexico  from  this  frontier  with  its  contingent  for  i 
the  war  with  the  French,  promptly  notified  the  Jaurez  Government  that  | 
he  should  sustain  Vidaurri,  and,  if  necessary,  march  his  troops  back  to  j 
Nuevo  Leon.  The  result  is  that  the  new  governor  will  not  attempt  to 
assume  his  position,  and  an  event  so  injurious  to  our  interests  is  happily 
avoided. 

The  commanding  general  is  doubtless  aware  of  the  great  advantage 
we  are  deriving  from  the  trade  with  Mexico.  With  the  glittering  attrac- 1 
tion  of  our  cotton  the  whole  available  resources  of  Mexico  are  being 
brought  to  us.  Shoes,  blankets,  cloth,  powder,  lead,  saltpeter,  sulphur, 
&c.,  are  now  coming  in  in  quantity  Which  will  soon  supply  our  wants,  j 
But  few  Supplies  indeed  reach  us  from  other  sources,  for  the  foreign 
trade  of  Matamoras,  while  anxious  to  get  our  cotton,  prefer  to  pay  specie 
to  exchanging  goods  for  it.  I feel  authorized  to  say  to  the  general  com- 
manding that  if  he  will  authorize  cotton  to  be  purchased  and  stored  at 
San  Antonio  every  article  manufactured  in  Mexico  in  required  quan- 
tity will  be  brought  here  and  exchanged  for  it  at  from  15  to  25  per 
cent,  advance  on  cost  and  charges.  The  Government  now  pays  in  Con- 
federate money  from  100  to  1,000  per  cent.  I sincerely  wish,  for  the 
good  of  my  country,  that  I could  attract  the  attention  of  the  Govern- 
ment to  the  rich  mine  of  wealth  and  power  she  has  in  this  cotton.  Every 
bale  should  be  purchased  and  all  transactions  be  made  on  that  basis.  It 
will  obtain  for  us  every  article  that  is  desired;  it  will  put  our  currency 
at  par,  and  it  will  save  the  people  and  country  from  the  extortion  of  the 
Jews  and  Gentiles  who  are  preying  on  our  vitals.  The  occasion  does 
not  allow  me  to  extend  this  subject,  but  I hazard  no  official  or  personal 
reputation  in  saying,  in  a word,  that  within  six  months,  by  the  exercise 
of  high  military  powers,  the  currency  will  be  available  to  the  Govern- 
ment and  soldiers  and  supplies  of  all  sorts  for  the  ensuing  year  be  se- 
cured beyond  a doubt. 

I respectful!}"  ask  that  the  order  of  the  general  commanding  Trans-  ' 
Mississippi  Department,  forbidding  the  issue  of  bacon  to  the  troops, 
may  be  modified,  so  that  the  army  in  this  section  ot  the  State,  whose 
supplies  are  obtained  here  and  which  supplies  are  not  available  for 
the  army  in  Arkansas,  may  receive  it. 


hap.  XX VII. ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


883 


I would  respectfully  call  the  attention  of  the  general  commanding  to 
he  order  from  the  Headquarters  of  the  Army  forbidding  the  purchase  or 
ssue  of  coffee  as  part  of  the  ration.  The  article  can  be  purchased  at 
rom  50  to  80  cents  per  pound  in  this  market  and  in  desired  quantities ; 
tnd  when  it  is  considered  that  the  pay  of  a soldier  at  the  present  de- 
ireciated  rate  of  our  currency  will  not  buy  a calico  dress  for  his  wife,  I 
eel  justified  in  asking  that  the  component  parts  of  the  ration,  being 
iqually  the  due  of  the  soldier  as  his  monthly  pay,  may  be  issued  to  him 
vhen  it  can  be  obtained  at  a reasonable  price.  If  the  influence  of  the 
:ommanding  general  is  brought  to  bear  on  the  subject  perhaps  the 
;oldiers  of  the  Trans-Mississippi  Department  will  be  benefited  thereby. 

Major-General  Magruder  is  reported  to  have  arrived  at  Houston. 
Brigadier- General  Hubert  will  leave  on  Tuesday,  the  2d  proximo,  for 
Little  Rock. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army , Commanding. 

[Indorsement.] 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  Department, 

Little  Boclc,  Ark.,  December  22,  1862. 

In  the  absence  of  Major-General  Holmes,  who  has  gone  to  Fort  Smith 
chese  communications  (copies)  are  respectfully  forwarded  to  the  Adju 
ant  and  Inspector  General. 

S.  S.  ANDERSON, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Trans-Miss.  Dept. 


Ibstract  from  Return  of  the  District  of  Texas , New  Mexico,  and  Arizona,  commanded  by 
Map  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder,  for  November,  1862  ( headquarters  Houston,  Tex.). 


Command. 


Present  for 
duty. 


-SrO 
eS  c3 
fcJ) 


Horses. 


Pieces  of  artil- 
lery. 


sub-District  of  the  Bio  Grande,  Brig. 
Gen.  H.  P.  Bee,  commanding: 

Corpus  Cliristi,  infantry,  cavalry, 
and  artillery. 

Lavaca,  infantry,  cavalry,  and 
artillery. 

Camp  Saiado,  infantry 

Camp  Morgan,  cavalry 

Camp  near  San  Antonio,  cavalry. . 

Camp  near  Columbus,  cavalry 

Camp  near  Oakland,  cavalry 

Port  Clark,  cavalry 

Atascosa,  cavalry 

Binggold  Barracks,  infantry  and 
cavalry. 

Fort  Brown,  cavalry* 

Carrizo,  cavalry  * 

Fort  McIntosh,  cavalry* 

Sub-District  of  Houston,  Col.  X.  B. 
Debray  commanding: 

Fort  Hebert,  infantry  and  artil- 
lery. 

Harrisburg,  cavalry 

Velasco,  infantry,  cavalry,  and 
artillery. 


23 


435 


532 


G56 


76 


18 


6 


10 


190 


267 


370 


1 


9 

6 

13 

31 

27 

3 

4 
17 


289 

100 

236 

474 

443 

77 

54 

275 


348 

118 

310 

605 

495 

106 

65 

337 


404 

153 

413 

769 

623 

163 

80 

363 


144  

410  

722  7 


79 


64 


1, 208 


1,  698 


2, 148 


29 

31 


569  708 

434  524 


814 

684 


852 

315 


884 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  District  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona,  <fc. — Cont’d. 


Command. 


Present  for 
duty. 


p<© 


Horses. 


Pieces  of 
lery. 


artil- 


Sub-District  of  Houston — Continued. 

Beaumont,  infantry,  cavalry,  and 
artillery. 

Matagorda,  cavalry 

Houston,  infantry  and  light  bat 
tery. 

Simmes’  Bayou,  cavalry  (unal 
tached). 

Clear  Creek,  cavalry  (unattached) 

Highland  Bayou,  cavalry  (unat 
tached). 

Morgan’s  Point,  cavalry  (unat 
tached). 

Harrisburg,  sappers  and  miners 
Lieut.  Col.  Hardeman  commanding: 

Columbus,  Arizona  Brigade  t 

Captain  Bountree  commanding: 

Bichmond,  Partisan  Corps 


21 


413 


497 


Grand  total. 


294 

170 


350 

207 


58 


60 


76 

23 

500 

125 


333 


5,  914 


8,  087 


636 


497 

724 


494 

104 


84 


85 


85 


125 


10,  007 


3,  730 


25 


* No  return  received. 


t No  return;  about  500  men  armed. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex.,  December  1,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

Expedition  has  sailed  from  New  York  for  Texas.  I find  this  dis- 
trict sadly  in  want  of  more  light  artillery.  Please  give  an  order  for 
two  batteries  to  be  turned  over  to  lieutenants  whom  I have  sent  to 
Jackson,  Miss.,  to  receive  them  from  Columbus. 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER. 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex.,  December  1,  1862. 

Lieutemant-General  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Mississippi : 

Sir  : An  immediate  invasion  of  Texas  being  expected,  and  finding 
this  district  sadly  in  need  of  light  artillery,  I have  the  honor  to  request 
that  you  will  send  me  in  charge  of  lieutenants  two  batteries,  with  a full 
supply  of  ammunition,  from  Columbus,  Miss.  I understand  there  is  a 
good  deal  of  artillery  at  that  place,  and  I trust  you  will  be  able  at  once 
to  comply  with  my  request.  I find  that  the  small  battery  of  light 
artillery  known  as  the  Valverde  Battery,  attached  formerly  to  Sibley’s 
brigade,  has  been  ordered  and  has  gone  forward  to  join  General  Holmes’ 
command.  Want  of  time  prevents  me  from  obtaining  orders  in  regard, 
to  this  matter  from  Richmond. 

I am,  general,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding . 


CHAr.  XXVII.  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


885 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  282.  J Richmond , Va .,  December  2,  1862. 

######* 

IY.  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley,  Provisional  Array,  will  proceed  to  New 
Iberia,  La.,  and  resume  command  of  bis  brigade,  reporting  by  letter  to 
Lieut.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  commanding  Trans-Mississippi  Department. 
# ###### 


By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 


JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  ( Headquarters  District  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  288.  J - Mobile , December  1,  1862. 

# # * * # # # 

IY.  Brigadier-General  Yaughn  with  his  command  will  proceed  with- 
out delay  to  Meridian,  Miss.,  and  report  to  Lieutenant-General  Pem- 
berton, commanding  Department  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 
headquarters  at  Jackson. 

# # # * # * # 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  H.  Forney : 

S.  GROOM, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Rutersville,  Tex.,  December  2, 1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Maoruder, 

Commanding  District  of  Texas  : 

General:  Since  our  conversations  of  last  week  some  thoughts  have 
occurred  to  me  perhaps  worth  early  utterance : 

1st.  In  case  of  an  attempt  upon  the  city,  such  as  we  discussed,  should 
our  success  only  extend  to  the  expulsion  of  the  vessels  beyond  Pelican, 
it  would  be  time  enough  then  to  decide  the  question  of  retiring  our 
guns  again  to  the  main-land.  It  is  highly  probable,  however,  if  the 
attack  were  supported  by  a menace  of  two  or  three  boats  coming  down 
the  bay,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the  enemy  would  evacuate  the 
entire  bay.  This  is  particularly  true  if  the  attack  were  made  in  the 
night,  as  it  should  be.  My  confidence  of  success  is  gradually  increasing. 

2d.  A boat  attempting  to  get  out  by  way  of  San  Luis  Pass,  if  belated, 
might  better  pass  through  the  canal  into  the  Brazos  River  and  there 
await  in  sight  of  the  Gulf,  but  concealed  by  a skirt  of  woods,  a safe 
time  to  pass  over  the  Brazos  Bar.  This  move  may  be  lost  by  delay ; 
but  the  attempt  upon  Galveston,  if  made  at  all,  should  be  timed  to  suit 
any  move  caused  by  the  attack  upon  Sabine  of  the  vessels  at  Galveston 
in  the  way  of  succor  to  those  in  Sabine. 

3d.  There  would  be  no  difficulty  in  getting  out  of  the  Brazos  River 
and  running  the  blockade,  which  has  never  been  kept  up  for  that  river, 
nor  would  there  be  much  peril,  I think,  in  passing  a boat  around  to  the 
Brazos;  but  I should  fear  very  much  any  attempt  to  get  a boat  out  at 
San  Luis  Pass  after  her  movement  in  that  direction  had  been  detected 
by  the  enemy.  Her  transit  into  the  Brazos  would  be  explained  by  many 
reasons,  such  as  the  transportation  of  corn  and  supplies  along  that 


886 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  X MEX.  [Chap.  XXVI 

river  for  troops  stationed  near;  whereas  her  entrance  into  Chocolat 
must  be  temporary  and  suspicious. 

Very  respectfully  submitted. 

C.  G.  FOBSHEY, 

Chief  Engineer . 

P.  S. — Should  emergency  require  it  I may  be  reached  in  about  fiftee 
hours  from  Houston.  At  all  events  I expect  to  return  in  a week. 


Port  Hudson,  December  2,  1862. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 


Present  for  duty,  5,500. 


WM.  N.  B.  BEALL, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex.,  December  3,  1862. 

Assistant  Adjutant-General, 

Trans- Mississippi  Department,  Little  Rock,  Ark. : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  Colonel  Gould’s  (Twenty-thirc 
regiment  of  Texas  cavalry,  now  stationed  at  or  near  Clarksville,  Be 
Biver  County,  Tex.,  is  at  this  time  very  much  required  for  service  i 
this  district.  I have  reliable  information  in  regard  to  the  fleet  whic( 
sailed  from  New  York  under  General  Banks,  and  am  expecting  that  e:> 
pedition  in  Galveston  Bay  or  the  Bio  Grande  daily.  It  consists  of  Co: 
coran’s  Legion,  of  about  6,000  men,  and  two  Maine  regiments.  I wi 
require  as  much  force  as  1 can  possibly  muster  to  meet  them,  and  hav 
earnestly  to  request  that  this  regiment  be  left  in  the  State  subject  to  m 
orders,  and  for  the  purpose  of  saving  time  be  ordered  to  report  withoii 
delay  at  Columbus,  Colorado  County,  Tex.  The  above  is  but  the  fir* 
installment  of  General  Banks’  command. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGBUDEB, 
Major-General , Comdg.  District  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz. 


Headquarters  Conscript  Service, 

Austin,  Tex.,  December  4, 1862.  i 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  call  the  attention  of  the  commandin 
major-general  to  the  fact  that  in  certain  German  settlements  resistanc 
to  conscription  is  seriously  contemplated,  and,  if  in  his  judgment 
seems  proper,  I would  be  giad  to  have  placed  at  my  disposal  a mounte 
force  sufficient  for  the  enforcement  of  the  laws,  the  letter,  copy  here 
with  inclosed,  is  only  one  of  several  that  I have  received  of  the  sain 
tenor  from  enrolling  officers. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedier 
servant, 

J.  P.  FLEWELLEN, 
Major  and  Superintendent  of  Conscripts. 


Chap.  XXvn.)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


887 


[In  closure.] 


Enrolling  Office, 

Industry , Austin  County , Tex .,  November  28,  18G2. 


Maj.  J.  P.  Flewellen, 

Superintendent  of  Conscripts , Austin,  Tex. : 

Sir  : The  above  thirty- two  names  * are  all  Germans  except  four.  Th'i  y 
are  remarkably  stubborn,  and  I am  satisfied  do  not  intend  to  submit  to 
enrollment.  I shall  therefore  need  a force  to  bring  them  m,  and  as  the 
militia  nearly  all  sympathize  with  them  I cannot  safely  rely  upon  them, 
and  would  suggest  that  a military  force  of  at  least  one  good  company 
be  placed  under  my  orders,  and  to  be  well  supplied  with  provisions  or 
money  to  obtain  them  in  the  country,  aud  to  be  mounted  and  well 


armed.  , n . . , , . 

1 deem  it  my  duty  in  this  connection  to  say  that  there  is  evidently  a 
spirit  of  insubordination  existing  among  the  Germans  in  this  region.  I 
have  it  from  the  most  reliable  authority  that  they  contemplate  resist- 
ance to  the  conscript  law  as  well  as  to  the  contemplated  draft.  Sundry 
meetings  have  been  held  to  concert  measures  of  resistance.  Several  ol 
the  meetings  were  held  in  secret,  and  the  last  a public  meeting,  in  which 
they  resolved  to  petition  to  the  Governor,  asking  that  their  families  be 
provided  for  and  themselves  armed  and  clothed  as  a preliminary  to 
their  submitting  to  the  laws  and  entering  the  service.  These  meetings 
were  largely  attended— by  400  to  500  persons.  If  I am  furnished  with 
force  sufficient  to  vindicate  the  majesty  of  the  law  at  once  I think  they 
will  submit  without  a struggle;  but  there  is  danger  in  delay.  If  it  suits 
your  convenience  I would  prefer  that  Capt,  E.  W.  Hargrove  or  Capt. 
J.  11.  McCown  (both  are  now  stationed  at  Hempstead,  this  county)  be  de- 
tailed for  this  duty. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

A.  J.  BELL, 

Enrolling  Officer , Austin  County , Texas. 


Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Louisiana  Militia,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  908.  ] Alexandria , December  4,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  E.  B.  Todd,  commanding  Eleventh  Brigade,  Louisiana 
Militia,  should  he  deem  it  necessary  for  the  defense  of  the  parishes  of 
Madison,  Carroll,  and  Tensas,  and  to  prevent  the  enemy  to  effect  a 
landing  or  to  proceed  into  the  interior  of  the  State,  and  if  it  be  neces- 
sary to  give  aid  and  assistance  to  the  Confederate  authorities  to  repel 
any  attack  by  the  enemy,  shall  call  out  into  active  service  the  militia 
force  of  his  brigade  and  all  persons  who  are  not  subject  to  conscription 
between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty  years,  and  will  place  them  into 
such  camps  as  he  may  deem  necessary  and  advisable. 

******* 

Bv  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief: 

J M.  GEIYOT, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Louisiana. 


* Names  omitted. 


888 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Report  of  the  District  of  Western  Louisiana , commanded  by  Ma 
Gen.  R.  Taylor,  December  4,  1862  ( headquarters  Alexandria,  La.). 


Troops. 


Present  for  duty. 


Infantry. 


Cavalry. 


Artillery. 


0 

DQ 

Q)  • 


Infantry. 
Cavalry  . 
Artillery 


Grand  total 


154 


154 


83 


83 


1,  051 


1,  051 


17 


17 


464 


464 


2,  737 
1,  390 
640 


4,  767 


b£ 


4,  37: 
2,  04 


Executive  Dept.,  Montgomery , AZa.,  Bee.  5,  1862. 
Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War , Richmond: 

Sir  : I invite  your  attention  to  the  inclosed  memorial  from  a portior 
of  the  Committee  of  Safety  of  Mobile,  not  because  I suppose  that  the 
War  Department  has  not  already  given  an  earnest  consideration  to  the 
subject  of  the  defenses  of  Mobile,  or  that  it  is  not  anxiously  concerned 
for  its  successful  resistance  to  the  efforts  which  will  doubtless  soon  be 
combined  against  it,  but  because  I know  the  greatly  extended  scope  oi 
action  of  the  department  calls  for  the  exercise  of  forethought  and  care  1 
ful  provision  in  so  many  points  now  threatened  that  perchance  some 
points  now  available  and  some  means  now  at  hand  may  possibly  be  over 
looked  in  these  incessant  demands  upon  your  attention. 

The  high  character,  the  unvaried  zeal,  the  earnest  devotion,  and  the 
steady  co-operation  of  this  committee  with  the  military  and  naval  au- 
thorities give  to  their  representations  more  than  ordinary  weighty 
They  are  not  of  the  weak  and  timorous  class,  disposed  to  fear  and  fly  at 
the  first  approach  of  the  sails  of  the  enemy,  but  men  who  will  fight  id] 
defense  of  their  homes  until  their  city  is  no  longer  tenable,  and  be  the] 
first  to  apply  the  torch  to  render  themselves  homeless  rather  than  thd] 
enemy  shall  enjoy  the  shelter  of  the  roofs  which  have  protected  them m 
and  their  children. 

Both  for  the  land  and  sea  defenses  they  have  cheerfully  expended)! 
their  means  and  given  of  their  time  and  energies,  under  the  direction) 
of  the  authorities,  in  the  belief  that  in  so  doing  they  were  protecting  not 
only  their  city,  but  the  rich  country  which  had  given  it  wealth  and  ex|| 
istence,  and  were  also  guarding  the  great  lines  of  intercommunication.! i 

They  speak  but  my  own  thoughts  when  they  say  that  to  do  this  sued 
cessfully  will  require  heavy  guns  and  a reserve  corps,  as  my  communi- 
cations to  your  predecessors  will  fully  show. 

I hope  it  may  be  in  your  power  to  provide  for  these  wants,  and  that 
your  means  may  be  made  available  before  the  enemy  can  make  his  ap- 
pearance. The  importance  of  Mobile  invites  his  attack  in  force,  and 
with  the  means  of  defense  called  for  at  hand  and  in  position  I shall  rely 
with  confidence  upon  the  skill  and  energy  of  the  military  and  naval 
commanders,  the  courage  and  ardor  of  those  under  their  command,  and 
the  spirit  and  determination  of  the  people,  that  when  the  struggle  ends 
Mobile  and  its  defenses  will  be  ours.  i 


I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  GILL  SHORTER, 

Governor  of  Alabama. 


889 


hap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

[Inclosure.] 


Mobile,  December  1, 1862. 

lis  Excellency  J.  G.  Shorter  : 

Sir  : The  undersigned*  in  discharge  of  a duty  confided  to  them  by  the 
Committee  of  Safety,  beg  to  call  your  attention  to  what  appears  to  be 
he  great  want  for  our  defense.  You  are  aware  the  committee,  under 
rour  sanction  and  with  the  approval  of  the  citizens,  are  doing  all  in  their 
>ower  to  aid  the  military  powers.  The  officers  to  whom  that  authority 
s intrusted  have  kindly  informed  us  of  the  condition  of  the  defenses; 
md  some  of  them  in  company  with  these  officers  have  personally  in- 
spected the  material  defenses  that  have  already  been  erected. 

It  is  not  needful  to  particularize  to  you  the  state  of  these  things.  We 
rive  all  honor  to  our  commanders,  but  it  is  plain  that  in  time  that  is 
low  past  errors  in  judgment  have  been  committed  in  some  things.  This, 
lowever,  can  never  be  avoided  by  man,  but  all  that  experience  and  ob- 
servation have  suggested  and  that  is  within  the  means  of  the  power 
hat  commands  is  now  in  the  course  of  execution. 

All  the  suggestions  of  the  military  and  naval  authorities,  and  of  prac- 
tical sense  on  the  part  of  the  civilian  too,  point  to  the  great  necessity 
)f  the  immediate  and  considerable  increase  of  artillery  at  this  point. . 
fou  know  our  location ; you  know  of  the  capacities  and  of  the  wants  of 
he  bay  and  its  shores  and  those  of  the  coast,  and  you  know  of  the 
Dowerful  means  of  attack  behind  movable  but  sheltered  bulwarks  that 
>ur  enemy  has  at  command.  You  know  these  things  too  well  to  have 
hem  more  particularly  urged  upon  you.  You  know  too  what  lies  be- 
iiud  this  gate- way  to  the  State,  and  it  is  not  necessary  to  press  upon  you 
he  importance  of  this  point.  But  has  the  Government  at  Bichmond 
fully  weighed  these  things,  and  has  it  directed  here  all  the  means  of 
lefense  that  its  position  as  to  locality  and  importance  demands  ? Has 
ts  due  relation  to  other  points,  that  it  is  true  are  threatened,  and  the 
whole  country  been  duly  considered  ? We  fear  not. 

We  know  that  able  officers  are  here.  We  know  that  they  have  called 
for  artillery  and  materials  of  war,  and  that  the  means  of  defense  have 
become  great.  We  would  have  them  greater  yet.  We  would  have  the 
soil  of  this  part  of  the  country  untainted  by  the  impress  of  a hostile  foot. 
But  we  fear  that  other  points  have  too  much  monopolized  the  attention 
of  the  Government,  and  that  our  wants  have  been  postponed. 

The  great  want  of  this  point  of  defense  is  for  more  guns  and  of  as 
large  a caliber  as  possible.  Points  of  importance,  of  great  importance, 
but  of  minor  interest  when  compared  with  those  of  commanding  magni- 
tude, are  yet  unarmed,  while  some  of  decisive  importance  are  still  but 
feebly  armed  or  are  equipped  in  a manner  far  below  that  completeness 
and  efficiency  that  should  be  imparted  to  them.  We  earnestly  beg 
that  you  will  see  that  the  responsibility  of  this  matter  is  placed  where 
it  rightly  belongs.  We  sincerely  hope  that  the  demands  of  our  offi- 
cers upon  the  General  Government  may  be  fully  met  and  our  needs  sup- 
plied. We  apply  to  you  as  the  head  of  our  Commonwealth  to  come  to 
our  aid  with  your  efficient  influence. 

Has  another  matter  been  sufficiently  attended  to  ? Have  proper 
corps  of  reserve  been  organized  and  posted  so  as  to  support  the  local 
force  in  case  of  need  ? Suppose  the  enemy  land  a large  force  to  march 
on  us  and  so  turn  our  water  defenses,  has  the  force  been  provided  that 
from  some  cehtral  point  can  march  and  meet  the  advancing  column1? 

These  are  questions  of  military  policy  under  military  direction  that 
may  be  big  with  importance  to  this  point  of  the  South  Mississippi  [sic], 


890  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xxvn. 

and  appear  to  us  to  demand  immediate  attention.  Your  memorialists 
venture  to  think  the  Governor  of  Alabama  has  a right  to  ask  these 
questions  and  to  press  them  on  the  power  that  holds  the  sword  and  lias 
undertaken  the  defense  of  which  the  State  has  deprived  itself  for  the 
common  good. 

Alabamians  have  shed  their  blood  and  ennobled  the  State  in  every 
field  of  the  war.  Shall  the  gate-way  to  the  homes  of  their  mothers, 
wives,  and  sisters  remain  inadequately  protected  by  the  Government 
whose  glory  they  have  so  illustrated  ? 

Very  respectfully, 

P.  HAMILTON,  Chairman. 

J.  CARTER. 

L.  M.  WILSON. 

CHAS.  P.  GAGE. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex .,  December  6,  1862. 

Major  Flewellen, 

Superintendent  of  Conscripts , Austin,  Tex. : 

Sir  : I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Magruder  to  acknowledge 
the  receipt  of  your  communication  of  the  4th  instant  in  regard  to  tin 
hostility  on  the  part  of  the  German  population  in  certain  localities  ir 
this  State  to  the  conscript  law,  and  to  say  to  you  that  he  desires  you] 
to  cause  all  persons  of  foreign  birth  who  exhibit  opposition  to  th€ 
enforcement  of  the  conscript  law  to  be  sent  from  this  State  and  united 
with  regiments  in  other  departments  before  all  other  conscripts,  andi 
that  where  they  are  found  most  hostile  to  its  operations  they  be  sent 
first  of  all.  The  major-general  commanding  desires,  however,  that  ir 
doing  this  you  will  exercise  much  caution,  causing  it  to  be  done  quietly 
and  without  show  if  such  a thing  be  practicable,  in  order  that  all  odious 
distinctions  between  the  good  and  loyal  citizens  of  foreign  birth  and 
those  who  are  refractory  may  be  obviated,  and  that  no  difficulties  from 
this  cause  also  may  arise  between  our  native-born  citizens  and  those  ol 
foreign  birth. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  P.  TURNER, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant - General. 

V d 


Hdqrs.  First  Dist.,  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  East  La., 
Jackson , Miss.,  December  6,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  copy  of  a letter  ad 
dressed  to  His  Excellency  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  of  the  State  ol 
Louisiana,  dated  December  2,  current,  in  reply  to  His  Excellency’s  letter 
of  the  3d  of  October  to  the  President  (copy  marked  B),  referred  to  me 
when  in  Richmond  for  explanation,  and  the  Governor’s  letter  of  the  2d 
of  October  (marked  0),  requesting  the  suspension  of  General  Orders. 
No.  2,  of  September  8,  1862. 

The  extraordinary  character  of  His  Excellency’s  letter  to  the  President 
in  contrast  with  that  addressed  to  me  personally  and  his  own  previous 


Chap.  XXVTI.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


891 


official  action  would  seem  to  render  it  necessary  to  ask  that  the  Presi- 
dent be  furnished  with  my  reply  and,  as  I trust,  full  vindication. 

Inclosed  please  find  also  copy  of  correspondence  with  citizens  of 
Saint  Tammany  Parish  respecting  trade  with  the  enemy  (marked  D).# 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  EUGGLES, 
Brigadier -General,  G.  8.  Army. 

[Inclosure  A.] 

Hdqrs.  Eirst  Dist.,  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  Eastern  La., 

Jaelcson , Miss.,  December  2,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Thomas  O.  Moore, 

Governor  of  Louisiana : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  your  letter  of  the  2d  October, 
received  on  the  eve  of  my  departure  for  Virginia,  from  which  State  I 
have  recently  returned.  This  will,  I trust,  satisfactorily  explain  the 
delay  of  my  reply. 

General  Order,  No.  2,  dated  Jackson,  Miss.,  September  8,  1862,  to 
which  you  refer,  was  issued  under  peculiar  circumstances.  Martial  law 
had  just  been  abolished  by  the  same  general  who  had  established  it. 
The  civil  authorities,  particularly  in  East  Louisiana,  were  represented 
by  Hon.  G.  W.  Martin,  presiding  judge  of  that  district,  as  really  power- 
less. His  letter  to  me  on  that  subject  is  now  on  file  in  the  War  Depart- 
ment. The  district,  being  bounded  by  the  Mississippi  Eiver,  the  lakes, 
and  Gulf,  was  exposed  to  constant  raids  from  the  enemy,  who  would  no 
doubt  exert  themselves  to  prevent  the  trial  and  punishment  of  persons 
arrested  for  holding  intercourse  with  and  giving  information  to  them. 
Unfortunately  experience  has  demonstrated  that  there  are  too  many 
willing  to  serve  them  in  this  way. 

Your  Excellency  must  at  once  perceive  how  much  this  state  of  things 
was  likely  to  embarrass  military  movements,  and  how  liable  the  best 
matured  military  plans  are  to  be  thwarted  by  the  facility  thus  afforded 
the  enemy  to  obtain  information  of  our  movements. 

It  was  therefore  indispensably  necessary  to  provide  some  safeguard 
against  spies  and  unrestrained  intercourse  with  the  enemy,  and  espe- 
cially among  a generous,  spirited  people,  unused  to  the  restraints  and 
vicissitudes  incident  to  a state  of  war. 

The  order  was  intended  to  prevent  such  improper  and  illegal  inter- 
course as  was  dangerous  to  the  public  welfare;  and  as  it  was  confined 
to  a mere  recitation  of  the  mandatory  and  prohibitory  provision  of  law 
(see  articles  56,  57,  58,  and  82  of  the  Eules  and  Articles  of  War)  the 
power  to  suspend  or  circumscribe  their  scope  or  intent  was  entirely 
beyond  my  official  jurisdiction.  I considered  it  to  be  my  duty  to  do 
all  in  my  power  to  check,  or  rather  to  prevent,  the  evils  referred  to  (see 
letter  A appended),  and  I felt  the  less  hesitation  in  doing  so  in  Louis- 
iana when  I remembered  the  very  stringent  proclamation  on  the  same 
subject  issued  by  Your  Excellency  in  June  last.  In  this  proclamation 
I find  the  following  strong  language : 

I am  not  introducing  any  new  regulations  for  the  government  of  our  citizens,  hut 
am  only  laying  before  them  those  that  every  nation  at  war  recognizes  as  necessary 
and  proper  to  be  enforced.  It  is  needless  therefore  to  say  they  will  not  bo  relaxed  : 
on  the  contrary,  I am  but  awaiting  the  assistance  and  presence  of  the  general  appointed 
to  the  department  to  inaugurate  the  most  effectual  method  for  their  enforcement.  It 
is  well  to  repeat  them : 


‘Not  found. 


892 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL  5 

Trading  with  the  enemy  is  prohibited  under  all  circumstances. 

Traveling  to  and  from  New  Orleans’  and  other  places  occupied  by  the  enemy  is  for- 
bidden. All  passengers  will  be  arrested.  Citizens  going  to  those  places  and  return- 
ing with  the  enemy’s  usual  passport  will  be  arrested. 

I submit  it  to  your  candor  if  with  this  proclamation  before  me  I had 
not  a right  to  suppose  that  my  order  was  in  strict  accordance  with  your 
views,  and  whether  I had  not  a right  to  expect,  if  occasion  required  it, 
your  cordial  co-operation  in  enforcing  it  f 

The  question  whether  citizens  could  properly  be  tried  under  any  cir~f 
cumstances  by  a military  tribunal  is  left  open  in  the  order,  to  be  decided 
at  the  proper  time  and  by  the  proper  authority.  This  question  is  one; 
of  some  difficulty,  and  is,  I fear,  likely  to  result  in  serious  embarrass- 
ment to  the  military  authorities  and  detriment  to  the  public  service.  , 

It  has  been  held  in  Congress  and  elsewhere  that  military  courts  have* 
no  jurisdiction  over  citizens  in  any  case,  and  that  they  cannot  even  try 
persons  charged  with  being  spies  for  the  enemy  unless  they  are  foreign-, 
ers,  alien  enemies,  or  belong  to  the  Army,  the  Navy,  or  to  the  militia  in 
actual  service  of  the  Confederate  States.  The  same  doctrine  has  been 
recently  asserted  by  high  judicial  authority  in  this  State,  where  it  had 
been  held  that  a citizen  who  had  been  convicted  by  a military  commis-J 
sion  of  having  acted  as  a spy  and  guide  for  the  enemy  must  be  turned 
over  to  the  civil  authorities,  to  be  tried  in  the  parish  or  county  where 
the  offense  was  committed.  This  was  in  the  case  of  William  Burlin- 
game, a citizen  of'  the  parish  of  Saint  Tammany,  Louisiana,  who,  being: 
arrested  by  my  order  and  sent  to  this  city  for  trial,  was  taken  out  of 
military  custody  on  a writ  of  habeas  corpus,  and  is  now,  I believe,  in 
the  jail  in  this  county  awaiting  your  requisition. 

However  great  the  evils  likely  to  arise  from  this  doctrine,  I have 
thought  it  my  duty  to  conform  to  these  authoritative  expositions  of  the 
law,  and  have  in  several  instances  ordered  such  persons  to  be  turned 
over  to  the  civil  authorities. 

While  in  Bichmond  I was  handed  a copy  of  your  letter  to  the  Presi- 
dent on  the  subject  of  my  order  No.  2,  in  which  I find  the  following 
paragraph : 

It  is  with  regret  that  I find  myself  continually  brought  as  it  were  into  conflict  with 
the  military  authorities,  whom  i am  most  desirous  to  assist  in  every  possible  way,  but' 
a wide-spread  ignorance  of  the  rights  of  citizens  or  indifference  to  them  often  renders 
it  imperative. 

For  the  implied  censure  of  my  conduct  contained  in  this  paragraph  I 
was  not  prepared,  as  I was  not  aware  that  any  conflict  had  ever  arisen, 
between  myself  and  the  civil  authorities,  and  I was  certainly  ignorant 
that  my  personal  and  official  relations  with  yourself  had  been  in  any 
manner  unsatisfactory.  If  I have  ever  failed  cordially  to  co-operate 
with  you  or  promptly  to  respond  to  any  of  your  wishes  I am  not  aware 
of  it,  and  am  at  a loss  to  know  to  what  instances  of  conflict  your  letter, 
refers. 

While  in  command  of  the  Louisiana  Brigade  at  New  Orleans  and  sub- 
sequently of  a division  at  Corinth  I am  not  conscious  of  ever  having 
failed  in  treating  you  with  that  consideration  demanded  alike  by  your 
personal  character  and  official  position ; and  when  at  a later  period  I 
was  assigned  to  the  command  of  Eastern  Louisiana  one  of  my  first  acts 
was  to  exert  myself  to  cause  the  restoration  of  certain  arms  belonging 
to  the  State  of  Louisiana  which  had  been  seized  for  Confederate  use. 
It  may  be  that  my  administration  of  this  district  was  not  in  accordance 
with  your  views,  but  I can  hardly  be  censured  for  this  when  it  is  recol- 
lected that  you  were  at  Opelousas  and  I at  Camp  Moore,  and  that  the 


!hap.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


893 


listance  and  difficulty  of  communication  deprived  me  of  the  benefit  of 
rour  advice  and  valuable  suggestions $ but  however  I may  have  failed 
o meet  your  wishes  I have,  I repeat,  yet  to  learn  of  any  case  of  conflict 
>etween  us. 

With  regard  to  the  imputation  of  u ignorance  of  the  rights  of  citizens 
>r  indifference  to  them,77 1 have  only  to  say  that  as  my  life  has  been 
pent  in  the  army  it  may  be  that  I am  not  as  well  informed  in  regard  to 
hese  rights  as  1 desire  to  be,  but  I trust  I am  incapable  of  feeling  in- 
lifferent  to  the  rights  of  my  countrymen,  no  matter  to  what  class  they 
oay  belong,  and  I had  hoped  that  a life  devoted  to  my  country’s  service 
aid  the  fact  that  I was  among  the  first  to  embark  in  the  revolution  in 
rhich  we  are  now  engaged  for  the  vindication  of  these  very  rights,  and 
ipon  which  I have  staked  life,  fortune,  and  fame,  would  have  spared 
ne  such  an  imputation. 

Your  letter  cannot  certainly  be  regarded  as  a special  recommencfation 
o Executive  consideration ; whether  it  has  prejudiced  me  with  the 
^resident  it  is  of  course  impossible  for  me  to  know,  but  it  is  rather  a 
iguificant  fact  that  about  the  time  of  its  receipt  I was  relieved  from 
he  command  of  any  portion  of  Louisiana  and  assigned  to  a district  com- 
jaratively  unimportant. 

An  officer  by  profession,  with  nothing  left  me  now  but  such  name  and 
haracter  as  a soldier  may  win,  you  will  readily  understand  the  impor- 
ance  to  me  of  preserving  that  name  untarnished ; and  I must  be  per- 
aitted  to  remark  in  conclusion  that  I was  withdrawn  from  active  service 
t Pensacola  and  ordered  to  Louisiana  on  the  application  of  the  State 
Executive  for  the  services  of  an  officer  unsolicited  by  me,  and  that  I have 
elt  that  my  lot  was  cast  among  a magnanimous  people. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  EUGGLES, 
Brigadier -General,  G.  8.  Army. 


[Inclosure  B.] 


Executive  Office, 
Alexandria , La .,  October  3,  1862. 

Ion.  Jefferson  Davis, 

President , Richmond  : 

Sir  : Inclosed  you  will  find  General  Euggles7  General  Order,  No.  2, 
o which  I invite  your  attention.  I have  written  him  requesting  he 
hould  suspend  the  operation  of  the  articles  of  war  Nos.  56  and  57  so 
ir  as  regards  citizens  until  I can  hear  from  you  whether' he  is  justified 
a so  doing  at  all. 

I assure  you,  sir,  it  is  with  regret  that  I find  myself  continually 
rought  as  it  were  into  conflict  with  the  military  authorities,  whom  I 
m most  desirous  to  assist  in  every  legitimate  way,  but  a wide-spread 
ignorance  of  the  rights  of  citizens  or  indifference  to  them  often  ren- 
ers  it  imperative. 

In  conclusion  I may  add  that  I am  always  convinced  your  views  are 
List  and  proper  concerning  them. 

I am,  sir,  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

THO.  O.  MOOEE, 

Governor  of  Louisiana. 


894 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH.  j 


[Inolosure  C.] 


Executive  Office, 
Alexandria , La.,  October  2,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Euggles, 

Commanding  District  of  the  Mississippi,  Jackson : 

General  : I have  noticed  published  in  the  Mississippi  newspapers,  i 
by  your  command,  a general  order,  No.  2,  dated  September  8,  1862,  ap- 
pointing provost-marshals  and  specifying  their  duties.  ] 

As  your  order  affects  a portion  of  this  State  I beg  to  ask  you  if?  iRj 
your  opinion,  articles  56  and  57  of  the  Articles  of  War  apply  to  citi- ij 

Z'l  Sfeel  assured  they  do  uot,  but  should  you  differ  from  mein  this  t 
opinion  I have  to  request  that  you  will  suspend  their  operation  as  far, 
as  regards  citizens  until  I can  hear  from  the  President,  whom  I ad- 
dressed to-day  on  the  subject. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient^servaut,  M00RE, 

Governor  of  Louisiana. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona 

Houston , Tex .,  December  8,  1862. 


Mai.  S.  S.  Anderson,  ......  tx 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Trans- Mississippi  Department : 

Sir  : Having  been  informed  that  Brigadier-General  Sibley’s  brigade 
had  been  ordered  back  to  the  district,  and  being  in  great  need  of  light 
artillery,  I have  ordered  the  Val verde  Battery,  Captain  Sayers,  to  le- 
main  in  camp  at  Marshall,  Tex.,  until  orders  shall  be  received  from  the 
lieutenant-general  commanding  in  regard  to  it.  I have  to  request  that, 
if  possible,  this  battery  may  be  left  in  this  district  subject  to  my  orders, 
and  such  do  I consider  the  importance  ot  the  request  that  I send  a 
special  messenger  to  bring  the  orders  of  the  lieutenant-general  com- 
manding in  relation  to  it. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  AtTDBE, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex.,  December  9, 1862. 

7 T->.  7, J T Jr.  . 


General  S.  Cooper,  T7 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Richmond,  1 a. : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  represent  that  I find  the  vari- 
ous commands  in  this  district  almost  without  arms.  Brigadier-General 
Sibley’s  command  is  very  deficient  in  that  particular,  the  men  having 
sold  their  arms  when  they  retreated  from  is  ew  Mexico  to  citizens  and 
Mexicans  to  procure  food  and  clothing,  of  which  they  were  at  one  tirnj 
almost  destitute.  These  arms  were  afterward  bought  up  and  giten  to 
other  troops,  which  have  left  the  State.  Only  1,200  men  of  this  bin 
glide  are  armed,  and  they  indifferently.  Of  Baylor’s  command  (some 
twenty-two  companies  in  process  of  organization)  about  o°0  men  have 
assembled,  and  only  35  are  armed  at  all.  I have  only  1,000  Enfield 


hap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


895 


ifles  and  about  200  small-arms  to  issue.  I therefore  hasten  to  inclose 
requisition  for  12,000  stand,  which  number  was  some  time  ago  asked 
>r  by  Brigadier-General  Hebert;  and  as  the  State  is  now  threatened 
ith  immediate  invasion  I trust  that  this  district  can  be  at  once  fur- 
ished  with  the  above  number  of  arms — Enfield  rifles  and  rifled  mus- 
ets,  if  possible.  Other  commands  here  are  as  poorly  provided,  the 
ivalry  being  armed  with  indifferent  shot-guns.  In  addition,  1 have  to 
iquest  that  three  batteries  of  rifled  pieces  and  three  batteries  of 
nooth-bore  guns  be  sent  to  this  district,  as  in  light  artillery  it  is  very 
eficient.  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  I have  been  informed  that 
nail-arms  were  being  manufactured  very  rapidly  at  Macon,  Ga.,  and 
Richmond,  Va.,  and  to  request  that  Colonel  Burton,  superintendent  of 
nnory  in  Georgia,  be  directed  to  send  the  number  of  small-arms  re- 
uired  by  this  district  from  the  manufactories  under  his  control  or  that 
rms  be  sent  from  other  points. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

j.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding , &c. 


Fort  Hebert,  Tex.,  December  9,  1862. 

[r.  George  W.  Grover, 

Mayor  of  Galveston , Tex.  : 

Sir  : Instructions  just  received  by  telegraph  from  Col.  X.  B.  Debray 
rant  time  to  the  people  of  Galveston  to  remove  from  there  up  to  the 
Lth  instant  at  9 a.  m.  You  will  therefore  please  make  it  public. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

O.  G.  JONES, 
Lieutenant  and  Dost  Adjutant . 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex .,  December  9,  1802. 

ieut.  Col.  S.  S.  Anderson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Trans-Mississippi  Department : 

Sir:  Inclosed  I send  a letter  of  the  Governor  of  Texas.  I find  Sib- 
y’s  brigade  and  the  troops  raised  by  Governor  Baylor  almost  without 
rms.  Sibley’s  men  sold  their  arms  to  Mexicans  and  our  citizens;  by 
le  latter  they  were  resold  to  our  Ordnance  Department,  issued,  and 
mt  out  of  the  country,  principally  to  Arkansas.  The  rest  of  the  troops 
ere  are  principally  cavalry,  and  armed,  some  with  inefficient  shot-guns, 
ffiers  with  indifferent  pistols,  and  some  not  at  all.  I am  informed  by 
ol.  Charles  De  Morse,  commanding  Twenty-ninth  Texas  Regiment, 
lat  he  is  under  orders  to  proceed  to  Fort  Smith  to  report  to  Major- 
eneral  Hindman.  Captain  Hooks,  who  bears  this  letter,  states  that 
is  transportation  will  not  be  ready  for  some  twenty  or  twenty  five  days, 
have  therefore  authorized  Colonel  De  Morse  to  remain  until  your  in- 
ductions can  be  received.  A large  expedition  under  General  Banks 
ill  arrive  at  Galveston  probably  in  a few  days.  I find  the  coast  and 
le  Rio  Grande  given  up.  With  my  troops  well  armed  I might  recover 
| aportant  points  on  the  coast,  and  probably  save  the  Rio  Grande,  so 
pcessary  to  us.  Under  these  circumstances  I cannot  but  concur  in  the 
finion  of  the  Governor  of  Texas  as  to  the  necessity  of  keeping  some 


896 


well-armed  troops  in  Texas,  and  therefore  request  that  the  Twenty  - 
ninth  Regiment  Texas  Cavalry,  Col.  C.  De  Morse,  be  ordered  by  the 
lieutenant-general  commanding  the  department  to  report  to  Columbus, 
Tex.,  without  delay. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ j.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding, 


[Inclosure.] 

Executive  Department, 

Austin , Tex .,  December  6,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder,  Houston , Tex.: 

General:  I feel  a very  deep  interest  in  the  defense  of  this  State  !i 
and  an  earnest  desire  to  co-operate  with  you  in  securing  it  from  being 
overrun  by  the  enemy.  I have  taken  much  pains  to  inform  myself  of 
the  state  of  our  defenses,  and  believing  them  to  be  inadequate,  you  must 
pardon  the  liberty  I take  in  calling  your  attention  to  our  destitute  con- 
dition in  the  matter  of  arms  and  ammunition.  There  seems  to  be  no 
doubt  that  a serious  invasion  of  Texas  will  be  attempted  this  winter. 
The  Confederate  States  troops  at  this  time  within  the  State  and  the 
State  troops  are  probably  sufficient  for  its  defense,  but  they  are  all  of 
them  to  some  extent,  and  some  of  them  wholly,  destitute  of  arms.  Bay- 
lor’s command  is  without  any  arms  at  all.  The  brigade  known  as  Sib- 
ley’s, who  may  now  be  considered  as  veterans,  are  not  half  armed,  and 
the  same  may  be  said  of  every  other  regiment  in  the  State.  The  inade- 
quate supply  of  ordnance  and  fixed  ammunition  within  the  department 
must  already  have  engaged  your  attention.  The  volunteers  who  first 
left  Texas  almost  without  exception  took  their  arms  with  them,  to  be 
used  in  the  public  service  elsewhere.  Many  were  furnished  by  the 
State,  and  thus  we  are  left  in  our  hour  of  peril  almost  destitute  of  the 
means  necessary  to  make  an  effective  resistance.'  The  State  has  had 
energetic  agents  for  twelve  months  or  more  engaged  in  purchasing  and 
repairing  such  arms  as  could  be  obtained,  but  these  have  been  far  in- 
ferior in  character  and  of  so  many  varieties  as  scarcely  to  be  capable 
of  classification.  The  same  may  be  said  of  those  which  still  remain  in 
the  hands  of  our  citizens,  and  even  for  these  the  supply  of  ammunition 
is  very  inadequate.  Under  the  circumstances  I have  not  thought  it  out 
of  the  line  of  my  duty  to  urge  upon  you  and  through  you  on  the  War 
Department  the  wants  of  our  State  and  the  importance  of  their  being 
promptly  supplied.  At  least  15,000  stand  of  arms  are  needed  to  equip 
fully  the  forces  in  the  State  and  the  new  levies  about  to  be  raised.  Five 
or  six  full  batteries,  partly  smooth-bore  and  partly  rifled,  are  too  few  for 
the  proper  defense  of  the  State,  and  that  number  should  be  at  once  for- 
warded here,  and  they  should  be  accompanied  by  the  usual  quantity  of 
fixed  ammunition  to  render  them  effective. 

I do  not  think  that  I overestimate  the  importance  of  Texas  to  the 
Confederacy  or  the  interest  the  Government  should  feel  in  preventing 
its  being  overrun  by  the  enemy.  Almost  all  the  only  sure  trade  and 
communication  between  the  Confederacy  and  the  outside  world  is  through 
her  western  frontier  into  Mexico.  Her  wheat  fields  and  her  hog  and  cat- 
tle ranches  contribute  largely  to  feed  the  armies;  her  wool  and  cotton 
factories  clothe  them  in  part;  her  sons  have  not  been  behind  the  fore- 
most at  the  call  of  duty,  and  have  poured  out  their  blood  like  water 
upon  the  battle-fields  of  liberty.  She  deserves  a better  fate  at  the  hands 


Uhaf.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


897 


of  the  authorities  than  to  be  left  with  the  old  men  and  boys  to  defend 
herself,  while  denied  the  means  of  effectually  doing  it. 

I am,  sir,  yours,  truly, 

F.  E.  LUBBOCK. 


December  10, 1862. 

Major-General  Magruder  : 

Dear  Sir  : I am  informed  by  letter  from  a reliable  person  at  Beau- 
mont that  five  vessels  appeared  off  Sabine  Pass  on  the  7th  and  at- 
tempted to  come  in,  but  failed  for  want  of  sufficient  water.  They  were 
still  outside  when  his  informant  left.  They  held  communication  with 
the  Federal  vessels  inside.  Their  character  is  one  transport,  one  large 
steamer,  one  propeller,  and  two  schooners.  Thinking  that  possibly  the 
information  may  not  have  reached  you  I send  it  in.  Have  you  any  late 
Northern  papers  you  could  lend  me? 

Very  respectfully, 

E.  H.  CUSHING. 

[Indorsement.] 

Colonel  Debray  will  please  send  copy  of  this  to  Maj.  Leon  Smith, 
who  has  gone  to  Niblett’s  Bluff,  and  also  station  a company  of  cavalry 
near  Sabine  Pass  to  keep  watch  upon  the  enemy’s  movements  and 
report  such  at  once  to  these  headquarters. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Magruder : 

H.  M.  STANAED,. 

Aide- de-  Camp. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex.,  December  12,  1862. 

Col.  S.  S.  Anderson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Trans-Mississippi  Department: 

Sir  : It  is  reported  that  the  enemy  are  off  Sabine  Pass  in  force,  at- 
tempting to  land.  The  occupation  of  Galveston  by  the  enemy  may  be 
ixpected  at  any  moment.  I have  ordered  the  Valverde  Battery  (Cap- 
ain  Sayers)  to  report  to  me  in  Houston,  as  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to 
lave  more  artillery  at  hand ; and  as  I can  find  out  nothing  about  Gen- 
eral Sibley  and  his  command,  to  which  this  company  is  attached,  from 
fie  adjutant- general  of  General  Hebert,  I have  ordered  the  whole  of 
General  Sibley’s  command  to  the  coast. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGEUDEE, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs,  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston,  Tex.,  December  13, 1862, 

Ton.  James  A.  Seddqn, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I cannot  ask  too  urgently  your  attention  to  the  inclosed  letter* 
)f  Governor  Lubbock,  as  to  the  pressing  need  of  arms  for  the  troops 
lecessary  to  the  defense  of  this  State.  Texas,  though  she  has  stripped 

*See  inclosure  to  Magruder’s  letter  of  December  9,  p,  896. 

57  R R — YOL  XY 


898 


W.  FLA.,  8.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

herself  of  her  young  men,  who  are  nobly  fighting  the  battles  of  the 
Confederacy  beyond  her  limits,  needs  but  arms  in  the  hands  of  the 
warlike  and  veteran  pioneers  who  have  remained  at  home  to  enable  her 
to  defend  her  soil  successfully,  but  these  arms  she  has  not.  All  the  ; 
rifles  and  shot-guns  at  one  time  in  the  hands  of  her  citizens  have  been  1 
sent  with  her  troops  to  the  army  elsewhere,  and  she  is  absolutely  now  j 
without  any  whatever,  except  the  few  with  which  the  troops  in  the 

field  here  are  badly  armed.  ... 

My  predecessor,  Brigadier-General  Hubert,  made  a requisition  betore 
my  arrival  for  12,000  stand  of  arms.  I repeated  this  call  a few  daysi 
ago,  and  now  again  respectfully  ask  the  utmost  exertions  of  the  War 
Department  to  procure,  if  possible,  the  supply  here  so  necessary,  with 
the  corresponding  quantity  of  ammunition ; also  additional  light  bat- 
teries be  sent  to  me  in  accordance  with  previous  requisitions.  Oi  the 
3,000  stand  of  arms  promised  me  by  the  former  Secretary  of  War  I 
have  succeeded  in  obtaining  only  1,000,  which  have  arrived  here.  I , 
have  the  honor  to  request  that  the  rest  be  supplied  as  early  as  possible. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDEB, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


War  Department,  G.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va .,  December  13,  1862. 

His  Excellency  J.  G.  Shorter, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  Alabama  : 

Sir:  Your  Excellency’s  letter  of  the  5th  instant,  inclosing  a comrnu 
nication  from  the  Committee  of  Safety  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  has  been  re 
ceived.  The  President  left  this  city  some  days  ago  to  visit  the  head- 
quarters of  the  different  armies  in  the  Southwest,  and  will  probably  be 
in  Mobile  within  the  course  of  the  next  fortnight.  Whatever  prepara- 
tion can  be  made  for  the  defense  of  that  city  within  the  compass  of  the 
means  of  the  Government  Your  Excellency  may  be  assured  will  be  made 
The  formation  of  a corps  of  reserve  in  aid  of  the  forces  of  the  Conled 
eracy  might  be  fairly  left  to  the  citizens  themselves.  Under  an  act  oi 
the  iast  Congress  “to  authorize  the  formation  of  volunteer  companies 
for  local  defense  ” (No.  72)  organizations  may;  be  made  which,  m any 
exigency  of  invasion,  would  prove  of  great  utility  5 and  the  act  provides 

an  easy  and  convenient  mode  for  doing  this.  . . 

Your  Excellency  may  be  assured  that  the  impending  invasion  on  the 
part  of  our  enemy  has  been  prepared  with,  great  care  and  with  a pio- 
fusion  of  means  almost  without  a parallel,  and  that  it  behooves  every 
man  in  the  State  of  Alabama  and  in  the  whole  Confederacy  to  be 
ready  to  do  his  whole  duty  for  repelling  it. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  CAMPBELL, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  op  Miss,  and  East  La 

Jackson,  Miss.,  December  14,  1862. 


Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  state,  for  the  information  of  the  lieutenant 
general  commanding,  that  I have  received  the  following  information 
which  is  entitled  to  some  consideration. 


!hap.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


899 


1st.  That  Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks  has  landed  a portion  of  his  forces 
consisting  of  25,000  men)  at  Ship  Island;  that  his  men  are  much  de- 
noralized,  and  are  to  be  drilled  and  disciplined  on  the  island.  The  rest  4 
>f  his  force  is  soon  to  be  landed.  Three  large  transports  landed  the 
roops  already  there. 

It  is  rumored  that  a re-enforcement  will  be  sent  to  New  Orleans  soon, 
)ut  now  there  are  not  more  than  2,000  men  in  New  Orleans. 

It  is  understood  that  General  Banks’  force  is  to  be  landed  when  ready 
it  Pontchatoula,  to  move  up  the  railroad  to  meet  Bosecrans’  army.  This 
las  been  decided  on  instead  of  landing  at  Baton  Bouge,  as  had  been  at 
>ne  time  contemplated. 

The  report  carefully  circulated  at  the  North  that  General  Banks’ ex- 
>edition  was  designed  for  Texas  it  is  understood  was  merely  intended 
;o  mislead  our  Government.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  question  now 
irises  as  to  the  expediency  of  destroying  the  barracks  at  Baton  Bouge 
md  a portion  of  the  town  or  preserving  them  at  the  risk  of  affording 
lid  and  comfort  to  the  enemy  by  again  affording  him  shelter. 

2d.  Major-General  Butler  orders,  December  8,  that  all  persons  who 
lave  registered  themselves  as  enemies  of  the  United  States,  and  who 
lesire  to  leave  New  Orleans  never  to  return,  shall  do  so  before  the  10th 
>f  December,  and  that  he,  General  Butler,  will  furnish  them  with  trans- 
lortation  through  the  Federal  lines  ; that  each  person  shall  be  allowed 
mly  to  carry  out  not  exceeding  $50  worth  of  clothing.  All  persons 
hus  embraced  are  required  to  furnish  a register  of  their  residences. 
Several  hundred  are  known  to  have  registered  for  this  purpose. 

The  arrival  of  these  victims  of  Federal  oppression  on  our  Southern 
:oast  will  be  unquestionably  attended  by  much  distress  and  destitution. 

’ respectfully  recommend  for  the  consideration  of  the  lieutenant-general 
:ommanding  that  measures  be  taken  to  afford  prompt  relief  and  pro- 
ection  for  all  such  fugitives. 

3d.  That  recently  some  forty-two  vessels  have  left  our  immediate 
•oast  and  been  lost  to  our  service,  having  been  seized  by  Major-General 
Butler. 

4th.  That  stringent  orders  had  been  received  by  Major-General  But- 
er  and  Commodore  Farragut  from  Washington  prohibiting  the  ship* 
nent  of  salt  and  probably  other  supplies  to  our  lines. 

These  items  of  information  are  communicated  for  the  lieutenant-gen- 
eral’s consideration. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  BUGGLES, 
Brigadier -General,  P.  A.  C.  8. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  District  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  99.  j Mobile , December  14,  1862. 

In  obedience  to  orders  from  department  headquarters  the  under- 
igned  hereby  relinquishes  the  command  of  the  district  to  Brig.  Gen. 
Y W.  Mackall. 


JOHN  H.  FOBNEY, 
Major-General , P.  A.  G.  8 . 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Department  No.  2, 

No.  62.  I Murfreesborougli , Tenn .,  December  14,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  B.  Buckner  is  relieved  from  duty  with  the  Army  of  Ten- 


900 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

nessee,  and  will  proceed  to  Mobile  and  assume  command  of  the  District 
of  the  Gulf. 

* * # * * * * 

By  command 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex.,  December  15, 1862. 

Mai.  S.  S.  Anderson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Trans- Mississippi  Department: 

Sir  : Inclosed  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  a copy  of  instructions: 
handed  to  me  by  Maj.  S.  Hart,  special  agent  on  the  part  of  the  Wail 
Department  for  the  purchase  of  arms,  supplies,  &c.,  from  and  through) 
Mexico.  Major  Hart  has  requested  me  to  publish  such  orders  as  wil| 
facilitate  him  in  the  execution  of  his  duties.  I have  had  a long  con  i: 
ference  with  Governor  Lubbock,  of  this  State;  General  Bee,  charged 
with  the  execution  of  orders  from  Headquarters  Trans-Mississipp| 
Department,  dated  Little  Bock,  Ark.,  October  14,  1862 ; Mr.  Latham.] 
Confederate  collector  at  Brownsville,  and  Major  Hart,  with  the  object  od 
carrying  out  the  orders  of  Lieutenant-General  Holmes  more  stringently  I 
and  of  producing  harmony  of  action  among  the  different  agents  who  haq 
already  made  purchases  of  cotton  and  contracts  based  upon  the  sameJ 
In  consequence  of  this  want  of  unity  and  other  causes  cotton  has  gom  \ 
up  to  25  cents  per  pound,  and  transportation  as  high  as  20  cents,  paicl 
in  specie.  The  most  of  the  cotton  on  the  route  is  in  the  hands  o I 
speculators,  as  I am  informed,  and  I have  directed  every  bale  withou 
the  permit  of  General  Bee  to  be  stopped  on  the  Bio  Grande.  I hay<jd 
also  ordered  that  all  men  coming  under  the  conscript  act  engaged  ill 
hauling  cotton  be  at  once  enrolled ; also  that  they  be  taken  to  the  nearesfll 
conscript  camp  for  service,  unless  they  will  use  their  teams  haulina 
cotton  for  the  Government.  The  order  of  Lieutenant-General  Holmeill 
has  had  already  a good  effect,  bringing  down  the  price  of  cotton  <1 
cents  a pound,  and  if  I can  increase  the  facilities  of  transporting  cotto]  I 
to  the  Government  agents  and  decrease  them  to  the  speculator  muc! 
good  maybe  done.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  for  success,  however) 
that  the  Government  agents,  whether  appointed  from  Bichmond  or  b; 
authority  of  General  Holmes  or  in  any  other  way,  should  know  eac.  > 
other  and  act  in  unison.  I have  therefore  ordered  all  agents,  either  ci 
the  Treasury  Department,  War  Department,  or  commanding  officer  c 
the  Trans-Mississippi  Department,  or  acting  under  any  other  authority 
to  report  their  authority  to  these  headquarters  forthwith,  with  a yieil 
of  submitting  them  to  Major  Hart,  who  is,  I believe,  provided  with 
large  amount  of  funds,  and  is  specially  sent  on  this  service  by  the  Wa 
Department.  I have  requested  him  to  report  forthwith  by  letter  t 
Lieutenant-General  Holmes.  I shall  order  him  also  to  send  invoice  ( 
all  supplies  he  may  receive  to  the  headquarters  of  Lieutenant-Genen 
Holmes,  in  order  that  the  orders  of  the  latter  may  be  communicated  t 
me  before  these  supplies  are  distributed.  I presume  this  is  alread 
provided  for,  however,  in  the  orders  on  this  subject  to  my  predecesso 
Bri o adier-General  Hubert.  The  headquarters  being  at  San  Antom 
I have  not  yet  had  access  to  the  order-book  or  files  of  the  office. 

It  will  be" perceived  that  Major  Hart  has  the  power  to  impress  tran 


of  General  Bragg : 


GEO.  G.  GABNEB, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


901 


Chap.  XXVII.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

portation  when  necessary.  I have  limited  that  power  however  to  trans- 
portation in  Texas ; that  coming  into  Texas  owned  by  Mexicans  and 
foreigners  bringing  in  supplies  must  not  only  be  exempted  from  impress- 
ment, but  must  be  protected.  As  the  enemy  is  expected  daily  on  the 
Rio  Grande  I have  directed  that  the  cotton  now  on  its  way  to  Browns- 
ville should  be  diverted  to  Ringgold  Barracks  on  the  landing  of  his 
troops.  I presume  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  is  informed  that 
the  Lower  Rio  Grande,  from  Ringgold  Barracks  to  the  mouth,  has  been 
virtually  given  up,  being  occupied  by  ouly  a few  hundred  cavalry,  and 
that  the  guns  have  been  stored  at  San  Antonio.  This  I found  on  my 
arrival ; also  that  almost  the  whole  of  the  coast  is  in  possession  of  the 
enemy.  Arms  are  our  principal  need.  I brought  only  1,000  small-arms 
with  me,  and  know  not  when  I shall  get  any  more  from  the  other  side 
of  the  Mississippi.  If  Lieutenant-General  Holmes  can  send  arms  to 
Texas  I beg  that  he  will  do  so  without  delay,  and  if  he  receives  any 
from  the  Government  I request  that  a portion  of  them  be  ordered  here. 
There  are  none  to  be  had  in  Mexico,  nor  do  I see  the  least  prospect  of 
getting  them  from  abroad  for  a long  time  to  come,  if  ever.  Being  con- 
traband of  war,  merchants  (foreign)  will  not  run  the  risk  of  the  blockade. 
As  Major  Hart  has  great  experience  as  a merchant,  has  the  confidence 
of  the  President  and  War  Department,  and  is  more  likely  than  any  one 
I know  to  bring  order  out  of  the  chaos  I find  the  cotton  trade  in  here, 
I respectfully  recommend  to  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  the 
department  the  publication  of  an  order  directing  all  agents  for  the 
purchase  of  cotton  to  report  to  him,  and  that  he  be  invested  with 
authority  from  the  headquarters  of  the  Trans-Mississippi  Department 
to  superintend  all  the  cotton  arrangements  of  this  district,  carrying  out 
contracts  already  made  by  agents  properly  authorized.  I have  heard  of 
many  agents  here  for  the  purchase  of  cotton,  and  am  already  satisfied 
that  they  are  acting  without  proper  authority  and  that  their  course  has 
almost  deprived  the  Government  of  the  means  of  transporting  cotton. 
I heard  of  one,  a heavy  operator,  acting  under  authority  from  General 
Lovell,  given  before  the  fall  of  New  Orleans.  There  is  every  conceiv- 
able scheme  presented  to  evade  the  last  orders  of  General  Holmes  on 
this  subject,  patriotism  being  generally  the  basis  upon  which  rascality 
raises  its  structure. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Port  Hudson,  December  17,  1862. 
Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

Fourteen  gunboats  and  sloops  are  at  Baton  Rouge  this  morning. 
The  Essex  has  started  up. 

WM.  N.  R.  BEALL, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Port  Hudson,  December  17,  1862. 

General  Pemberton: 

Report  is  that  between  6,000  and  7,000  of  the  enemy  at  Baton  Rouge. 

WM.  N.  R.  BEALL. 


902 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


[December  18,  1862. — Stevenson’s  division  ordered  from  East  Ten- 
nessee to  Mississippi,  to  report  to  Lieut.  Gem  J.  0.  Pemberton.  See 
Series  I,  Yol.  XX,  Part  II,  p.  453.] 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex .,  December  19,  1862. 

Col.  S.  S.  Anderson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General , Trans-Mississippi  Department : 

Sir  : I have  just  received  your  letter*  of  the  — instant,  stating  that 
Sibley’s  brigade  had  been  ordered  opposite  Vicksburg.  I to-day  also 
saw  an  order  from  Brigadier-General  Scurry,  directing  that  brigade 
and  Stone’s  and  Gurley’s  regiments  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to 
march.  I had  ordered  Sibley’s  brigade  to  Harrisburg,  between  Gal- 
veston and  this  place,  in  order  to  protect  the  coast  and  the  railroads, 
the  latter  absolutely  vital.  I also  wrote  General  Holmes,  requesting 
that  Stone’s  and  Gurley’s  regiments  might  be  sent  at  once  to  Columbus, 
Tex.,  where  they  are  extremely  needed.  I found  also  the  Bio  Grande 
frontier  virtually  abandoned.  It  must  be  retrieved  forthwith  or  our 
trade  will  be  cut  off  and  the  enemy  obtain  a base  for  operations  against 
Texas  affording  him  every  advantage.  I have  but  a few  moments  tc 
write,  as  the  cars  leave  in  half  an  hour,  and  there  are  but  tri- weekly 
stages.  I will  send  return  of  troops  next  mail,  and  will  state  now  from 
memory  the  following,  on  which  1 think  General  Holmes  can  rely : In 
Texas,  number  of  troops  organized  and  for  duty  8,000  men,  which  in 
eludes  Sibley’s  brigade  and  excludes  Baylor’s  troops,  now  being  organ 
ized.  Of  these  latter  there  are  about  1,500  men,  of  which  three  com 
panies  only  are  armed.  Of  Sibley’s  brigade  only  about  1,200  men  ard 
armed,  and  they  indifferently.  There  are  not  more  than  6,000  meEj 
armed  at  all  in  Texas.  There  ought  to  be  that  number  alone  on  the 
Bio  Grande.  I was  about  to  send  an  expedition  there  to  regain  the! 
frontier,  but  if  Sibley’s  brigade  and  Stone’s  and  Gurley’s  regiments! 
are  taken  from  me  I will  not  be  able  to  do  so.  I beg  therefore  thaf 
the  order  alluded  to  by  you  for  these  troops  to  proceed  to  Vicksburg 
be  countermanded.  Of  course  I shall  facilitate  the  movement  towarci 
Vicksburg  in  every  way  in  my  power  unless  I receive  different  orders 
from  General  Holmes,  who  of  course  knows  that  General  Banks  is! 
about  to  sail  with  a large  force  for  Texas. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGBUDEE, 

Major-General , Commanding . 


Bichmond,  Va.,  December  20,  1862. 
Major-General  Eorney,  Mobile , Ala.: 

I have  reasons,  not  however  conclusive,  to  believe  Banks’  fleet  i; 
intended  to  operate  in  the  Gulf,  and  in  the  first  instance  to  attacl 
Mobile.  Be  prepared. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
{Secretary  of  War. 


See  of  November  26,  p.  879. 


Chap.  XXYII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  903 

Abstract  from  Report  of  Troops  in  the  District  of  the  Gulf,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  W.  W. 
Mackall,  December  20,  1862  ( headquarters  Mobile,  Ala.). 


Troops. 


Army  of  Mobile 

East  District 

Harbor  Brigade 

Choctaw  and  Owen  Bluffs 

Fifty -third  Regiment  Alabama  Partisan  Rangers 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Effective  total 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

270 

3,571 

3,  804 

4, 820 

5,  663 

113 

1,  998 

2, 121 

2, 450 

2,  807 

61 

910 

1, 020 

1,164 

1, 283 

20 

201 

244 

284 

328 

31 

486 

519 

628 

805 

495 

7, 166 

7, 708 

9,346 

10,  886 

Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex.,  December  21,  1862. 

Col.  S.  S.  Anderson,  Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a list*  of  officers  of  the  Federal 
Army  who  are  represented  by  the  New  Orleans  papers  to  have  arrived 
in  that  place.  The  papers  state  that  General  Corcoran  has  sailed  from 
New  York  for  that  place.  You  will  perceive  from  the  inclosed  list  of 
officers  that  there  are  two  major-generals,  and  as  these  organizations 
are  in  all  probability  complete,  this  expedition  must  consist  of  at  least 
20,000  men.  To  meet  this  invading  force  you  will  see  from  my  letter 
to  Lieutenant-General  Holmes,  forwarded  several  days  since  (a  copy 
of  which  is  herein  inclosed),!  that  I am  by  no  means  prepared,  on  ac- 
count of  the  disorder  and  want  of  organization  which  prevails  here  on 
account  of  the  removal  of  troops  from  this  district. 

In  view  of  these  facts  I have  the  honor  to  urgently  renew  my  request 
that  the  troops  ordered  by  Lieutenant-General  Holmes  to  report  to 
Brigadier-General  Scurry  be  retained  under  his  command  in  this  dis- 
trict. Should  General  Holmes,  in  view  of  this  information,  deem  it 
proper  to  grant  my  request,  any  orders  from  him  countermanding  or 
changing  the  movements  of  these  forces  will  reach  their  commanding 
officers  if  forwarded  to  them  en  route  by  Shreveport  to  Monroe,  La.  It 
is  scarcely  necessary  for  me  to  say  that  great  dissatisfaction  exists  in 
this  State  at  the  removal  of  armed  troops  from  its  limits  and  the  reten- 
tion of  those  only  who  are  unarmed.  Please  send  copies  of  such  orders 
countermanding  to  these  headquarters. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD.  MAGBTJDER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex.,  December  21,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Hon.  F.  R.  Lubbock, 

Governor  of  State  of  Texas  : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  Lieutenant-General  Holmes 
has  ordered  Sibley’s  brigade,  together  with  Gurley’s  and  Stone’s  regi- 
ments, to  Louisiana,  and  that  I have  obeyed  the  order.  I am  in  receipt 


Not  found. 


t See  letter  of  December  9,  p.  — . 


904 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVlt.  ! 

. 

of  New  Orleans  papers  stating  that  General  Banks  with  his  staff  has 
arrived  and  mentioning  other  officers,  from  which  I am  satisfied  that  a 
force  of  at  least  20,000  strong  is  at  hand  for  the  invasion  of  this  State* 
In  view  of  the  diminution  of  our  forces  by  the  removal  of  the  above- 
mentioned  forces  from  this  State  and  of  the  arrival  of  these  Federal 
forces  momentarily  expected,  I have  to  request  that  you  will  call  out 
at  once  all  the  militia  which  the  State  can  possibly  arm  and  cause  them 
to  rendezvous  at  Harrisburg.  I have  also  to  request  that  you  will 
send  arms  and  a full  supply  of  ammunition  for  these  troops,  in  order 
that  they  may  be  armed  and  equipped  as  soon  as  possible.  While  I 
have  facilitated  the  movement  of  these  troops  (Sibley’s  brigade  and  j 
Stone’s  and  Gurley’s  regiments)  in  every  possible  manner,  I have  sent 
a letter  to  General  Holmes  by  courier  requesting  that  the  order  for  the  i 
movement  be  countermanded.  I doubt,  however,  if  it  will  be  done. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDEB, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Havana,  December  22, 1862. 

My  Dear  — : 


I presume  you  are  ere  this  posted  as  to  Banks’  expedition,  as  I see 
that  many  are  leaving  the  city  of  New  Orleans  for  Dixie.  He  has 
25,000  men,  besides  Butler’s  army.  His  landing  at  New  Orleans  closes 
the  business  so  far  as  Mobile  is  concerned.  One  battalion  is  sufficient 
for  Mobile,  just  to  keep  order  and  say  that  there  is  troops  there. 

The  West  is  clamorous  for  the  opening  of  the  Mississippi  River,  as 
the  low  prices  of  grain  in  New  York  is  killing  them.  The  Government 
of  Lincoln  must  open  the  river,  or  sooner  or  later  they  will  have 
trouble  with  the  West,  and  every  nerve  will  be  extended  for  that  end 
in  the  West. 

No  iron-clads  in  the  Gulf  as  yet  or  likely  to  be  soon.  They  will 
probably  make  an  attempt  to  take  Charleston  soon  with  their  iron- 
clads, but  my  opinion  is  greatly  strengthened  of  late  that  Mobile  will 
not  be  attacked  by  gunboats ; but  it  behooves  the  hurrying  up  of  the 
iron-clads  to  make  defense  more  certain  if  they  should  attempt  it. 

The  news  of  Burnside’s  defeat  is  grand ; they  say  12,000  to  15,000 
killed  and  wounded.  New  York  is  in  great  gloom  over  it.  I send  a 
New  York  World  u for  the  Club  of  17,”  giving  particulars.  Let  me 
hear  from  you  soon.  Where  in  hell  is  the  Florida?  She  could  be  doing 
more  good  than  25,000  men.  Our  ships  get  no  freight  here  on  any 
terms.  Insurance  5J  war  risk  in  New  York  and  going  up ; it’s  killing 
to  their  commerce. 

Sincerely,  your  friend. 

[Not  signed.] 


General  Banks  will  attack  Port  Hudson  so  soon  as  possible  for  him 
to  get  his  army  organized.  Butler  had  10,000  men  previously. 


[Indorsements.] 

General  S.  Cooper,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen .,  Richmond : 

The  above  is  from  a reliable  source  in  Havana.  The  information  is 
derived  by  him  from  New  York,  Key  West,  and  other  points. 
Respectfully, 

S.  B.  BUCKNER, 

Major-General , Commanding  District  of  the  Gulf. 


Uhap.  xxvn.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  905 

January  6, 1863. 

Respectfully  submitted  to  Secretary  of  War.  Important. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Galveston,  Tex.,  December  22, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Mackruder,  0.  S.  A., 

Gomdg.  Military  District  of  Texas , &c.,  Houston , Tex. : 

General  : We,  the  undersigned,  having  received  a communication: 
from  the  mayor  of  this  city,  Mr.  George  W.  Grover,  stating  that  notice 
has  been  given  by  Colonel  Debray,  commanding  Sub-Military  District 
of  Houston,  that  all  communication  between  this  city  and  the  interior 
A the  State  is  now  cut  off,  we  have  respectfully  to  request  you  to  state,, 
for  our  information  and  guidance,  if  this  order  is  intended  to  prohibit 
us  from  obtaining  those  provisions  from  the  State  which  are  necessary 
for  the  support  of  the  aliens  remaining  at  the  port  and  who  now  com- 
pose the  majority  of  the  inhabitants. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servants, 

ARTHUR  T.  LYNN, 

Her  Britannic  Majesty7 s Consul , et  al. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona,. 

Houston , Tec p.,  December  23,  1862. 

Maj.  A.  M.  Jackson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir  : I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Magruder  to  ask  whether  yon 
know  anything  of  General  Sibley  being  ordered  with  his  command  to 
New  Iberia,  in  Louisiana.  All  information  in  regard  to  General  Sibley 
in  your  possession  you  are  requested  to  communicate  through  Captain 
Loebnitz,  who  bears  this  to  San  Antonio  and  will  return  at  once. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  P.  TURNER, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  District  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  105.  j Mobile , December  23, 1862. 

By  virtue  of  Special  Orders,  No.  62,  Headquarters  Department  No.  2, 
the  undersigned  assumes  command  of  the  District  of  the  Gulf. 

The  following  staff  is  announced : Lieut.  Col.  G.  B.  Cosby,  chief  of 
staff;  Maj.  T.  J.  Clay,  adjutant  and  inspector  general;  Capt.  W.  F. 
Mastin,  assistant  adjutant-general;  Maj.  Y.  Sheliha,  chief  of  artillery; 
Maj.  S.  K.  Hays,  chief  quartermaster;  Lieut.  C.  F.  Johnson,  Lieut.  J. 
N.  Galleher,  aides-de-camp;  Lieut.  O.  F.  Rice,  acting  aide-de-camp. 

S.  B.  BUCKNER, 
Major-General , Provisional  Army. 


General  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  111.  ) Richmond , December  24,  1862. 

I.  The  following  proclamation  of  the  President  is  published  for  the 
information  and  guidance  of  all  concerned  therein : 


906 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL  \ 
By  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States. 


A PROCLAMATION. 

Whereas  a communication  was  addressed  on  the  6th  day  of  July  last  (1862)  by  Gen-j 
eral  Robert  E.  Lee,  acting  under  the  instructions  of  the  Secretary  of  War  of  the  Con- 
federate States  of  America,  to  General  H.  W.  Halleck,  general-in-chief  of  the  United! 
States  Army,  informing  the  latter  that  a report  had  reached  this  Government  thati 
William  B.  Mumford,  a citizen  of  the  Confederate  States,  had  been  executed  by  the 
United  States  authorities  at  New  Orleans  for  having  pulled  down  the  United  States 
flao-  in  that  city  before  its  occupation  by  the  forces  of  the  United  States,  and  callings 
for  a statement  of  the  facts,  with  a view  to  retaliation,  if  such  an  outrage  had  really 
been  committed  under  sanction  of  the  authorities  of  the  United  States ; 

And  whereas  (no  answer  having  been  received  to  said  letter)  another  letter  was,  on 
the  2d  August  last  (1862),  addressed  by  General  Lee,  under  my  instructions,  to  General 
Halleck,  renewing  the  inquiry  in  relation  to  the  said  execution  of  said  Mumford,  with), 
the  information  that  in  the  event  of  not  receiving  a reply  within  fifteen  days  it  woulcg 
be  assumed  that  the  fact  alleged  was  true  and  was  sanctioned  by  the  Government  of 
the  United  States ; ~ 

And  whereas  an  answer,  dated  on  the  7th  August  last  (1862),  was  addressed  to  Genj 
eral  Lee  by  General  H.  W.  Halleck,  the  said  general-in-chief  of  the  armies  of  thd 
United  States,  alleging  sufficient  cause  for  failure  to  make  early  reply  to  said  letter  ok 
6th  July,  asserting  that  “No  authentic  information  had  been  received  in  relation  tO| 
the  execution  of  Mumford,  but  measures  will  be  immediately  taken  to  ascertain  the 
facts  of  the  alleged  execution,”  and  promising  that  General  Lee  should  be  duly  m-j 

f#rmed  thereof:  , , , , J 

Aud  whereas  on  the  29th  November  last  (1862)  another  letter  was  addressed,  unden 
my  instructions,  by  Robert  Ould,  Confederate  agent  for  the  exchange  of  prisoners,  unj 
der  the  cartel  between  the  two  Governments,  to  Lieut.  Col.  W.  H.  Ludlow,  agent  ofl 
the  United  States  under  said  cartel,  informing  him  that  the  explanations  promised  in 
the  said  letter  of  General  Halleck  of  7th  of  August  last  had  not  yet  been  received,; 
and  that  if  no  answer  was  sent  to  the  Government  within  fifteen  days  from  the  dejj 
livery  of  this  last  communication  it  would  be  considered  that  an  answer  is  declined  y: 

And  whereas,  by  letter  dated  on  the  3d  day  of  the  present  month  of  December,  the  ] 
said  Lieutenant-Colonel  Ludlow  apprised  the  said  Robert  Ould  that  the  above-recited : 
communication  of  29th  of  November  had  been  received  and  forwarded  to  the  Secrej; 
tary  of  War  of  the  United  States; 

And  whereas  this  last  delay  of  fifteen  days  allowed  for  answer  has  elapsed  and  no 
answer  has  been  received ; * , . „ . J 

And  whereas,  in  addition  to  the  tacit  admission  resulting  from  the  above  refusal  to 
answer,  I have  received  evidence  fully  establishing  the  truth  of  the  fact  that  the  said 
William  B.  Mumford,  a citizen  of  this  Confederacy,  was  actually  and  publicly  exe^ 
cuted  in  cold  blood  by  hanging  after  the  occupation  of  the  city  of  New  Orleans  by 
the  forces  under  the  command  of  General  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  when  said  Mumford 
was  an  unresisting  and  non-combatant  captive,  and  for  no  offense  even  alleged  to  have! 
been  committed  by  him  subsequent  to  the  date  of  the  capture  of  the  said  city  j 

And  whereas  the  silence  of  the  Government  of  the  United  States  and  its  maintain- 
ing of  said  Butler  in  high  office  under  its  authority  for  many  months  after  his  com, 
mission  of  an  act  that  can  be  viewed  in  no  other  light  than  as  a deliberate  murder 
as  well  as  of  numerous  other  outrages  and  atrocities  hereafter  to  be  mentioned,  aliord 
evidence  only  too  conclusive  that  the  said  Government  sanctions  the  conduct  of  said 
Butler  and  is  determined  that  he  shall  remain  unpunished  for  his  crimes: 

Now,  therefore,  I,  Jefferson  Davis,  President  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America/ 
and  in  their  name,  do  pronounce  anddeclare  the  said  Benjamin  F.  Butler  to  be  a felon/ 
deserving  of  capital  punishment.  I do  order  that  he  be  no  longer  considered  or  treated! 
simply  as  a public  enemy  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America,  but  as  an  outlaw  and1 
common  enemy  of  mankind,  and  that  in  the  event  of  his  capture  the  officer  m com- 
mand of  the  capturing  force  do  cause  him  to  be  immediately  executed  by  hanging . 
and  I do  further  order  that  no  commissioned  officer  of  the  United  States  taken  captive 
shall  be  released  on  parole  before  exchange  until  the  said  Butler  shall  have  met  with 
due  punishment  for  his  crimes.  . _ , , ,,  » e J 

And  whereas  the  hostilities  waged  against  this  Confederacy  by  the  forces  ot  the 
United  States  under  the  command  of  said  Benjamin  F.  Butler  have  borne  no  resem- 
blance to  such  warfare  as  is  alone  permissible  by  the  rules  of  international  law  or  tne 
usages  of  civilization,  but  have  been  characterized  by  repeated  atrocities  and  outrages, 
among  the  large  number  of  which  the  followingmay  be  cited  as  examples. 

Peaceful  and  aged  citizens,  unresisting  captives  and  non-combatants,  have  been 


* Correspondence  referred  to  in  this  proclamation  will  appear  in  Series  II. 


Chap.  XXYH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


907 


confined  at  hard  labor,  with  balls  and  chains  attached  to  their  limbs,  and  are  still  so 
held,  in  dungeons  and  fortresses.  Others  have  been  subjected  to  a like  degrading 
punishment  for  selling  medicines  to  the  sick  soldiers  of  the  Confederacy. 

The  soldiers  of  the  United  States  have  been  invited  and  encouraged  by  general 
orders  to  insult  and  outrage  the  wives,  the  mothers,  and  the  sisters  of  our  citizens. 

Helpless  women  have  been  torn  from  their  homes  and  subjected  to  solitary  con- 
finement, some  in  fortresses  and  prisons  and  one  especially  on  an  island  of  barren 
sand  under  a tropical  sun,  have  been  fed  with  loathsome  rations  that  had  been  con- 
demned as  unfit  for  soldiers,  and  have  been  exposed  to  the  vilest  insults. 

Prisoners  of  war  who  surrendered  to  the  naval  forces  of  the  United  States  on  agree- 
ment that  they  should  be  released  on  parole  have  been  seized  and  kept  in  close  con- 

Repeated  pretexts  have  been  sought  or  invented  for  plundering  the  inhabitants  of 
the  captured  city  by  fines,  levied  and  exacted  under  threat  of  imprisoning  recusants 
at  hard  labor  with  ball  and  chain. 

The  entire  population  of  the  city  of  New  Orleans  have  been  forced  to  elect  between 
starvation,  by  the  confiscation  of  all  their  property,  and  taking  an  oath  against  con- 
science to  bear  allegiance  to  the  invaders  of  their  country. 

Eoress  from  the  city  has  been  refused  to  those  whose  fortitude  withstood  the  test, 
sven  to  lone  and  aged  women  and  to  helpless  children  ; and  after  being  ejected  from 
their  homes  and  robbed  of  their  property  they  have  been  left  to  starve  in  the  streets 
or  subsist  on  charity.  . _ . * 

The  slaves  have  been  driven  from  the  plantations  in  the  neighborhood  ot  JNew  Or- 
leans till  their  owners  would  consent  to  share  the  crops  with  the  commanding  gen- 
eral, his  brother,  Andrew  J.  Butler,  and  other  officers;  and  when  such  consent  had 
been  extorted  the  slaves  have  been  restored  to  the  plantations,  and  there  compelled 
to  work  under  the  bayonets  of  guards  of  United  States  soldiers. 

Where  this  partnership  was  refused  armed  expeditions  have  been  sent  to  the  plan- 
tations to  rob  them  of  every  thing  that  was  susceptible  of  removal,  and  even  slaves 
too  aged  or  infirm  for  work  have,  in  spite  of  their  entreaties,  been  forced  from  the 
homes  provided  by  the  owners  and  driven  to  wander  helpless  on  the  highway. 

By  a recent  general  order  (No.  91)  the  entire  property  in  that  part  of  Louisiana 
lying  west  of  the  Mississippi  River  has  been  sequestrated  for  confiscation,  and  officers 
have  been  assigned  to  duty,  with  orders  to  ‘‘gather  up  and  collect  the  personal  prop- 
erty and  turn  over  to  the"  proper  officers  upon  their  receipts  such  of  said  property 
as  may  be  required  for  the  use  of  the  United  States  Army ; to  collect  together  all  the 
other  personal  property  and  bring  the  same  to  New  Orleans  and  cause  it  to  be  sold 
at  public  auction  to  the  highest  bidders”— an  order  which,  if  executed,  condemns  to 
punishment  by  starvation  at  least  a quarter  of  a million  of  human  beings  of  all 
ages,  sexes,  and  conditions ; and  of  which  the  execution,  although  forbidden  to  mili- 
tary officers  by  the  orders  of  President  Lincoln,  is  in  accordance  with  the  confisca- 
tion law  of  our  enemies,  which  he  has  directed  to  be  enforced  through  the  agency  of 
civil  officials.  And,  finally,  the  African  slaves  have  not  only  been  excited  to  insur- 
rection by  every  license  and  encouragement,  but  numbers  of  them  have  actually  been 
armed  for  a servile  war— a war  in  its  nature  far  exceeding  in  horrors  the  most  merci- 
less atrocities  of  the  savages. 

And  whereas  the  officers  under  the  command  of  the  said  Butler  have  been  in  many 
instances  active  and  zealous  agents  in  the  commission  of  these  crimes,  and  no  in- 
stance is  known  of  the  refusal  of  any  one  of  them  to  participate  in  the  outrages  above 
narrated ; 

And  whereas  the  President  of  the  United  States  has,  by  public  and  official  declara- 
tion, signified  not  only  his  approval  of  the  effort  to  excite  servile  war  within  the 
Confederacy,  but  his  intention  to  give  aid  and  encouragement  thereto  if  these  inde- 
pendent States  shall  continue  to  refuse  submission  to  a foreign  power  after  the  first 
day  of  January  next,  and  has  thus  made  known  that  all  appeals  to  the  laws  of  na- 
tions, the  dictates  of  reason,  and  the  instincts  of  humanity  would  be  addressed  in 
vain  to  our  enemies,  and  that  they' can  be  deterred  from  the  commission  of  these 
crimes  only  by  the  terms  of  just  retribution : 

Now,  therefore,  I,  Jefferson  Davis,  President  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America, 
and  acting  by  their  authority,  appealing  to  the  Divine  Judge  in  attestation  that 
their  conduct  "is  not  guided  by  the  passion  of  revenge,  but  that  they  reluctantly  yield 
to  the  solemn  duty  of  repressing,  by  necessary  severity,  crimes  of  which  their  citi- 
zens are  the  victims,  do  issue  this  my  proclamation,  and  by  virtue  of  my  authority  as 
Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Armies  of  the  Confederate  States  do  order — 
i 1st.  That  all  commissioned  officers  in  the  command  of  said  Benjamin  F.  Butler  be 
! declared  not  entitled  to  be  considered  as  soldiers  engaged  in  honorable  warfare,  but 
as  robbers  and  criminals,  deserving  death ; and  that  they  and  each  of  them  be,  when- 
ever captured,  reserved  for  execution. 

2d.  That  the  private  soldiers  and  non-commissioned  officers  in  the  army  of  said 
Butler  be  considered  as  only  the  instruments  used  for  the  commission  of  the  crimes 


908 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xxvn. 


perpetrated  by  Ms  orders  and  not  as  free  agents;  that  they  therefore  be  treated, 
when  captured,  as  prisoners  of  war,  with  kindness  and  humanity,  and  be  sent  home 
on  the  usual  parole,  that  they  will  in  no  manner  aid  or  serve  the  United  States  in 
any  capacity  during  the  continuance  of  this  war  unless  duly  exchanged. 

3d.  That  all  negro  slaves  captured  in  arms  be  at  once  delivered  over  to  the  execu- 
tive authorities  of  the  respective  States  to  which  they  belong,  to  be  dealt  with  ac- 
cording to  the  laws  of  said  States. 

4th.  That  the  like  orders  be  executed  in  all  cases  with  respect  to  all  commissioned 
officers  of  the  United  States  when  found  serving  in  company  with  armed  slaves  in 
insurrection  against  the  authorities  of  the  different  States  of  this  Confederacy. 

In  testimony  whereof  I have  signed  these  presents  and  caused  the  seal  of  the  Con- 
federate States  of  America  to  be  affixed  thereto  at  the  city  of  Richmond,  on 
Tl.  s.]  this  23d  day  of  December,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hun- 
dred and  sixty-two. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 

By  the  President : 

J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  State. 

II.  Officers  of  the  Army  are  charged  with  the  observance  and  enforce-, 
ment  of  the  foregoing  orders  of  the  President.  Where  the  evidence  is 
not  full,  or  the  case  is  for  any  reason  of  a doubtful  character,  it  will 
be  referred  through  this  office  for  the  decision  of  the  War  Department. 

By  order : 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


December  25, 1862. 

Colonel  Debray: 

General  Magruder  directs  that  you  summon  Maj.  (Capt.)  Leon  Smitl 
and  direct  him  to  prepare  the  Bayou  City  for  service  immediately  ; t<| 
put  a platform  on  the  boat  for  the  32-pounder  rifled  gun,  which  will  be 
sent  up  to  Harrisburg  to-morrow ; to  prepare  the  Neptune  in  like  man 
ner  for  the  two  24-pounder  howitzers  now  at  Harrisburg.  He  will  us^ 
Cotton  on  the  decks  of  both  to  give  the  appearance  of  protection  and 
not  wait  to  fasten  it  if  it  costs  time.  For  this  purpose  he  will  use  al 
the  mechanics  and  other  force  that  can  be  worked  with  advantage,  taki 
ing  the  material  or  property  he  may  need  by  seizing  if  necessary.  Ht 
will  send  some  other  boat  for  the  guns  at  Morgan’s  Point  instead  of  the 
Neptune.  He  will  call  for  150  volunteers  for  each  boat,  taking  citizen f 
and  soldiers  from  all  quarters.  He  will  make  all  the  dispositions  and 
perform  all  his  functions  in  the  general’s  name.  He  will  use  the  small!) 
arms  already  given  him  if  they  have  not  been  sent  away.  He  will  b(! 
ready  to  move  at  12  m.  day  after  to-morrow  (Saturday)  to  take  part  ii! 
an  attack  upon  the  fleet  if  things  do  not  change.  The  coxswain  of  th<( 
Owasco  has  deserted,  and  will  be  sent  up  to  report  to  Major  Smith  to 
morrow.  He  says  the  fleet  can  be  easily  driven  out  of  the  harbor,  anc 
is  anxious  to  take  part  and  lead  a cotton  boat  in  the  fight.  He  is  drunk, 
and  has  been  fighting,  he  says,  on  account  of  his  principles.  He  wil 
not  play  false.  If  he  does  he  dies.  He  wishes  to  serve  the  gun  him 
self.  Take  him  on  board,  but  do  not  let  him  go  near  the  gun.  Trea 
him  kindly  and  let  him  remain  near  the  captain.  Take  any  man’s  cot 
ton  unless  it  can  be  bought.  I prefer  Major  Smith  to  go  in  commant 
of  both  boats.  Attack  from  on  shore,  if  any,  will  be  with  about  2,00< 
long-range  rifles  and  twenty  pieces  of  artillery.  Only  300  soldiers  have 
arrived,  and  they  in  an  unarmed  vessel.  Keep  the  coxswain,  Monroe 
from  liquor.  Colonel  Debray  will  order  down  such  unarmed  men  o 


Ohap.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


909 


Sibley’s  brigade  as  can  be  spared.  Captain  Good  has  still  some  Mis- 
sissippi rifles  or  other  small-arms  on  band.  Let  him  issue  them  to  Major 
Smith  to  arm  his  vessel.  Tell  the  editors  of  papers  not  to  publish  a 
word  as  to  army  movements  in  this  State.  Colonel  Debray  will  be  sent 
for  if  there  is  a fight. , Send  the  message  to  Colonel  Hardeman  to  Col- 
umbus and  no  farther. 

C.  G.  FORSHEY, 
Consulting  Engineer. 


Houston,  Tex.,  December  25,  1862 — 2 p.  m. 

Colonel  Debray: 

* # * # * # # 

Send  an  express  to  Major  Shea,  directing  him,  in  General  Magruder’s 
name,  to  burn  the  railroad  ties  at  Indianola  and  Lavaca.  Direct  Major 
Shea  to  order,  in  General  Magruder’s  name,  the  cavalry  battalion  near 
Victoria,  left  there  for  his  support,  to  proceed  to  Lavaca,  leaving  their 
horses  in  charge  of  not  more  than  one-fifth  of  the  men  and  one  or  two 
careful  commissioned  officers,  to  remain  at  Victoria  until  further  orders. 
Direct  Major  Shea  to  burn  or  destroy  the  light-houses  at  Saluria  and 
Pass  Cavallo  and  all  the  houses  at  Pass  Cavallo  if  practicable.  Send 
a copy  of  these  orders  by  mail  to  General  Bee. 

* # # # # * * 

Send  an  order,  in  General  Magruder’s  name,  to  Major  Hobby  to  send 
a party  to  Aransas  light  house  to  destroy  it.  Captain  Neal  or  Captain 
Willke  will  know  the  best  way  of  approaching  it.  Let  them  take  for 
this  purpose  two  kegs  of  powder.  Say  that  the  general  is  aware  of  the 
difficulties,  but  believes  they  can  be  overcome.  Direct  General  Bee, 
in  General  Magruder’s  name,  to  order  by  courier  the  officers  in  com- 
mand of  the  troops  at  Brownsville  to  destroy  the  light-house  on  Padre 
Island. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Magruder: 

E.  P.  TURNEEr, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Eastern  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Houston,  Tex.,  December  25,  1862. 

Major  Shea  : 

Sir  : I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Magruder,  who  is  now  at 
Virginia  Point,  to  inform  you  that  the  enemy  have  landed  at  Galveston. 
Major-General  Magruder  orders  that  you  burn  the  railroad  ties  at 
Indianola ; also  the  bridges  at  Indianola  and  Lavaca.  You  will  in  his 
name  order  the  cavalry  battalion  near  Victoria,  left  there  for  your  sup- 
port, to  proceed  to  Lavaca,  leaving  their  horses  in  charge  of  not  more 
than  one-fifth  of  their  force  and  one  or  two  careful  commissioned  officers, 
to  remain  at  Victoria  until  further  orders.  You  will  burn  or  destroy 
the  light  houses  at  Saluria  and  Pass  Cavallo  and  all  the  houses  at  Pass 
Cavallo  if  practicable. 

A copy  of  each  of  the  above  orders  I will  send  by  mail  to  General 
Bee.  The  major-general  commanding  also  orders  that  you  remount  the 
10-inch  columbiad,  if  it  has  arrived,  at  once  ; if  not,  send  a courier  at 
ouce  to  hurry  up  Lieutenant  Woodward  with  the  gun. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBRAY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Eastern  Sub-District  of  Texas, 


910 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTL 


Headquarters  Eastern  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Houston , Tex .,  December  25,  1862. 

Major  Hobby, 

Commanding , Corpus  Christy  Tex. : 

Major  : Major-General  Magruder,  who  is  now  at  Virginia  Point  (the 
enemy  having  arrived  to-day  in  some  force  at  Galveston),  directs  that 
yon  send  a party  to  Aransas  light-house  to  destroy  it.  Captain  Neal ; 
or  Captain  Wiilke  will  know  the  best  way  of  approaching  it.  Let 
them  take  for  this  purpose  two  kegs  of  powder.  Major-General  Ma- 
gruder desires  me  to  say  that  he  is  aware  of  the  difficulties,  but  he  be- 
lieves they  can  be  overcome. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBRAY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Eastern  Sub-District  of  Texas . 


Opelousas,  La.,  December  25, 1862. 

Lieut.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding  Trans-Mississippi  Department : 

General:  In  obedience  to  the  orders  received  from  the  Secretary 
of  War,  a copy  of  which  is  herewith  inclosed,  I have  the  honor  to  report 
my  arrival  at  this  place  en  route  to  New  Iberia.  I reported  to  you  from 
Vicksburg  also.  While  in  Richmond  the  President  impressed  upon  me 
the  importance  of  immediate  and  active  operations  in  this  quarter  and 
that  I should  meet  my  brigade  at  the  point  designated.  At  Jackson  I 
was  informed  that  the  troops  had  been  directed  by  General  Magruder 
to  Virginia  Point,  in  front  of  Galveston,  and  again  at  Vicksburg  I was 
notified  by  letter  from  one  of  my  staff  at  Monroe  that  General  Scurry 
had  been  assigned  to  the  command  of  my  brigade,  and  had  proceeded 
to  Texas  accordingly,  and,  moreover,  that  the  Val verde  Battery  was 
then  at  Monroe.  I do  not  assume  this  unofficial  information  to  be  cor- 
rect ; but  in  the  event  that  it  should  be  so  I deem  it  proper  to  say  to 
you  that  an  interview  with  the  Governor  and  many  members  of  the  Leg- 
islature to-day  has  satisfied  me  that  this  part  of  the  State  of  Louisiana,; 
by  far  the  richest  in  the  Confederacy,  is  in  a lamentably  defen selessi 
condition.  The  people  and  the  authorities  had  relied  confidently  upon 
the  Texas  troops,  promised  them  so  repeatedly  by  the  War  Department 
and  the  President,  for  protection.  Indeed  the  President  had  assured 
two  gentlemen,  planters  on  the  Atchafalaya,  in  Jackson,  on  the  20th 
instant,  that  General  Sibley  was  at  New  Iberia  with  his  brigade.  The 
citizens  seem  to  have  lost  all  confidence  in  themselves  and  reliance  in 
the  assurances  of  the  Government,  and  are  fleeing  from  every  quarter 
and  in  every  direction.  The  Arizona  Battalion,  of  my  brigade,  has  beep 
actively  and  very  usefully  employed,  under  its  very  efficient  lieutenant- 
colonel  (Herbert),  scouting  and  reconnoitering  in  the  vicinity  of  Plaque- 
mine  and  the  Mississippi  River.  With  the  exception  of  this  battalion 
1 have  no  troops  to  operate  with  under  the  orders  of  the  War  Depart- 
ment. 11 

I have  written  to  General  Taylor  and  furnished  him  with  a copy  oi 
my  orders;  but  the  equivocal  character  of  that  order  as  regards  my 
relative  official  position  to  him  leaves  me  no  alternative  but  to  await 
your  instructions.  Meanwhile  I shall  proceed  to  New  Iberia  and  tc, 
the  salt-works  in  that  vicinity,  and  familiarize  myself  with  the  roads, 
streams,  and  general  resources  of  the  country.  It  is  proper  that  1 


Chap.  XXVII.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


911 


should  also  inform  you  that  my  staff  officers  are  en  route  to  this  place 
with  funds  for  the  payment  and  subsistence  of  my  troops.  A supply 
of  sabers,  cartridge  boxes,  &c.,  are  also  en  route  from  Richmond.  No 
other  cavalry  arms  could  be  obtained  from  that  quarter,  and  the  Gov- 
ernment informs  me  that  General  Taylor  has  none.  In  short,  this 
country  is  absolutely  destitute,  I fear,  both  of  men  and  material.  I had 
the  honor  on  another  occasion  to  represent  to  you  the  importance  of 
keeping  the  Yal verde  Battery  with  the  troops  so  closely  identified  with 
it.  I beg  leave  to  report  and  urge  this  upon  you,  and  I would  respect- 
fully request  that  the  battery  under  Captain  Sayers  be  ordered  to  New 
Iberia  at  once. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  H.  SIBLEY, 
Brigadier- General. 

[Inclosure.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  282.  j Richmond , Va .,  December  2,  1862. 

***-**## 

IY.  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley,  Provisional  Army,  will  proceed  to  New 
Iberia,  La.,  and  resume  command  of  his  brigade,  reporting  by  letter  to 
Lieut.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  commanding  TransrMississippi  Department. 
* * * # * # # 

By  command  of  Secretary  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


Virginia  Point,  Tex.,  December  -26,  1862. 

dr.  Arthur  T.  Lynn, 

Consul  to  Her  Britannic  Majesty , and  other  Consuls  and 

Consular  Agents  of  different  powers  at  Galveston,  Tex. : 

Gentlemen  : I received  your  communication  of  22d  instant,  in  which 
ou  state  that  you  have  been  informed  by  the  mayor  of  Galveston  that 
11  communication  between  that  city  (Galveston)  and  the  interior  of  the 
State  is  now  cut  off,  and  you  request  me  to  state  for  your  information 
nd  guidance  if  this  order  is  intended  to  prohibit  you  from  obtaining 
hose  provisions  from  the  State  which  are  necessary  for  the  support  of 
he  aliens  remaining  at  the  port  and  who  now  compose  the  majority  of 
he  inhabitants. 

In  reply,  I have  the  honor  to  inform  you,  as  indeed  you  well  know, 
hat  the  harbor  of  Galveston  has  been  in  the  exclusive  possession  of 
he  enemy  since  early  in  October,  and  that  Confederate  soldiers  or 
itizens,  even  singly,  cannot  pass  into  the  city  without  being  fired  upon 
y the  fleet,  which  commands  all  approach  from  the  interior.  Under 
hese  circumstances  the  citizens  of  Galveston,  without  regard  to  nation- 
lity,  have  been  invited  to  the  interior,  and  transportation  offered  free 
f cost  to  all.  This  was  availed  of  to  some  extent.  The  invitation  has 
een  renewed  from  time  to  time.  More  recently  1 directed  Colonel 
>ebray  to  give  notice  that  persons  could  pass  to  and  from  Galveston 
P to  a certain  period ; all  intercourse  would  be  prohibited ; by  my  order 
ie]  requested  the  mayor  of  Galveston  to  communicate  to  the  foreign 
msuls  this  determination  of  mine,  and  to  state  to  them  that  I would 


912 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  xxvn. 

not  be  responsible  for  any  annoyance  to  those  who  should  remain  in 
Galveston  after  that  time,  thus  giving  every  opportunity  to  the  consuls 
and  citizens  or  subjects  of  their  respective  consuls  to  establish  them- 
selves in  Houston  or  elsewhere  in  the  interior.  This  period  has  passed,  j 
but  I am  still  willing  to  afford  the  foreign  consuls  and  all  others  in  Gal-' 
veston  every  facility  in  my  power  for  leaving  that  city,  provided  it  is 
claimed  within  twenty-four  hdurs  from  the  time  of  the  delivery  of  this  ! 
note  to  Her  Britannic  Majesty’s  consul  at  Galveston. 

With  respect  to  provisions  for  the  citizens  of  Galveston  I have  the 
honor  to  state,  for  the  information  of  the  consuls,  that  arrangements 
were  entered  into  by  me  with  the  commander  of  the  Federal  fleet  and 
all  parties  concerned  for  provisioning  the  city  by  steamers  sent  in  for! 
that  purpose.  The  commanding  officer  of  the  Federal  fleet,  however,  ! 
insisted  on  inserting  in  th$  article  of  agreement  that  steamers  bearing 
a flag  of  truce  should  not  float  the  Confederate  flag.  This  was  of  course] 
peremptorily  refused  by  me,  since  which  I have  sent  an  officer  to  treat] 
with  the  commander  of  the  Federal  fleet  with  the  view  of  removing  from, 
the  articles  of  agreement  these  objectional  features,  but  I have  no* 
official  knowledge  of  the  result  of  this  conference.  It  is  evident,  under! 
these  circumstances,  that  no  injustice  has  been  done  the  consuls  or  the] 
citizens  or  subjects  of  the  Governments  which  they  represent. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGBUDEB, 

Maj.  Gen.,  Comdg.  Dist.  of  Texas,  Neiv  Mexico,  and  Arizona. 


Headquarters  Eastern  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Houston , Tex.,  December  26,  1862. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Buchel, 

Or  any  Officer  Commanding  at  Brownsville , Tex. : 

Sir:  Major-General  Magruder,  who  is  now  at  Virginia  Point,  oppo| 
site  Galveston,  where  Federal  forces  are  arriving,  instructs  me  by  telej 
graph  to  send  to  you  in  his  name  the  following  order:  u You  will  im-j 
mediately  destroy  the  light-house  on  Padre  Island.”  A copy  of  this 
order  is  forwarded  to  Brigadier-General  Bee,  your  immediate  com- 
mander. You  will  report  the  execution  of  this  order  both  to  General 
Bee  at  San  Antonio  and  to  General  Magruder  at  Houston. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X.  B.  DEBBAY, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Eastern  Sub-District  of  Texas,  jj 


San  Antonio,  Tex.,  December  27,  1862. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  Texas,  &c. : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt,  per  Captair 
Loebnitz,  of  your  communication  of  the  23d  instant,  containing  certair 
inquiries  relative  to  Brigadier-General  Sibley.  Capt.  J.  E,  Dwyei 
aide-de-camp  to  General  Sibley,  arrived  here  on  yesterday  morning  <b 
rect  from  Biclimond,  which  place  he  left  on  the  5th  or  6th  instant.  H( 
informs  me  that  General  Sibley  was  then  in  receipt  of  orders  from  tin. 
War  Department  to  proceed  forthwith  to  New  Iberia,  La.,  and  thereto 
resume  the  command  of  his  brigade.  Qeneral  Sibley  was  to  leayo 


913 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

Richmond  in  pursuance  of  these  orders  on  the  day  succeeding  Captain 
Dwyer’s  departure,  and  Captain  Dwyer  subsequently  learned  that  Gen- 
eral Sibley  had  left  Richmond  at  the  period  designated.  I am  in  re- 
ceipt of  no  other  information  on  these  subjects,  but  regard  Captain 
Dwyer’s  information  as  perfectly  certain,  he  having  himself  seen  the 
orders  of  the  Department  to  General  Sibley. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  M.  JACKSON, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex.,  December  27,  1862. 
His  Excellency  Governor  Lubbock: 

Governor  : I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Magruder  to  state 
that  the  militia  which  has  already  been  called  out  are  required  at  the 
earliest  moment  possible  to  strengthen  the  army  and  to  provide  for  the 
defenses  of  the  State.  You  are  therefore  respectfully  requested  to 
give  immediate  orders  for  the  commanding  officers  to  report  with  their 
companies,  organized  in  accordance  with  the  Confederate  States  regu- 
lations, at  this  place.  You  are  also  requested  to  provide  them  with  a 
full  supply  of  arms  and  ammunition,  as  they  will  be  immediately  sent 
to  the  coast  to  provide  for  its  defense. 

I am,  Governor,  very  respectfully, 

A.  G.  DICKINSON, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Port  Hudson,  December  28,  1862. 
Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

General  Gardner  has  arrived  and  assumed  command. 

WM.  N.  R.  BEALL, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters,  Port  Hudson, 

December  29,  1862. 

issT.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  La., 

Jackson , Miss. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  concerning  this 
Dost: 

i I have  kept  myself  busy  in  reconnoitering  the  locality,  and  I find 
hat  a large  amount  of  work  has  been  done,  and  generally  well  done, 
)ut  there  is  yet  a great  deal  to  do.  The  batteries  are  generally  well 
posted  and  well  made,  but  there  is  not  a sufficient  supply  of  ammuni- 
tion. The  field  works  are  well  laid  out  and  well  constructed  and  are 
being  pushed  as  rapidly  as  the  limited  means  will  permit.  I would 
espectfully  urge  that  a large  number  of  axes,  spades,  and  pick-axes 
nay  be  sent  as  soon  as  possible.  The  very  broken  country,  even 
vithin  the  lines,  makes  it  difficult  to  fortify  every  part  as  thoroughly 

58  r r — VOL  xv 


914  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  xxvn. 

as  it  should  be  without  making  the  lines  too  extended,  hut  the  work  j 

ms 

areaU  new’ levies^  except  about  three  regiments,  and  the  regiments  are 
well  filled  up.  The  gunboats  and  transports  have  all  retame ^ N 

as  pos°s"nd  a larger  supply  of  ammunition  is  urgently  needed  for 

aU  theinamT  livery  respectfully,  your  ohedmnt^erv^^ 

Major-  General. 


Orders,  ) 
— { 


Hdqes.  Louisiana  Militia,  Ad jt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

„ ...  j Opelousas,  December  29,  lb62. 

I Brig  Gen.  B.  B.  Todd,  commanding  Eleventh  Brigade,  wiB,  imme-. 

sisaasss 

sippi  Biver.  * 

* * * * . 

By  order  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in-chief. 


Houston,  Tex.,  December  29, 1862. 

Maj-  “>  «*  rfe0Th;  hono 

' -SeeKandolph  ta^lagn.derNV)V..u:tber  7,  1882,  and  MoWiUie  to  Secretary  of  W« 
January  10,  1863. 


hap.  XXVH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  915 

o terribly  from  these  savage  visitations,  is  as  natural  as  their  hostility 

0 the  prowling  beasts  of  prey. 

It  is  a matter  of  notoriety  "that  for  .years  past  tribes  of  Indians  liv- 
og  in  Kansas  under  treaty  with  the  United  States  Government  and  re- 
eiving  its  annuities  have  been  at  war  with  Texans  as  if  we  were  a 
oreign  people.  They  regularly  stole  from  our  frontier  hundreds  upon 
undreds  of  valuable  animals,  and  found  a market  for  them  at  the  Gov- 
rnment  forts  and  agencies  both  in  and  out  of  Texas. 

It  is  equally  notorious  that  on  numerous  occasions  the  women  of  our 
>tate  have  been  taken  prisoners,  and,  after  being  subjected  to  every 
utrage  that  the  brutal  passions  of  the  savage  could  prompt,  they  were 
lurdered  in  cold  blood,  and  their  scalps  used  to  ornament  the  shields 
f the  Indian  warriors.  As  one  of  the  hundreds  of  sad  proofs  of  such 
cenes  of  horror  I have  myself  seen  an  Indian  shield  on  which  were 
lie  scalps  of  twenty-two  different  unfortunate  women,  paraded  as  em- 
letns  of  the  Indian  murderer’s  valor  and  prowess.  Further,  I present 
ou  the  shield  of  an  Indian  chief  who  was  killed  by  myself  in  a hand- 
i-hand conflict  in  the  month  of  June,  1860,  in  Throckmorton  County, 
’exas,  after  he  and  his  marauding  party  had  perpetrated  several  mur- 
ers  in  my  immediate  neighborhood.  It  is  ornamented,  you  will  see, 
fter  the  usual  fashion  of  the  Indian  warrior,  with  a scalp— -a  woman’s 
iir  tresses— those  of  a young  American  lady,  thought  to  be  a Miss 
ackson,  who  had  been  murdered  during  one  of  the  frequent  raids.  I 
ispectfully  request  that  it  be  sent  to  His  Excellency  the  President,  to 
nable  him  to  judge  whether  there  is  not  some  cause  for  the  bitter  feel- 
lgs  I,  in  common  with  the  people  of  our  frontier,  entertain  toward  the 
idians.  As  I write  there  is  now  in  the  city  of  Houston  a voung  lady 
•om  whose  lips  you  can  hear  a tale  of  Indian  atrocities  which  she  her- 
)lf  witnessed,  wherein  a lady  of  respectability  was  the  victim  of  the 
tost  deliberate  and  fiendish  cruelty,  which  is  but  one  of  scores  of  sirni- 
t outrages  that  have  desolated  the  homes  of  my  friends  and  brother 
ontiersmen  for  years. 

But  I need  not  dilate  further  on  this  point.  A full  and  detailed  rec- 
’d  of  the  whole  series  of  Indian  atrocities  perpetrated  on  the  frontier 
ittlers  of  Texas  is  now  on  file  in  the  State  archives  at  Austin.  It  is 
le  result  of  the  investigations  of  a board  of  commissioners  composed 
’some  of  the  most  respected,  reliable,  and  intelligent  gentlemen  of  the 
fcate,  appointed  by  the  Governor  for  the  express  purpose  of  ascertain  - 
g all  the  facts  as  to  the  repeated  reports  of  Indian  cruelties  inflicted  on 
lr  frontier.  It  is  a simple,  unvarnished  narrative,  but  furnishes  a fear- 
.1  tale  of  sorrow  and  suffering.  Women  and  children  are  the  princi- 
il  sufferers  in  the  atrocities  it  depicts,  and  its  perusal  would,  I am  cer- 
iii,  arouse  the  coldest  heart  and  feeblest  arm  to  unsparing  hatred  of 
relentless,  merciless,  and  treacherous  foe,  and  a natural  desire  to  see 
tern  driven  utterly  from  the  face  of  the  earth. 

1 would  here  add,  as  an  additional  motive  for  the  intense  hostility  of 
e thousands  of  Texas  frontiersmen  for  the  Indians,  that  the  tribes 
Inch  have  inflicted  such  losses  on  them  are  with  few  exceptions  wilder, 
jrcer,  and  more  untamable  than  any  known  to  exist  in  Kortli  America, 
ley  are  more  nomadic  even  than  the  Arabs  of  the  desert ; they  live 
clusively  on  meat,  and  some  tribes  it  is  well  known  are  cannibals. 

The  late  United  States  Government  attempted,  however,  from  the 
ost  praiseworthy  motives,  to  tame  and  reclaim  the  savages.  With  a 
^severance  and  a liberality  worthy  of  better  objects  for  such  efforts 
id  such  expenditure  that  Government  for  seven  years  in  Texas  per- 
sted  in  its  efforts,  based,  as  experience  has  shown,  on  a falser  philan- 


916  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  X.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL  I 

thropy  than  that  of  England  toward  the  slaves  of  Jamaica.  The  In- 
dians lived  on  the  reserves  and  in  the  homes  provided  for  them,  expended 
their  annuities,  devoured  the  Government  provisions,  pretended  mend- 1 
ship  with  the  whites,  played  at  agriculture  and  civilization,  and  m theJ 
mean  time  committed  robberies  and  murders  innumerable  on  the  citi-l 

^Ouruew  Government  has  attempted  to  follow  out  the  same  policy, 
and  what  has  been  the  result  1 Why,  that  recently  these  Indians  murl 
dered  the  Government  employes  and  left  to  join  our  enemies  m Kansas,) 
as  have  a large  number  of  the  Cherokees,  Greeks,  and  Semmoles.  J 
It  was  with  sentiments  toward  the  Indians,  the  natural  growth  of] 
years  of  such  acquaintance  with  them  and  their  deeds  as  I have  mem 
tioned,  that  at  the  head  of  the  Second  Texas  Mounted  Rifles  I marched, 
into  Arizona  in  1861  to  drive  out  the  Federal  troops.  I found  in  that  I 
rich  and  beautiful  country  evidences  of  constant  Indian  depredaaonsj 
worse  even  than  those  inflicted  on  Texas  and  executed  on  a much  largei 
scale.  I found  at  Fort  Davis  the  formidable  Apache  Indians.  Thejl 
had  come  in  for  the  purpose  of  making  a treaty.  As  Fort  Bliss  wa 
threatened  at  the  time  by  the  Federal  forces  m Arizoi aa  I could  not 
stop  to  make  the  treaty  with  them  (as  I was  ordered  to  do  by  the  com, 
mauding  officers  of  the  department),  but  had  the  head  chief  bronght  tj 
Fort  Bliss  by  stage  and  there  made  the  desired  treaty.  I loaded  bin, 
with  presents  and  sent  him  back  by  stage  to  Fort  Davis  116  depart mj 
with  abundant  expressions  of  friendship.  But  he  left  the  sta^e  afte 
stealing  two  pistols,  and  a few  nights  afterward  the  Indians  of  his  trib 
left  Fort  Davis,  stealing  all  the  horses  they  could  get  and  killing 
number  of  cattle.  They  were  pursued  by  Lieutenant  May,  Gompan; 
D Second  Texas  Mounted  Rifles,  with  15  men,  all  of  whom  except  on 
man  were  killed  by  the  very  Indians  who  had  drawn  rations ; from  u 
for  three  months  previously  and  who  had  never  been  unkindly  tieatei 

in  a single  instance  that  I know  of. 

From  this  out  outrages  were  committed  frequently ; the  mails  wer 
robbed  ; in  one  or  two  instances  the  passengers  were  found  hanging  u 
by  the  heels,  their  heads  within  a tew  inches  of  a slow  fire,  and  the 
thus  horribly  roasted  to  death.  Others  were  found  tied  to  the  wheel 
of  the  coach,  which  had  been  burned.  These  Indians,  400  or  500  strong 
then  attacked  the  Pino  Alto  mines,  and  would  have  murdered  evert 
body  there  but  for  a piece  of  artillery,  sent  there  by  my  order  in  ant 
cipation  of  such  an  assault.  Several  trains  of  emigrants  were  the 
attacked  in  the  mountain  passes  and  were  murdered,  the  Indians  rof 
bin"  them  of  everything.  More  than  100  of  our  citizens  were  murdere. 
by  these  Indians  in  the  face  of  a treaty  which  they  had  broken  witll 

°UUpon  thearrival  of  General  Sibley’s  brigade  these  Indians  stole  fro) 
his  troops  100  head  of  horses  and  mules.  Accompanied  by  many  nati  < 
born  citizens  of  Arizona  and  New  Mexico  I followed  tile  roWiws  traj 
which  led  me  to  the  town  of  Carretas,  Chihuahua.  I thought  “y^d 
iustifiable  in  killing  the  Indians  and  recovering  the  animals,  the  Me. 
ican  alcalde  acknowledging  that  the  Apacheshabitually  stole  proper 
from  the  whites  in  Arizona  and  run  it  into  Mexico,  and  that  his  Go 
ernment  could  not  and  did  not  afford  him  protection  J 

So  soon  as  the  Indians  found  that  1 was  after  them  with  a formidab: 
force  and  determination  to  punish  them  severely  they  went  to  tl 
mines  which  they  had  but  a short  time  previously  attacked,  and  witn 
flag  oflruce  prosed  to  make  a treaty.  Then  it  was  that  I issued  t 
order  to  exterminate  them.  I had  just  read  an  article  published  in  tl 


Chap.  XXYII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


917 


Charleston  Courier  or  Mercury,  sent  me  by  Col.  A.  B.  O’Bannon  from 
Fort  Bliss,  and  which  stated  that  our  Congress  had  declared  a war  of 
extermination  against  all  those  wild  and  hostile  Indian  tribes  who  had 
shown  an  utter  disregard  for  all  treaty  stipulations.  Presuming  from 
such  an  important  statement  in  such  well-known  responsible  journals 
that  it  indicated  the  policy  of  our  Government,  and  feeling  convinced 
(as  I do  still)  that  such  a policy  was  the  only  one  suitable  to  the  hostile 
and  treacherous  tribes,  I acted  on  it. 

The  question  now  presents  itself  as  to  what  will  be  the  policy  of  our 
Government  toward  the  Indians  in  such  exposed  sections  as  Arizona. 
Experience  has  demonstrated  that  since  the  days  of  the  Spanish  Gov- 
ernment in  Mexico  the  people  there  have  relied  upon  the  treaties  with 
the  Indians.  The  result  has  been  that  all  Northern  Mexico,  that  once 
teemed  with  inhabitants  and  with  millions  of  stock,  is  now  a desert,  in 
consequence  of  Indian  depredations  following  broken  Indian  treaties. 
If  the  Confederate  Government  adopts  the  policy  of  making  treaties 
and  endeavors  to  purchase  peace  and  affords  no  more  adequate  protec- 
tion from  Indians  than  the  Government  of  the  United  States  has  af- 
forded on  the  frontier  of  this  State  and  in  Arizona  the  result  will  be 
that  the  citizens  there  will  be  reduced  to  the  condition  of  stock  raisers 
and  herders  for  the  benefit  of  the  Indian  tribes  alone. 

Arizona  has  been  kept  in  poverty  by  Indian  depredations.  Not  a 
cow,  sheep,  or  horse  can  be  raised  there  now  except  by  being  herded 
day  and  night.  As  the  Indians  there  live  almost  exclusively  by  steal- 
ing, depredations  are  a daily  occurrence,  and  the  people  are  kept  poor 
from  the  want  of  protection:  Treaty  after  treaty  has  been  made  and 
broken,  and  the  general  belief  among  the  people  is  that  extermination 
3f  the  growm  Indians  and  making  slaves  of  the  children  is  the  only 
remedy.  This  system  has  been  practiced  in  New  Mexico.  There  is  not 
a,  family  of  wealth  in  that  country  but  has  Indian  slaves  derived  from 
that  source.  In  fact  so  popular  is  this  system  of  civilizing  the  Indian 
that  there  have  been  several  efforts  made  to  pass  a law  in  the  New 
Mexican  Legislature  making  all  Indians  taken  prisoners  slaves  for 
life.  It  was  a knowledge  of  this  custom  among  the  people  of  Arizona 
that  to  some  extent  induced  me  to  give  the  order  that  has  been  the 
3ause  of  complaint  against  me.  I must  acknowledge  that,  a firm  be- 
liever in  the  civilizing  effects  of  the  system  of  slavery  as  regards  the 
African  race,  I cannot  appreciate  as  it  may  possibly  merit  the  sym- 
pathy that  would  consider  the  extension  of  that  system  to  the  youth 
)f  the  Indian  race  a measure  deserving  of  rebuke.  I must  further 
icknowledge  the  possession  of  no  sympathy  whatever  for  the  adults, 
whose  highest  ambition  is  the  successful  prosecution  daily  and  nightly 
)f  wholesale  robbery  and  unsparing  murder,  accompanied  by  traits  of 
iendish  cruelty  and  scenes  of  appalling  horror  that  the  pen  cannot 
lepict  nor  the  imagination  conceive; 

As  Texas  and  Arizona  are  the  only  portions  of  our  youthful  Confed- 
eracy that  will  suffer  from  Indian  depredations  and  atrocities  it  is  a 
natter  of  vital  importance  to  them  what  policy  will  be  decisively 
idopted  by  our  Government  toward  the  perpetrators  of  these  villainies. 

[ risk  nothing  in  asserting  that  this  State  suffers  a loss  of  five  millions 
)f  dollars  annually  attributable  to  Indian  depredations  alone,  and  the 
act  is  evident  that  heretofore  the  Government  was  either  unable  or 
mwilling  to  protect  our  people.  The  result  of  this  has  been  that  the 
rontier  counties  of  this  State  have  been  almost  entirely  abandoned, 
tnd  lauds  can  now  be  purchased  there  for  50  cents  per  acre  that  could 
lot  be  purchased  for  $10  an  acre  six  years  ago.  In  fact  our  frontier 
iettlers  are  fast  becoming  for  the  Indians  just  what  the  Mexicans  are. 


918 


W.  FLA. 


As  the  Indians  are  encouraged  by  our  enemies  in  Kansas,  who  have 
nearly  half  the  Cherokees,  Creeks,  Seminoles,  and  other  smaller  tribes 
under  their  control,  in  addition  to  the  Northern  Comanches  and  Kiowas, 
if  some  more  effectual  means  of  protection  are  not  adopted  it  is  useless 
to  talk  of  maintaining  our  frontiers.  If  the  Government  had  the  com- 
bined wealth  of  the  world  it  could  not  purchase  peace  with  the  Indians, 
and  in  my  humble  opinion  it  would  be  far  cheaper  to  board  the  savages 
(were  that  possible)  at  first-class  hotels  than  to  continue  the  reserva- 
tion, feeding,  paint,  and  blanket  system  longer,  and  one  of  the  govern- 
ing motives  of  the  frontier  counties  of  Texas— which  poll  a majority  of 
the  votes  in  the  State— in  joining  the  secession  movement  was  the  hope 
and  belief  that  our  new  Government  would  drop  the  old  1 peace-pur- 
chasing” system  with  the  Indians  and  adopt  the  extermination  policy. 

I have  no  hesitation  in  stating  that  the  order  referred  to  was  not  in- 
tended for  publication,  nor  did  I suppose  that  it  would  be  paraded  be- 
fore the  country  as  it  has  been  by  the  malice  of  those  who  entertain  no 
good  feeling  toward  me.  Such  an  order  excites  no  surprise  in  Arizona 
or  Texas,  while  it  may  not  read  well  in  Richmond.  Still  I do  not  deem 
it  consistent  with  my  opinions  and  feelings  on  the  subject  of  Indians 
and  Indian  policy  to  retract  or  disavow  a word  of  the  order  referred  to. 
While  I sincerely  regret  that  it  has  been  viewed  m such  a light  by  His 
Excellency  the  President  as  to  induce  him  to  deprive  me  of  the  com- 
mand of  the  brave  men,  most  of  them  my  old.frontier  comrades  whom  I 
was  prepared  to  lead  to  battle  against  both  Abolition  and  savage  foe 
yet  I cannot  alter  the  convictions  and  feelings  of  a life-time.  I can  still 
do  my  country  some  service  should  my  State  be  invaded,  and  m t at 
hour  Texans,  I know,  will  not  refuse  me  a place  in  their  ranks  to  meet 
and  exterminate  a foe  hardly  less  cruel  and  remorseless  than  the  Co- 
manche  or  the  Apache. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^  ^ baYIj0R. 

Governor  of  Arizona . 


[Indorsements.] 


Headquarters  District  of  Texas,  &c., 

February  6,  1863. 

Without  expressing  any  opinion  as  to  the  policy  or  propriety  of  Gov 
ernor  Baylor’s  letter,  I testify  with  pleasure  to  his  devoted  gallantry  at 
the  recapture  of  Galveston,  where  he  served  as  a private  ot  artillery  in 
the  most  exposed  and  dangerous  position  and  rendered  most  impor- 
tant services,  and  I respectfully  but  earnestly  recommend  him  as  the 
most  suitable  officer  for  the  command  of  the  troops  raised  by  him  to 
Arizona  and  known  as  the  Arizona  Brigade.  # „ , 

I beg  leave  to  ask  a perusal  by  the  Secretary  of  War  of  the  within 
statement.  Colonel  O’Bannon  informed  me  that  he  gave  the  informa- 
tion to  Governor  Baylor  that  our  Congress  had  passed  laws  for  the  ex- 
termination of  these  Indians,  whom  I happen  to  know  well  as  being  not 

»»*“'  ”14  b~“  “a  “f  a’SK’BBEgbBE, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

March  24,  1863. 

Bespectfully  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  War.  ^ chAY 

Assistant  Adjutant-Oeneral. 


hap.  XXVH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


919 


March  29,  1863. 

Respectfully  submitted  to  the  President  for  information. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary . 

Secretary  of  War: 

This  letter  requires  attention.  It  is  an  avowal  of  an  infamous  crime 
nd  the  assertion  of  what  should  not  be  true  in  relation  to  troops  in 
?exas,  &c. 

J.  D. 


Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 

New  Iberia , La .,  December  30,  1862. 
leneral  S.  Cooper,  A.  and  I.  G.  G.  S.  Army , Richmond , Va.: 
General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  extract  of 
Ipecial  Orders,  No.  289,  paragraph  IV,  relative  to  Colonel  York  and 
tker  officers  of  the  Fourteenth  Louisiana  Regiment,  who  are  directed 
to  report  (to  me)  for  duty  as  drill  officers,”  &c.,  of  such  conscripts  as 
lay  be  in  camp  and  assigned  to  the  two  brigades  of  Louisiana  infantry 
ow  in  the  State  of  Virginia. 

On  my  arrival  in  the  State  of  Louisiana  I found  but  one  camp  of  in- 
duction established,  viz,  at  Monroe,  and  but  few  conscripts  enrolled 
nd  reported  at  that  camp.  I at  once  established  another,  which  I 
)cated  at  Camp  Pratt,  in  the  southern  portion  of  the  State,  and  having 

0 other  competent  field  officer  at  that  time  subject  to  my  orders,  as- 
igned  Lieutenant-Colonel  Burke,  of  the  Second  Louisiana  Regiment, 
) the  command  of  the  last-mentioned  camp.  In  North  Louisiana  but 
iw  conscripts  were  had,  and  of  those  few  upward  of  100  were  sent 
y me  to  Vicksburg,  where  they  were  greatly  needed  in  the  Louisiana 
Bgiments  on  duty  at  that  important  point.  In  the  section  of  the  State 
Northern  Louisiana)  from  which  the  conscripts  were  required  to  report 
fc  Monroe  but  few  persons  were  liable  to  the  operation  of  the  conscrip- 
on  act,  nearly  the  whole  population  between  eighteen  and  thirty-five 
aving  volunteered  in  the  service  prior  to  the  passage  of  the  act.  In 
outhern  Louisiana,  notwithstanding  the  occupation  of  a considerable 
ortion  of  the  State  by  the  enemy,  about  3,000  persons  were  enrolled 
nd  reported  to  Camp  Pratt  as  conscripts.  Of  this  number  nearly  2,000 
ave  been  assigned  to  the  regiments  ordered  to  my  command  in  this 
istrict  to  fill  their  ranks,  and  the  remainder  sent  to  the  Louisiana  troops 
jrving  at  and  near  Port  Hudson,  and  formed  into  companies  for  service 

1 this  district,  as  authorized  by  the  Department.  The  number  of  con- 
3ripts  recently  brought  tothecamps  is  small,  and  these  have  to  behunted 
own  by  detachments  from  the  small  command  which  I have  at  my  dis- 
osal  and  brought  in  tied  and  sometimes  ironed.  Having  retained  Lieu- 
mant-Oolonel  Burke  some  four  months,  I have  recently  relieved  him 
*om  duty  at  Camp  Pratt  and  he  has  returned  to  his  regiment  in  Vir- 
inia.  Colonel  Waggaman,  of  Tenth  Louisiana  Regiment,  who  came 
ere  for  recruits  for  the  Louisiana  regiments  in  Virginia,  has  been 
ssigned  by  me  to  command  of  Camp  Pratt.  This  officer  speaks  both 
'rench  and  English,  and  the  knowledge  and  use  of  both  languages  is 
nportant  at  that  post.  As  I have  before  stated  to  the  Department,  I 
link  we  can  expect  but  small  additions  to  our  forces  from  the  conscrip- 
on  act  passed  at  the  last  session  of  Congress.  The  exemption  law  ren- 
ers  the  act  almost  inoperative  so  far  as  this  State  is  concerned.  I shall 
stain  Colonel  Waggaman  for  a short  time  until  I can  ascertain  what 


920  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYH. 

number  of  troops  can  be  added  to  our  forces  under  the  conscription  law 
now  sought  to  be  enforced.  You  will  perceive  that,  with  the  great  ter- 
ritory which  is  within  my  military  district  and  scarcely  2,000  effective 
men  for  duty,  I cannot  spare  any  large  detachments  to  hunt  down  and 
bring  to  camp  the  skulking  conscripts  who  seek  to  evade  service. 

For  the  reasons  above  stated  I have  ordered  the  officers  named  in 
extract,  as  above  referred  to,  to  return  to  their  regiments  in  Yir^nia, 
as  they  cannot  be  assigned  to  any  duty  here  which  will  be  of  beneht  to 
the  service  or  accomplish  the  object  intended  by  the  Department. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  TAYLOR, 

Major-General , Commanding . 


YioksburGt,  Miss.,  December  30,  1862. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  Jackson , Miss.: 

In  saying,  “want  all  the  troops  I can  get,”  I mean  that  if  the  enemy 
continues  to  increase  his  force,  and  I have  no  doubt  he  will,  that  all 
the  troops  ordered  to  re-enforce  me  will  be  absolutely  necessary  to  in- 
sure the  safety  of  Yicksburg  and  Port  Hudson.  I cannot  entirely  aban- 
don Grenada,  The  heavy  rain  will  relieve  the  approach  from  fekip- 
witffis  Landing.  Have  accordingly  ordered  troops  from  Yaughau  s to 
Snyder’s  Mill  via  Yazoo  River,  an  important  position.  Relief  for  men 
in  trenches  is  necessary  ; they  have  been  now  three  days  m them,  bo 
far  we  have  held  all  advanced  points  with  very  considerable  loss  to 

enemy  and  small  to  ourselves.  ,,  . Q AAA 

The  enemy  will  strengthen  at  Baton  Rouge.  Their  strength  is  8,000. 
If  necessary,  troops  can  be  returned  from  there.  This  is  the  vital  point. 
The  enemy  is  persevering.  I desire  to  work  ™thpy<^gEI>TON) 

Lieutenant-General,  Commanding . 


Mobile,  December  31,  1862. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War: 

Guns  and  ammunition  most  effective  against  iron-clads  needed  at 
Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson.  Very  much  ly* 


Abstract  from  Bet  urn  of  the  District  of  the  Lower  Bio  Grande,  commanded  by  Lieut.  Col. 
J a.  Buchel,  for  December , 1862  ( headquarters  Fort  Brown , Tex.). 


Troops. 


Fort  Brown,  Tex.,  Eesaca,  Carracitos,  and  Edinburg- . 

Binggold  Barracks 



Carrizo 

Laredo 

Camp  Las  Cuevitas 


Total. 


Present  for 
duty. 


198 

355 

22 

62 

56 

61 


37  754 


227 

438 

24 

65 

70 

65 


359 

471 

41 

81 

85 

65 


•S 


1, 102 


341  | 
103 


532 


bap.  XXVn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


921 


Dol.  Thomas  Green:] 


[January.] 


Colonel  : I send  you  some  15  men  more  by  to-day’s  train.  Am  get- 
ing  on  smoothly  5 have  no  trouble  except  in  getting  corn  to  camp, 
toads  bad. 

One  of  my  paroled  men,  a German,  has  just  come  in  from  Cat  Spring, 
German  settlement  of  this  county,  and  reports  that  the  Germans  are 
mbodying  at  Frelsburg  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  resisting  the  con- 
cript  and  draft  as  State  troops.  They  say  the  negroes  are  to  be  free, 
nd  that  Jack  Hamilton  is  in  the  country.  They  are  supposed  to  num- 
er  from  1,000  to  1,500.  We  are  bound  to  have  trouble  with  them,  and 
he  sooner  the  rebellion  be  crushed  the  better  for  them  and  the  country. 
The  people  of  the  county  are  holding  meetings  and  collecting  arms, 
relieving  themselves  and  property  in  great  danger.  Much  excitement 
5 evinced  by  the  farmers  along  the  river.  They  dread  a concert  on  the 
art  of  the  negroes.  We  have  no  arms  and  can  be  of  little  service. 

Yours, 

McCOWN. 


These  reports  are  reliable.  General  Magruder  should  be  informed  of 
he  facts. 

McCOWN. 


On  account  of  the  difficulty  of  getting  forage  to  camp,  having  to  haul 
■j  some  12  or  15  miles,  would  recommend  that  the  mules  be  sent  to  some 
eighborhood  where  forage  is  abundant  and  not  to  be  hauled.  Let  me 
ear  from  you. 

McC. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  January  1,  1863. 
aeutenant-General  Pemberton,  Vicksburg: 

One  of  General  Gardner’s  staff,  just  arrived,  says  that  the  general  has 
ccurate  information  from  Baton  Rouge,  including  numbers  of  regi- 
lents ; force  10,000  or  11,000.  All  but  three  regiments  are  new.  A 
egiment  and  battalion  expected.  General  Gardner  full  of  confidence. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  January  1, 1863. 
jieutenant-General  Pemberton,  Vicksburg: 

It  would  be  safest  to  re  enforce  Port  Hudson  by  road.  My  informa- 
ion  from  Colonel  Marigny  and  E.  Hiriart,  of  New  Orleaus,  is  that  no 
e-enforcement  is  necessary. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 


Jackson,  January  2,  1863. 

lajor-General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson : 

I am  told  that  you  are  confident  with  your  present  force.  I .hope  it  is 
o,  for  we  can’t  afford  more  men  than  you  want.  If  you  require  more 
ay  so. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General . 


922 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 

War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond , Va.,  January  2,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton, 

Commanding , &c.,  Jackson,  Miss.: 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  16th  instant,  inclosing  one  from  0.  G. 
Dahlgren,  was  referred  to  the  Chief  of  Ordnance,  and  your  attention  is 
respectfully  called  to  his  reply,  as  follows : 


The  messenger  who  left  here  on  the  17th  instant  with  two  10-inch  colambiads  was 
instructed,  to  take  four  32-pounders  from  Mobile  to  General  Taylor  for  the  defense  of 
the  Washita.  Four  more  might  be  sent,  if  deemed  necessary,  from  Mobile  after  the 
arrival  of  the  columbiads.  The  difficulties  of  transportation  are  almost  insurmount-  j 

able‘  J.  GORGAS, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Ordnance. 


J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  Department, 

Little  Rock , January  2,  1863.  . 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder, 

Commanding  District  of  Texas , &c.,  Houston : 

General  * Your  communication  of  the  21st  ultimo,  accompanied] 
with  a duplicate  of  that  of  the  17th,  also  your  letter  of  the  15th  ultimo, 
by  Mr.  Swan,  have  been  received  and  laid  before  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding,  who  instructs  me  to  say  in  answer  to  the  first  two  that 
he  has  no  power  to  order  Sibley’s  brigade  to  remain  in  Texas,  the  order 
for  it  to  move  to  Louisiana  having  emanated  from  the  Department  of 
War:  and,  as  you  will  perceive  from  the  inclosed  copy  of  an  order  from 
the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  to  Brigadier-General  Sibley,  there; 
can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  intention  of  the  Department  on  the  subject.. 
In  answer  to  the  communication  of  the  15th  ultimo,  above  referred, 
to,  I am  directed  by  the  lieutenant-general  to  say  you  have  been  mis- 
informed as  to  the  arms,  shot-guns,  &c.,  brought  from  Texas  not  being 
in  use.  The  arms  which  have  been  received  from  Bichmond  have  been 
appropriated  to.  the  unarmed  regiments.  Arms  are  expected  shortly 
from  east  of  the  Mississippi,  and  General  Blanchard  has  been  directed^ 
to  stop  them  at  Monroe  and  hold  them  subject  to  your  orders. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

’ S.  S.  ANDERSOY, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La.,  January  3,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor, 

Commanding  West  Louisiana , Alexandria  : 

General  : I send  couriers  to  you  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining 
the  facilities  of  communicating  with  you  direct.  Co-operation  of  the 
troops  under  your  command  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Mississippi  Riveij 
might  materially  assist  in  the  defense  of  this  place.  I cannot  express 
my  views,  as  this  letter  might  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  I have; 
reliable  information  from  Baton  Rouge  that  the  enemy  have  twenty-twcjj 
regiments  of  infantry,  about  400  cavalry,  and  four  batteries  of  Napo-, 


923 


hap.  XXVTL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

jon  guns  already  there.  Corcoran’s  Legion  expected  yesterday.  Brig, 
ren.  Cuvier  Grover  is  in  command,  assisted  by  the  notorious  Billy 
Wilson,  who  has  lately  been  appointed  a brigadier.  Major-Generals 
ianks  and  Augur  were  expected.  They  have  two  Parrott  guns  in  each 
attery.  A small  force  of  cavalry  crossed  over  to  tbe  west  side  of  the 
iver  at  Baton  Bouge  and  pressed  horses,  mules,  and  wagons  in  the 
icinity.  Banks’  much- talked -of  expedition  has  turned  up  at  New  Or- 
gans. I have  seen  his  order  in  a New  Orleans  paper  assuming  com- 
tand.  I send  you  scraps  from  a Baton  Bouge  paper.  I respectfully 
lvite  a reply.  Such  information  as  you  might  give,  which  if  falling 
ito  the  enemy’s  hands  would  not  be  of  any  service  to  him,  would  be 
ery  acceptable  to  me. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

[FBANK.  GABDNEB], 
Major- General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

San  Antonio , January  3,  1863. 

laj.  A.  G.  Dickinson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Houston  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  copies  of  official  communications 
iceived  to-day  by  express  from  the  Bio  Grande,  which  convey  the  in- 
»rmation  of  serious  disturbances  in  that  portion  of  my  command. 

I have  instructed  Colonel  Luckett  to  demand  of  the  Governor  of  Ta- 
aulipas  that  he  shall  arrest  and  deliver  up  to  me  the  perpetrators  of 
le  outrage,  as  well  as  full  indemnity  for  the  property  destroyed,  and 
so  to  assure  that  functionary  that  immediate  and  active  measures  on 
is  part  to  effectually  prevent  a recurrence  of  such  acts  must  be  taken, 
: on  him  will  rest  the  responsibility  of  the  consequences  that  will  ensue. 
I deem  it  my  duty  to  suggest  to  the  general  commanding  that  in 
y opinion  it  is  important  that  I should  immediately  repair  to  Browns- 
llle,  and  use  my  best  efforts  to  maintain  the  peace  and  quiet  of  the 
ontier,  or,  failing  in  that,  to  take  such  measures  as  will  compel  the 
eighboring  States  of  Mexico  to  keep  her  turbulent  population  at  home. 
I therefore  respectfully  ask  that  orders  to  that  effect  may  be  sent  to 
e,  accompanied  with  the  views  of  the  general  as  to  my  remaining 
lere  permanently  or  returning  to  this  post. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier -General,  Provisional  Army. 


[In  closure.] 

Headquarters  Lower  Bio  Grande, 

Fort  Brown,  Tex.,  December  28,  1862. 

'aj.  E.  F.  Gray, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  C.  S.  Army,  San  Antonio,  Tex.: 

Sir  : Inclosed  herewith  you  will  please  find  copies  of  correspondence 
itween  Governor  Lopez,  of  Tamaulipas,  and  myself  relative  to  the 
dugees  now  in  Matamoras,  and  also  to  some  Corn  which  our  agent,  Mr. 
inders,  had  purchased. 

Mr.  Sanders  obtained  a permit  from  Governor  Vidaurri  to  export  500 
irgas  of  corn,  but  Governor  Lopez  refused  to  allow  but  one-half  to 
iss  through  the  State  of  Tamaulipas.  I wrote  him  a letter  (a  copy  is 


924 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYTLj 


lierewith  inclosed)  showing  liim  the  injustice  of  such  a restriction.  Sub- 
sequently I learned  verbally  (the  written  reply  not  having  been  re-1 
ceived)  that  he  utterly  refuses  to  let  any  of  the  corn  pass  through  the; 

^1  regard  this  action  as  a highway  robbery,  and  if  the  general  com- 
manding  will  grant  me  permission  I will  cross  over  at  Mier  and  eithei 
bring  the  corn  or  money  or  hostages  sufficient  to  insure  its  safe  arrivals 

as  soon  as  received.  , , J 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, j 

A . BUCHEL, 

Lieut.  Col.  Third  Texas  Infantry , Comdg.  Lower  Rio  Grande. 


[Sub-incloeure.] 


Headquarters  Lower  Bio  Grande, 

Fort  Brown , Tex .,  December  27,  1862. 

Don  Albino  Lopez,  Governor  of  Tamaulipas,  Mexico : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communica- 
tion of  the  24th  instant,*  in  reply  to  my  note  of  the  same  date,  and  beg 
to  be  allowed  to  make  a few  remarks  in  regard  thereto. 

In  all  civilized  countries,  when  citizens  revolt  against  the  sovereignty 
of  their  State  by  taking  np  arms  (as  most  of  the  refugees  from  the  State 
of  Texas  now  in  Matamoras  have  done),  and  have  been  driven  by  force 
of  arms  into  a neighboring  country,  it  is  the  custom  that  such  traitor* 
are  removed  from  the  frontier  to  the  interior  of  the  country  m whict 
they  take  refuge.  But  should  this  not  be  done,  and  the  authorities  o 
the  country  from  which  such  traitors  come  demand,  for  reasons  knowi 
to  themselves,  the  removal  of  the  refugees  to  the  interior,  and  the  de 
mand  is  not  complied  with,  it  is  always  regarded  as  an  act  of  bad  taitn 
and  inimical  to  the  country  from  whence  the  demand  emanates. 

Maior  Yager,  the  bearer  of  my  communication  to  Your  Excellency 
respectfully  requesting  to  pass  through  the  State  of  Tamaulipas  50 
cargas  of  corn,  to  be  exported  at  Mier  (said  corn  having  been  purchasec 
in  the  State  of  Nuevo  Leon  for  the  use  of  the  troops  by  our  agent,  Mi 
A.  M.  Sanders,  of  Boma,  permission  being  granted  by  Governor  Vidauri 
to  export  it),  reports  that  Your  Excellency  refuses  to  grant  such  perrnis 
sion,  but  would  perhaps  allow  one-half  to  be  exported,  provided  tb 
other  half  was  sold  to  the  authorities  of  the  State  of  Tama ulipas. 
cannot  believe  that  Major  Yager  fully  understood  Your  Excellency 
Common  courtesy  between  the  authorities  of  neighboring  countries  a 
peace  with  each  other  and  the  customary  usage  between  such  autlioi 

ities  would  forbid  such  an  action.  i 

What  would  Governor  Lopez  and  the  merchants  of  Matamoras  thin 
if  the  Confederate  authorities  or  those  of  the  State  of  Texas  were  to  ac 
in  such  a manner  toward  the  merchandise  which  the  Governor  and  sar 
merchants  now  have  or  might  have  in  the  State  of  Texas;  or  if  th 
exportation  of  beeves,  &c.,  should  only  be  allowed  under  such  a cond 
tion  Would  not  such  an  action  be  regarded  as  an  outrage,  althou0 
we  might  plead  necessity  as  an  excuse  J ■ , , , Ar  • 

Only  a written  communication  therefore  will  convince  me  that  Majc 
Yager’s  report  of  Your  Excellencey’s  verbal  reply  is  correct. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  BUCHEL 

Lieut.  Col.  Third  Infantry , Comdg.  Lower  Rio  Grande. 


* Not  found. 


Jhap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


925 


State  of  Texas,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office, 

Austin , January  3,  1863. 

Maj.  A.  G.  Dickinson, 

Assistant  Adjutant * General , Headquarters  Houston  : 

Major  : In  reply  to  your  favor  of  29tli  ultimo  I am  directed  by  the 
jovernor  to  state  that  he  construed  the  language  of  the  general’s  com- 
nunication  of  date  of  20th  December  ultimo,  to  wit — 

I have  to  request  that  you  will  call  out  at  once  all  the  militia  which  the  State  can 
jossibly  arm  and  cause  them  to  rendezvous  at  Harrisburg — 

;o  be  another  and  distinct  requisition  from  that  of  \Brig.  Gen.  P.  O. 
Sebert,  of  date  November  8,  1862,  which  is  as  follows : 

I have  the  honor  to  call  upon  you  for  not  less  than  5,000  militia  soldiers,  to  serve  for 
;hree  months,  unless  sooner  discharged. 

He  now  understands  from  your  communication  of  the  29th  of  Decem- 
ier  ultimo  that  the  general  commanding  makes  no  call  at  this  time  for 
State  troops,  but  that  his  communication  of  20th  December  referred  to 
:he  speedy  concentration  of  the  troops  called  out  under  the  requisition 
)f  General  Hebert  at  Houston. 

I am  pleased  to  inform  you  that  by  General  Orders,  No.  27,  from  this 
)ffice,  companies  as  soon  as  organized  are  ordered  to  report  to  you  at 
:he  earliest  practicable  moment. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  Y.  DASHIELL, 

A djutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Enrolling  Office  of  Austin  County, 

Industry , January  3,  1863. 

Vlaj.  J.  P.  Flewellen, 

Superintendent  of  Conscripts , Austin,  Tex. : 

Sir  : In  addition  to  what  I have  heretofore  reported,  of  date  Novern- 
)er  28, 1862,  and  December  25, 1862, 1 have  the  honor  in  this  connection 
o further  report  that  the  Germans  of  my  district  and  of  the  adjoining 
counties  are  in  a state  of  open  rebellion  to  our  Government.  They  are 
lolding  meetings  almost  every  day,  and  held  a large  meeting,  consist- 
ng  of  about  600  persons,  on  the  31st  of  December,  1862,  in  Shelby 
Prairie,  the  upper  portion  of  this  county,  and  organized  by  calling  Mr. 
j.  Senman  to  the  chair,  and  appointed  a committee  to  draught  resolu- 
ions  expressive  of  the  sense  of  the  meeting;  whereupon  the  committee 
'ecommended  that  the  following  resolutions  be  adopted: 

That  the  chair  appoint  one  man  in  each  beat  to  return  home  and  call  their  men 
ogether,  and  then  organize  instanter  into  companies  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  which 
las  been  done  by  electing  captains  and  appointing  specified  times  of  drilling,  which 
hey  have  begun  already ; also  keeping  a picket  guard  mounted  and  armed,  to  bo 
eady  to  communicate  information  to  the  officers  in  command. 

Said  meeting  was  represented  by  live  counties,  to  wit:  Austin,  Wash- 
ington, Fayette,  Lavaca,  and  Colorado.  They  were  called  first  by  coun- 
ies.  Delegates  answered  to  their  names.  Then  they  were  called  by 
)eats.  The  following-named  persons  were  present  and  delivered  speeches 
n said  meeting,  all  of  whom  were  in  favor  of  resistance  to  the  Govern- 
nent  and  opposed  to  going  into  the  service  in  any  way:  Fr.  Mittanck, 

>f  New  Ulm  ; F.  Hanbold,  of  New  Ulm  ; Hildebrand,  of  Biegel 

lettlement,  Fayette  County ; H.  Zulauf,  of  New  Ulm ; Suliger, 


926 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chap.  XXVTL 


of  Industry  ; F.  W.  Dorbritz,  of  New  ITlm ; C.  Rungo,  of  New  TTlm ; | 

Helams,  sr.,  Of  Boeder’s  Mill,  Austin  County;  Lewis,  or. 

La  Grange,  Fayette  County  (an  American). 

There  was  a "draft  held  here  about  the  23d  of  December  in  response! 
to  the  Governor’s  proclamation  for  men.  Quite  a number  of  them  weresj 
drafted  and  a great  many  were  conscripts.  These  two  combined  have  I 
increased  the  rebellion  to  this  pitch.  The  drafted  men  have  continued  I 
to  refuse  to  be  sworn  into  the  State  service  on  the  day  appointed  by  the  jl 
captain  of  Industry  for  the  drafted  men  to  be  sworn  into  the  service.  | 
He  was  assaulted  and  driven  from  the  place  appointed  by  him  for  said 


purpose ; also  a friend  of  his  was  actually  mobbed,  by  being  beaten  with  \\ 
sticks,  iron  bars,  &c. 

Therefore,  sir,  I deem  it  to  be  my  duty  to  ask  for  assistance  again.  | 
Not  less  than  one  full  regiment  of  cavalry,  to  be  well  mounted,  armed,  j| 
and  supplied  with  subsistence  to  maintain  them  while  so  engaged,  will  1 
do  any  good,  but  would  meet  with  defeat.  If  there  is  a force  sufficient  | 
to  vindicate  the  majesty  of  the  law  at  once  it  can  be  quelled  without  sj 
much  bloodshed  on  our  part,  but  if  allowed  to  remain  and  mature  would  1 
require  a much  greater  sacrifice  of  life  and  property  than  if  crushed  out 
now  at  the  beginning. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

A.  J.  BELL,  1 

Enrolling  Officer  Western  District  Austin  County . 


Jackson,  January  4,  1863. 


Major-General  Smith,  Vicksburg : 

Get  steamers  ready  at  once  and  send  Gregg’s  brigade  as  quickly  as 
possible  to  Port  Hudson.  I telegraphed  Stevenson  to-day  to  have  him 
ready.  Tell  me  to-night  when  lie  can  get  off. 

See  Stevenson  on  the  subject.  Be  prompt. 

J.  G.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Twenty-second  Brigade  Texas  State  Troops, 

La  Grange , Tex.,  January  4,  1863. 

Maj.  A.  G.  Dickinson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  &c.,  Houston,  Tex. : . 

Major  : I feel  it  my  duty  through  you  to  lay  before  Major-General 
Magruder  the  following  matters;  and  this  is  rendered  the  more  neces- 
sary on  account  of  the  delay  that  must  necessarily  result  in  his  hearing 
from  the  Governor,  to  whom  last  night  I sent  an  express,  and  our  mili- 
tia laws  are  so  faulty  as  not  to  concede  authority  to  any  one  except  the 
Governor  to  call  out  the  State  troops;  yet  should  an  emergency  make 
it  absolutely  necessary  I should  assume  the  responsibility  to  do  so.  For 
several  days  expresses  have  come  to  me  from  various  directions,  at  first 
giving  mere  rumors,  but  last  evening  more  definite  information.  Dr. 
G.  B.  Robson  came  in  last  evening,  having  been  sent  by  a number  of 
very  respectable  citizens  living  in  this  county  some  18  miles  from  here, 
bringing  me  the  information  that  on  last  Wednesday  from  500  to  700 
men  met  at  Boeder’s  Mill,  just  over  the  line  of  this  county,  in  Austin 
County,  and  that  they  determined  to  resist  the  draft  and  conscription  to 
the  last  extremity;  that  as  soon  as  the  drafted  men  are  ordered  out  they 
mean  to  assemble  and  resist  it ; that  the  'meeting  was  addressed  by 


sap.  XXVIL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


927 


Germans  and  Americans;  that  they  are  organized  and  have  their  offi- 
ers  elected,  and  they  mean  to  stir  up  insurrection  with  all  of  its  hor- 
ors  in  case  of  conflict,  and  that  six  counties  were  represented.  Ur. 
fcobson  states  that  this  information  was  obtained  from  men  who  were 
,t  the  meeting  and  that  it  is  reliable.  Dr.  Bobson  is  one  of  our  most 

irominent  citizens.  . _ 

I also  have  reliable  information  that  on  last  Tuesday  night  large  num- 
bers of  armed  men  were  seen  to  go  from  this  (Austin)  and  Colorado 
bounties  toward  Boeder’s  Mill ; one  party  was  headed  by  an  American 
nd  passed  in  the  night.  On  Wednesday  morning  some  75  men,  mostly 
,rmed  from  this  county  passed  through  Fayetteville,  a little  town  in 
his  county  12  miles  from  here,  and  reported  that  they  were  going  to 
frelsburg,  in  Colorado  County,  but  were  watched  and  seen  to  leave  the 
rrelsburg  road  and  to  take  the  road  to  Boeder’s  Mill. 

A German,  a true  man,  came  to  see  me  yesterday,  and  stated  he  wished 
o communicate  something  to  me,  but  that  he  would  not  do  so  unless  I 
promised  to  keep  his  name  secret,  and  upon  my  doing  so  he  told  me 
hat  on  Thursday  the  Germans  of  his  neighborhood  had  met  at  the  house 
if  a drafted  man,  and  there  organized  into  a company  and  elected  their 
iflicers  to  resist  being  taken  off  as  drafted  men,  and  also  to  resist  con- 
icription,  and  that  they  had  threatened  every  German  with  destruction 
vho  would  not  join  them;  that  they  intended  to  wait  until  an  attempt 
vas  made  to  force  the  men  off,  and  then  they  would  assemble  and  resist 

o the  death.  uk,  T _ 

Two  other  gentlemen  of  respectability  (W.  W.  Wade  and  P.  Clawson, 
>f  Fayetteville)  came  to  me  about  midnight  Friday  night,  and  reported 
o me  that  this  meeting  detailed  by  this  German  was  held,  and  that 
very  movement  indicated  resistance  ; also  that  a German  blacksmith 
n Fayetteville  was  discovered  to  be  secretly  making  spear  heads;  also 
hat  these  men  had  in  the  last  few  weeks  provided  themselves  with 

im  munition.  . 

I also  have  information  of  three  other  meetings  of  Germans  having 
3een  held  in  other  and  different  neighborhoods  in  this  county,  all  secret, 
ind  also  of  other  meetings  being  appointed  for  to-day  (Sunday)  and 

Monday.  . , 

We  have  a large  German  population  in  this  county,  and  in  Colorado, 
Austin,  and  Washington  Counties.  Many  of  them  are  true  men,  and 
if  we  never  had  had  a traitor  American  nearly  all  would  have  been, 
and  the  seeds  of  disaffection  have  been  sown  by  native  Americans,  and 
thfey  now  have  natives  colleagued  with  the  disloyal  among  them.  These 
secret  meetings  have  been  holding  for  months,  but  until  lately  have  not 
attracted  much  attention.  For  some  two  weeks  past,  however,  my  at- 
tention has  been  frequently  called  to  them,  and  I have  labored  inces- 
santly to  keep  down  the  hot  headed  men  upon  our  side,  in  order  that 
we  might  get  into  the  design,  and  also  to  prevent  anything  being  done 
which  would  precipitate  a civil  war  and  place  us  in  the  aggressive.  I 
have,  however,  had  true  men  on  the  alert,  obtaining  all  the  information 
possible,  but  they  have  been  so  cautious  that  this  has  been  very  diffi- 
cult, and  a German  who  was  a secessionist  was  kicked  out  of  one  of  the 
meetings,  it  is  rumored,  and  charged  with  being  a spy. 

In  times  of  public  excitement  it  is  most  difficult  to  cull  out  the  truth 
from  exaggerated  rumor,  and  while  I would  have  our  distinguished 
commander  informed  of  these  matters  I would  not  be  instrumental  in 
stirring  up  unnecessary  excitement.  It  has  been  because  of  the  true 
men  of  this  county  knowing  of  the  disaffected  element  among  us 
that  they  have  declined  to  volunteer,  being  unwilling  to  leave  their 


928 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIIj 


families  at  home  and  they  away,  and  also  determined  to  make  an  issu| 
with  the  disloyal  by  compelling  them  to  meet  the  draft.  I feel  satisfied 
that  we  have  true  men  enough  among  us  to  overcome  the  disloyal  i^ 
case  of  an  outbreak,  but  they  have  not  the  arms,  having  given  them  ti 
those  gone  into  the  Army,  while  most  of  those  believed  to  be  disloyal 
are  well  armed.  i 

Again,  if  civil  war  really  is  intended,  and  we  were  even  well  armed 
we  are  very  much  scattered  and  surrounded  by  those  who  are  suspected 
and  to  attempt  to  assemble  from  the  different  neighborhoods  would  bin 
give  the  disloyal  the  same  opportunity,  and  the  families  of  the  true  mei 


be  left  defenseless.  . 

I received  an  order  from  the  Governor  through  the  Adjutant- Generaj 
to  send  forward  the  three-months7  men  to  Houston  as  fast  as  companies! 
could  be  organized,  but  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  draft  is  not  yet  mad<| 
in  all  the  counties,  and  particularly  in  view  of  the  threat  of  resistance 
whenever  an  attempt  should  be  made  to  force  off  the  drafted  men,  ancj 
to  give  us  time  to  prepare,  I have  issued  orders,  fixing  Monday,  the  12tJ 
of  this  month,  for  the  time  of  assembling  at  Columbus.  This  postpond 
xnent  will  perhaps  delay  a conflict,  and  enable  us  to  get  ready,  ant 
probably  prevent  it  altogether. 

With  perfect  deference  to  our  able  chieftain  I most  respectfully  sug 
gest  that  if  a regiment  of  cavalry  could  be  sent  to  the  disaffected  region 
it  would  overawe  the  disaffected  and  prevent  an  outbreak,  if  any  is  in! 
tended.  Perhaps  even  a less  number  would  do.  If  this  were  done  unde) 
cover  of  forming  an  encampment  to  obtain  supplies  it  would  allay  sus 
picion,  and  the  drafted  men  would  see  the  necessity  of  obeying  the  call) 
and  all  perhaps  pass  off  quietly. 

From  all  I can  learn  the  greatest  disaffection  is  about  New  Ulm  ant 
Industry,  in  Austin  County,  and  Pound  Top  and  Fayetteville,  in  thii 
county.  Neither  of  these  places  is  more  than  10  or  12  miles  apart.  I 
a command  of  cavalry  were  placed  in  Fayetteville  it  would  be  convert 
ient  to  all  the  other  points,  and  could  act  according  to  circumstances 
Fayetteville  is  about  18  miles  from  Alley  ton,  the  head  of  the  railroad 
and  there  is  plenty  of  corn  in  the  neighborhood. 

I have  hesitated  to  address  you  because  I know  that  the  Governor  ii 
the  proper  officer  for  me  to  apply  to,  and  I must  make  the  great  desir< 
I have  to  prevent  a conflict  between  our  own  citizens  my  excuse  fo: 
the  course  taken. 

If  my  paper  and  the  manner  in  which  I have  written  on  it  be  agains 
regulations  let  the  scarcity  of  the  article  be  my  excuse. 

WILLIAM  G.  WEBB, 


Brigadier- General,  Second  Brigade  Texas  State  Troops. 


P.  S. — A gentleman  has  just  come  to  me  in  haste  to  inform  me  of  an 
other  meeting  of  Germans  on  yesterday  on  the  west  side  of  the  Color ad< 
River,  in  a German  neighborhood,  at  which  there  were  over  100  mei 
present,  and  a German  woman  stated  that  their  object  was  to  resist  th< 
draft. 


[January  4,  1863.] 

Brig.  Gen.  William  G.  Webb,  La  Grange : 

At  a public  meeting  held  by  the  citizens  in  Biegel  Settlement 
Fayette  County,  Texas,  on  January  4,  1863,  the  following  declaratioi 
was  adopted  as  an  expression  of  the  sentiments  of  said  meeting  : 

The  measures  taken  by  the  Government  to  protect  this  State  agains 
invasion  are  so  far-reaching  and  serious  in  their  consequences  that  the: 
fill  our  minds  with  dread  and  apprehension. 


iXP.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.-1 — CONFEDERATE. 


929 


The  past  lias  already  taught  us  how  regardlessly  the  Government 
nd  the  county  authorities  have  treated  the  families  of  those  who  have 
iken  the  field.  We  have  been  told  that  they  would  be  cared  for,  and 
'hat  up  to  this  time  has  been  done?  They  were  furnished  with  small 
ims  of  paper  money,  which  is  almost  worthless,  and  which  has  been 
ffused  by  men  for  whose  sake  this  war  and  its  calamities  were  origi- 
ated. 

Last  year  we  made  tolerably  good  crops ; the  prospect  for  the  next 
i not  very  encouraging,  and  we  cannot  look  forward  with  indifference 
pon  starvation,  which  we  apprehend  for  our  wives  and  children. 
Although  it  has  been  said  that  we  will  not  be  needed  for  more  than 
iree  months,  the  time  for  planting  will  then  be  over  and  our  children 
lay  go  begging,  for  the  small  pay  which  we  are  to  receive  for  our  serv- 
es is  insufficient  to  purchase  bread  for  our  families  and  pay  for  it.  We 
nd  our  families  are  almost  destitute  of  clothing,  and  have  no  means  of 
etting  enough  to  protect  us  even  imperfectly  against  the  cold,  from 
'hicli  cause  sickness  and  epidemics  result,  as  has  been  experienced  in 
le  Army,  where  more  men  have  fallen  victims  of  disease  than  by  the 
word  of  the  enemy. 

Last  autumn  we  applied  to  procure  cloth  from  the  penitentiary,  but 
p to  this  time  we  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  any,  whereas  negro- 
olders,  whom  we  could  name,  can  get  such  things  and  fetch  them  home, 
'or  these  reasons  we  sympathize  with  all  the  unfortunate  who  have  to 
rovide  for  their  own  maintenance,  and  hope  that  our  authorities  will 
>ok  upon  us  as  men  and  not  as  chattels.  With  what  spirit  and  what 
ourage  can  we  so  situated  fight,  and  that,  moreover,  for  principles  so 
ir  removed  from  us  ? 

Besides  the  duty  of  defending  one’s  country  there  is  a higher  and 
lore  sacred  one — the  duty  of  maintaining  the  families.  What  benefit 
; there  in  preserving  the  country  while  the  families  and  inhabitants  of 
le  same,  nay,  even  the  Army,  are  bound  to  perish  in  misery  and  star- 
ation  ? 

In  view  of  the  foregoing  we  take  the  liberty  hereby  jointly  to  declare 
hat  unless  the  Army  and  we  obtain  a guarantee  that  our  families  will 
e protected,  not  only  against  misery  and  starvation,  but  also  against 
exations  from  itinerant  bands,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  answer  the  call, 
nd  the  consequences  must  be  attributed  to  those  who  caused  them. 
Furthermore,  we  decline  taking  the  army  oath  (as  prescribed)  to  the 
onfederate  States,  as  we  know  of  no  law  which  compels  Texas  troops, 
ho  are  designed  for  this  State,  to  take  the  same. 

It  is  the  unanimous  wish  of  those  assembled  in  this  meeting  to  apply 
) Brig.  Gen.  W.  G.  Webb  to  use  all  of  his  influence  to  the  effect  that 
le  men  now  drafted  for  militia  service  be  permitted  to  stay  at  home 
ntil  they  have  finished  planting. 

By  authorization  and  in  the  name  of  about  one  hundred  and  twenty 
itizens. 

C.  AMBERG. 

H.  BAUCH. 

R.  HILDEBRAND. 

H.  KRALE. 

H.  HASSE. 

1 do  hereby  certify  the  above  and  foregoing  to  be  a true  and  correct 
opy  of  the  original  (translation). 

JAMES  PAUL, 
Private  Secretary. 


59  R r — vol  xv 


930 


Headquarters, 


Matagorda , January  4,  1863. 


Lieut.  James  Perry  Bryan,  Adjutant: 


Sir:  In  the  afternoon  of  December  the  30th  I received  a communi-jj 
cation  from  Captain  Marmion,  of  the  steam  gunboat  John  F.  Carr, 
through  Captain  Crofts,  of  the  steamer  Cora,  that  if  I should  hear  am 
firing  from  the  Carr  to  come  over  or  send  a detachment  of  30  men. 

Not  long  after  receiving  this  intelligence  I heard  several  guns  fro] 
the  Carr,  which  was  then  lying  in  the  bay  near  the  peninsula,  am 
opposite  the  town  of  Matagorda.  I immediately  placed  my  men,  coni 
sisting  of  1 lieutenant,  4 non-commissioned  officers,  and  35  privates,) 
together  with  3 volunteers  from  the  town  of  Matagorda  (commanded 
by  myself),  on  board  of  the  Cora,  and  started  from  the  wharf  for  th<j 
Carr, "which  I reached  about  sunset.  Upon  consultation  with  Captains 
Marmion  and  Hall  it  was  agreed  that  we  should  make  a night  attack 
upon  the  enemy’s  encampment  or  intrenchment,  provided  we  deemed 
it  prudent  after  reconnoitering.  j 

The  plan  was  to  land  our  force,  consisting  of  my  own  men  and  lq 
from  the  gunboats,  including  officers,  on  the  peninsula  by  the  smal 
boats ; move  up  to  within  a safe  distance,  reconnoiter,  and,  if  prudent 
make  the  attack.  The  steamers  Carr  and  Cora  were  lying  at  anchoi 
about  1,000  to  1,200  yards  from  the  peninsula.  We  left  these  steamers! 
in  the  small  boats  for  the  peninsula  about  10  o’clock  p.  m.,  and  aftei 
running  about  half  way  to  the  shore  a most  terrific  norther  began  tc 
blow,  which  induced  us  to  abandon  the  attack  and  order  a return  tc 
the  steamers. 

The  boat  in  which  were  Captains  Marmion,  Hall,  Lubbock,  and  myself 
together  with  Mr.  Wilcox,  of  the  Signal  Corps,  and  three  others,  sue 
ceeded  in  reaching  the  steamers.  The  two  other  boats  filled  and  sank, 
and  18  of  my  men  were  lost,  together  with  the  3 volunteers  above  menl 
tioned,  to  wit:  Sergeants  Matthews  and  Jones,  Corporal  McKinley 
Privates  McKinley,  Connor,  J.  and  F.  Secrist,  Thomas  Wadsworth 
James  Seaborn,  May,  Meneley,  Walton,  A.  C.  Johnson,  Hines,  Gibson 
Copeland,  and  Howell ; George  M.  Bowie  has  not  been  found,  but  nj 
doubt  he  was  drowned ; volunteers,  James  Bugeley,  Duggan,  and  Lakd 
Fifteen  minutes  longer  and  the  whole  party  would  have  landed,  and  J 
believe  we  could  have  taken  the  enemy,  as  they  numbered  but  few,  l 

any,  more  than  we  did.  , , . . A , 

When  our  men  who  escaped  drowning  reached  their  intrenchments 
about  12  o’clock  m.,  their  fires  were  still  burning.  While  attempting 
to  reach  the  steamers  several  of  my  men  discharged  their  guns,  anc 
immediately  rockets  were  thrown  up  from  their  steamers  on  the  outside 
and  I think  at  that  time  the  enemy  left  their  intrenchments. 

Never  did  an  undertaking  at  its  commencement  appear  more  auspi 
cious  or  one  which  ended  more  disastrously.  As  1 am  now  too  lew  ii 
numbers  to  discharge  my  duties  fully  at  this  post  I would  be  glad  t< 
have  Lieutenant  Davis  relieved  at  Elliott’s  Ferry  by  a company  o. 
detachment.  Let  him  return  to  his  company. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ jjjJGELEY 

Captain  Company  D,  Brown’s  Regiment  T.  C*. 


ap.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


931 


PROCLAMATION. 

Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Galveston , Tex.,  January  5,  1863. 

Whereas  the  undersigned  has  succeeded  in  capturing  and  destroying* 
portion  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  and  in  driving  the  remainder  out  of  Gal- 
ston  Harbor  and  beyond  the  neighboring  waters  and  thus  raising 
e blockade  virtually,  he  therefore  proclaims  to  all  concerned  that 
e harbor  of  Galveston  is  open  for  trade  to  all  friendly  nations,  and 
eir  merchants  are  invited  to  resume  their  usual  intercourse  with  this- 
rt. 

Done  at  Galveston  this  the  fifth  day  of  January,  eighteen  hundred 
d sixty-three. 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


ecial  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

No.  35.  ( Galveston , Tex.,  January  5,  1863. 

* * # # # # # 

VII.  Lieutenant- Colonel  Hardeman  having  armed  his  regiment  will 
)ceed  with  it  to  Alleyton,  and  thence  will  send  out  parties  to  disarm 
3 disloyal  Germans  and  enforce  the  draft  and  conscript  act. 

VIII.  Brigadier-General  Bee  will  order  the  troops  at  Ringgold  Bar- 
bs to  proceed  to  the  Rio  Grande  to  dispute  any  attempted  landing 
the  enemy. 

*#*#### 

£.  Colonel  Cook  will  send  10  men  with  the  steamer  Lucy  Gwinu  this 
ernoon  with  flags  he  will  get  at  the  house  of  Colonel  Nichols,  and 
them  with  the  United  States  flag  always  flying ; also  take  a Con- 
nate flag  with  him,  but  not  to  use  it  until  further  orders.  Occupy 
> fort  on  Pelican  Spit  until  the  enemy,  if  any  appears,  is  decoyed 
bin  the  harbor,  when  he  will  place  his  men  on  board  a sailing  craft, 
ich  will  be  furnished  for  the  purpose  by  Maj.  Leon  Smith,  and  go 
►und  l\v  the  Northern  Channel  toward  Half  Moon  Shoal  and  return 
Hah  < ston  Island. 

f possible  among  the  detail  of  men  have  one  or  two  men  who  under- 
ud  sailing  a boat.  Take  supplies  along  for  ten  days,  blankets,  &c. 

* * * * * * # 

)y  command  of  Major-General  Magruder: 

E.  P.  TURNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


n.  James  A.  Srnnoy, 

.S < crrtftry  if  War: 


Headquarters, 
Galveston,  Tex.,  January  6,  1863. 


It::  : l!a\  ing  raptured  l!ie  steamer  Harriet  Lane,  but  slightly  dam- 
wit n her  toil  armaiix  iit  on  board,  I have  the  honor  to  request 
1 idle  1 c put  in  conimiss  nn  as  a war  steamer,  with  Capt.  Leon  Smith, 
3 commanded  the  expedition  by  which  she  was  captured,  as  captain. 


^932  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Cbaf.  XXTlj 

I beg  that  Capt.  Leon  Smith  be  appointed  post  captain  in  the  Provij 
ional  Navy,  for  which  he  is  in  every  way  well  qualified  * 

I have  the  honor  urgently  but  respectfully  to  request  that  Lieu! 
Catesby  Ap  R.  Jones,  of  the  Navy,  be  ordered  to  report  to  me  to  relief 
> Captain  Hunter.  I applied  for  Lieutenant  Jones  last  summer.  H 
was  anxious  to  come,  but  the  Navy  Department  declined.  ^v\  ith  hi 
assistance  I could  have  had  by  this  time  a fleet  of  ten  or  fifteen  se<j 
going  vessels,  all  armed.  Please  send  also  four  or  five  good  young  nav 
officers.  I would  prefer  them  to  volunteers,  but  time  is  everything.  Cap 
Leon  Smith’s  practical  experience  and  resources  as  a commander  for  | 
longtime  of  ocean  steamers  in  the  Pacific  and  river  boats  here  an 
invaluable  and  cannot  be  replaced.  If  the  Harriet  Lane  can  be  gotte 
ready  before  she  is  blockaded  in  I will  send  her  to  sea.  ! 

Please  answer  me  in  full  by  telegraph.  An  officer,  Lieutenant  Gibsoi 
who  bears  this  to  Vicksburg  will  wait  there  for  your  reply.  * 

. J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  Texas, 

January  6,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War  : , 

Sir  • I have  the  honor  urgently  to  recommend  to  the  favorab 
consideration  of  the  Department  the  following  plan  for  the  defense 
Texas,  internally  and  externally : . „ . _ _ . , , * n. 

There  are  about  12,000  men  organized  m this  State,  about  b,U 
armed,  and  these  indifferently.  I wish  to  divide  these  into  brigades 
3 000  men  each,  and  to  place  them  under  good  brigadier-generals,  ai 

each  two  brigades  under  a major-general.  . . j 

The  extent  of  the  country  is  so  great  that  an  order  is  in  most  cad 
valueless  when  it  reaches  its  destination.  The  extent  of  coast  is  abo 
400  miles,  and  the  territory  of  the  State  extends  from  800  to  1,0; 
miles  in  the  interior.  In  this  vast  country  the  utmost  confusion  af 
disorganization  prevail  in  the  military  administration  from  a want 
control  by  the  proper  officers,  who  must  be  at  a great  distance  frc 
some  portions  of  their  commands. 

Disaffection  exists  in  a greater  degree  than  has  been  represented 
me,  but  will  not  spread  if  promptly  put  down  $ if  not,  it  will  increase. 

Various  other  reasons  induce  me  to  ask  the  appointment,  as  soon 
it  is  possible,  of  major-generals  and  brigadier-generals  enough  to  enat 
me  to  carry  out  my  plan,  which  is  simply  this : 

1st  To  hold  thfc  Rio  Grande  at  all  hazards.  The  command  the 
must  be  unsupported  and  self-sustaining.  I would  assign  it  to  Genei 
Bee,  whose  relations  with  the  Mexican  authorities  and  personal  qua! 
cations  make  this  arrangement  an  excellent  one.  This  I have  alrea' 
done,  and  I propose  to  give  him  command  as  far  northeast  as  the  Nuec« 

2d.  To  assign  a brigadier-general  to  the  command  of  all  the  count 
from  the  Nueces  to  the  Colorado. 

3d.  Another  brigadier  to  the  command  of  that  between  the  Coloia 
and  the  Sabine,  where  there  are  railroads  parallel  to  the  coast. 

4th.  One  brigadier-general  to  command  on  the  western  frontier  lr( 
the  Upper  Nueces  to  the  Clear  Fork  of  the  Brazos-— the  Indian  reser 


* See  Mallory  to  Davis,  January  24,  1863,  p.  959. 


3hap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  933 

5th.  One  major-general  to  have  his  headquarters  habitually  at  San 
Antonio;  and, 

6th.  Another  major-general  to  have  his  headquarters  at  Houston. 

The  commanding  officer  of  the  whole  would  be  most  of  the  time  in 
lie  saddle,  and  might  establish  his  headquarters  wherever  his  services 
vere  most  required. 

Similar  districts  might  be  laid  out  as  conscript  districts,  each  com- 
nanded  by  a major,  the  whole  by  a superintendent  of  conscripts,  with 
he  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel. 

With  this  arrangement,  and  efficient  staff  officers,  harmony  and 
iromptness  of  action  and  due  responsibility  would  be  easily  attained. 

To  carry  it  out  I wish  the  general  officers  asked  for.  At  present  I 
lave  but  one,  Brigadier-General  Bee,  permanently,  and  Brigadier- 
leneral  Scurry  temporarily,  and  in  order  to  obtain  those  of  the  proper 
fualifications  I respectfully  recommend  the  inclosed  names  to  the  fa- 
vorable consideration  of  the  President. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding , &e. 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

San  Antonio,  January  6,  1863. 

ffaj.  A.  G.  Dickinson, 

Asst  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dist.  of  Texas , Houston , Tex. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communi- 
cation by  express  and  to  report  that  seven  companies  of  Colonel  Woods’ 
■egiment  of  cavalry  from  Lavaca  and  three  of  the  same  from  Fort 
)lark,  Majors  Taylor  and  Duff  with  their  battalions,  five  companies  of 
he  Third  Regiment  Infantry,  andWillke’s  light  battery,  also  five  com- 
>anies  of  the  Frontier  regiment,  have  been  ordered  to  the  Rio  Grande, 
n the  aggregate  about  2,500  men. 

I would  respectfully  request  that  the  Second  Regiment  Texas  Mounted 
Jifles  (belonging  to  my  brigade)  may  be  ordered  to  report  at  Ringgold 
Barracks. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier -General,  Provisional  Army. 


Port  Hudson,  January  7, 1863. 

Aaj.  J.  R.  Waddy: 

Total  effective,  8,239 ; aggregate  present,  10,421.  Add  about  2,500 
or  Gregg’s  brigade.  Garrisons  of  Clinton  and  Camp  Moore  not  in- 
luded. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Huntsville,  Tex.,  January  7,  1863. 
General  : It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  mingle  my  congratulations 
nth  the  many  thousands  that  you  have  received.  You,  sir,  have  in- 


934 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


troduced  a new  era  in  Texas  by  driving  from  our  soil  a ruthless  enemy. 
You  deserve,  sir,  not  only  my  thanks,  but  the  thanks  of  every  Texan.  1 
Your  advent  was  scarcely  known  in  Texas  when  we  were  awaked  fromj 
our  reverie  to  the  realities  of  your  splendid  victory.  Its  planning  and 
execution  reflect  additional  glory  on  your  former  fame,  as  well  as  on  the 
arms  of  Texas. 

Most  sincerely  do  we  trust  that  a new  era  has  now  dawned  upon  us,  i 
and  that  you  may  be  enabled  again  to  restore  Texas  to  her  wonted  se-i 
curity.  We  hope  that  Texas,  with  so  gallant  a leader  as  you  are,  ge n- 
eral,  will  yet  show  to  the  world  that  she  is  capable  of  defending  her 
own  soil,  notwithstanding  she  has  already  been  drained  of  her  only  re-( 
sources,  which  have  been  transferred  to  other  battle-fields.  You  will 
find  that  all  Texans  want  is  a general  who  is  capable  of  leading  them 
to  victory,  and  now  having  obtained  that,  I hope  you  will  ever  find  them 
ready  to  second  your  efforts  and  that  your  future  may  be  as  glorious 
as  your  past. 

When  you  arrived  here,  general,  you  found  our  country  without 
organization,  without  plans  for  our  defense,  and  our  situation  most  de- 
plorable. What  few  resources  we  had  were  without  organization,  with- 
out discipline,  and  without  everything  that  was  calculated  to  render 
the  means  she  had  efficient.  You  have  breathed  new  life  into  every- 
thing ; you  have  illustrated  to  them  what  they  can  do,  and  most  sin- 
cerely do  I trust  that  the  past  may  only  be  the  dawning  of  the  future, 
and  I pray  that  under  the  guidance  of  a Divine  Being  you  may  be  en- 
abled to  carry  out  the  regeneration  of  Texas.  It  would  give  me  pleas- 
ure, general,  to  call  and  pay  my  respects  to  you  were  it  not  that  I have 
but  recently  arisen  from  a sick  bed. 

Very  truly,  your  friend, 

’ SAMUEL  HOUSTON. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  5.  f Port  Hudson , La .,  January  7,  1863. 

The  troops  of  this  post  will  be  organized  into  brigades,  arranged  at 
the  breastworks  as  follows : 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  John  Gregg’s  brigade  to  take  post  on  the  right,  extend- 
ing from  the  river ; Brig.  Gen.  S.  B.  Maxey’s  brigade  the  center,  and 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  N.  R.  Beall’s  brigade  the  left. 

II.  Brigadier-General  Maxey’s  brigade  will  consist  of  Col.  W.  B. 
Miles’  Legion ; the  consolidated  regiment  consisting  of  the  Forty-sec- 
ond, Forty-sixth,  Forty-eighth,  Fifty-third  Tennessee  Regiments,  and 
Ninth  Tennessee  Battalion,  commanded  by  Col.  W.  A.  Quarles ; the 
consolidated  regiment  consisting  of  the  Forty-ninth,  Fifty-fifth  Ten- 
nessee, and  the  Seventh  Texas  Regiments,  commanded  by  Col.  J . E. 
Bailey ; Col.  Gus.  A.  Breaux’s  Thirtieth  Louisiana  Regiment,  and 
Boone’s,  Roberts’,  and  Fenner’s  batteries,  and  Colonel  Allen’s  Fourth 
Louisiana  Regiment. 

III.  Brigadier-General  Beall’s  brigade  will  consist  of  the  consolidated 
regiment  consisting  of  the  Fourteenth,  Sixteenth,  Seventeenth,  Eight- 
eenth, Twenty-third  Arkansas  Regiments,  and  First  Arkansas  Battalion, 
commanded  by  Col.  R.  H.  Crockett;  the  consolidated  regiment  consist- 
ing of  the  Eleventh  and  Fifteenth  Arkansas  Regiments,  commanded 
by  Col.  John  L.  Logan;  the  consolidated  regiment  consisting  of  the 
Twenty-seventh  and  Thirty-first  Alabama  Regiments  and  Sixth  Ala- 
bama Battalion,  commanded  by  Col.  J.  M.  Simonton ; the  consolidated 


hap.  XXVII.  1 CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


935 


egiment  consisting  of  Thirty-ninth  and  First  Mississippi  Regiments, 
ommanded  by  Col.  W.  R.  Shelby,  and  Abbay’s,  Herod’s  and  Bradford’s 
>atteries. 

IY.  Tlie  heavy  artillery  and  cavalry  will  remain  as  separate  com- 
nands.  The  reports  of  each  separate  organization  will  be  sent  direct 

o these  headquarters.  , , . 

Y.  The  previous  organization  of  brigades  will  be  discontinued,  but 
he  consolidated  regiments  will  remain  so  consolidated  until  the  strength 
>f  any  one  regiment  will  justify  its  separation. 

YI.  Consolidated  morning  reports  will  be  sent  in  to  these  headquar- 
ers  on  Tuesdays  and  Fridays  of  each  week,  and  reports  of  number 
ind  condition  of  arms  and  amount  of  ammunition  will  be  sent  in  each 
Friday. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner : 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General . 


Galveston,  January  8, 1863. 

Japt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

A.  A.  G .,  Dept,  of  Tex.,  Y.  Hex.  and  Ariz.,  Galveston , Tex.: 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  pursuant  to  special  orders 
ind  instructions  of  3d  instant  from  the  major-general  commanding,  I 
proceeded  seaward  that  night  on  the  bark  Cavallo,  three  guns,  Captain 
Saunders;  schooner  Leader,  one  gun,  Captain  Johnston,  and  pilot  boat 
Japtaiu  Payne,  with  detachments  from  the  regiments  of  Colonels  Green, 
Cook,  and  Griffin,  to  capture  the  Clyde-built  steamer,  with  troops  and 
stores  on  board,  then  off  the  bar  waiting  for  a pilot. 

At  3.30  a.  m.,  4th,  anchored  off  Fort  Point  Battery;  a half  hour 
clearing  the  ship  for  work  and  getting  the  men  below.  Sail  was 
then  made  with  difficulty,  owing  to  the  scarcity  of  seamen,  their  un- 
willingness to  work,  and  the  light  wind  prevailing,  thus  consuming 
time  that  otherwise  employed  might  have  accomplished  the  object 
of  the  expedition. 

At  daylight  steamer  4 to  5 miles  distant  showed  signal  lor  a pilot, 
which  was  answered  by  Captain  Payne,  who  stood  out  to  the  bar,  sound- 
ing; he  returned  at  9 a.  m.  (the  wind  being  too  light  for  the  bark  to 
make  heading),  and  was  instructed  to  proceed  to  the  steamer,  allay  this 
suspicion  (now  evidently  aroused),  and  if  possible  entice  her  in ; if  neces- 
saiy,  to  go  on  board  as  pilot,  bringing  her  to  such  a position  that  the 
guns  of  the  bark  could  command  her.  He  promptly  complied  there- 
with; went  on  board  the  steamer,  which  immediately  got  under  way, 
steering  eastward  until  out  of  sight,  carrying  him  with  her.  The  pilot- 
I boat  returned  and  was  ordered  to  town. 

For  several  hours  the  bark  had  been  compelled  to  lay  at  anchor  on 
account  of  the  narrow  channel  and  light  wind.  She  returned  to  Galves- 
ton at  5 p.  m.,  failing  to  realize  the  success  anticipated  for  the  reason 
| heretofore  given. 

I would  respectfully  call  the  attention  of  the  major-general  command- 
ing to  the  case  of  Captain  Payne,  that  he  may  be  exchanged,  as  there  is 
a possibility  of  his  being  subjected  to  much  trouble  in  his  present  con- 
dition. 

Captains  Saunders  and  Johnston  were  very  energetic  in  discharg- 
ing all  the  duties  assigned  to  them.  Captains  Tubbs  and  Richardson, 


936 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIlI 

of  the  infantry,  also  Captain  Barnett,  gave  me  all  assistance  in  then! 
power. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient j 
servant, 

C.  M.  MASON, 

Major , Commanding  Expedition ► 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

No.  37.  ( Galveston , January  8, 1863*  ! 

**##*#■* 

II.  Colonel  Hardeman,  commanding  Arizona  Brigade,  will  proceed  all 
once  with  his  brigade  and  take  post  at  La  Grange,  reporting  the  arriva]jl 
at  that  place  to  these  headquarters. 

* # # * * # # 

VII.  Quaker  guns  will  at  once  be  mounted  at  Bolivar  Point  and  South 
Battery.  Troops  from  Pyron’s  regiment  will  be  posted  at  the  intersec- 
tion of  Strand  street  and  the  beach,  to  be  shown  the  enemy  during  the 
day  and  withdrawn  at  night. 

m * * * * # * 

[By  command  of  Major-General  Magruder : 

E.  P.  TUBNEB, 
Assistant- Adjutant  General .J 


Hdqrs.  Hist,  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Galveston , January  9,  1863. 
Col.  S.  S.  Anderson,  Assis tant  Adju tant- General: 

Sir  : I have  the  pleasure  to  inform  you  that  I have  by  simultaneous 
attack  by  land  and  sea  succeeded  in  capturing  and  destroying  a portion! 
of  the  enemy’s  fleet  and  driving  the  rest  to  sea.  This  was  done  undei 
a heavy  fire  of  canister  and  grape  from  the  enemy’s  ships.  I am  forti- 
fying Galveston  by  constant  work  night  and  day,  and  hope  to  be  able 
to  do  so  effectually  unless  the  enemy  return  with  a large  fleet,  in  which 
event  I fear  I shall  be  compelled  to  yield  the  possession. 

I have  submitted  to  the  President  a plan  for  the  defense  of  Texas, 
which  as  soon  as  possible  will  be  forwarded  to  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding  the  Trans-Mississippi  Department.  I hope  that  all  of  my 
arrangements  and  operations  may  meet  with  his  and  your  approbation, 

I have  applied  to  the  President  for  the  promotion  of  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Scurry,  with  the  request  that  should  the  promotion  be  ordered  to 
report  to  me,  inasmuch  as  I need  assistance,  being  overwhelmed  with 
labor  here. 

There  are  indications  here  of  a refractory  and  revolutionary  spirit 
among  certain  classes  in  different  parts  of  Texas.  Some  800  Germans 
have  actually  assembled  in  Colorado  County,  well  armed,  and  are  hold- 
ing themselves  in  an  attitude  of  defense,  and  threaten  resistance  to  the 
operation  of  the  military  laws.  I have  sent  to  this  quarter  several  com- 
panies of  the  Arizona  Brigade,  with  a piece  of  artillery,  for  the  purpose 
of  quelling  these  disturbances  and  preventing  a second  occurrence. 

I shall  spare  no  efforts  to  facilitate  the  departure  of  Sibley’s  brigade. 
They  will  proceed  to  New  Iberia,  La.,  as  I am  informed  by  Major  Lea 
that  they  are  ordered  to  that  place.  Should  the  lieutenant-general  wish 
them  ordered  elsewhere  they  can  be  diverted  to  any  other  point  after 
reaching  New  Iberia. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


937 


If  Lieutenant-General  Holmes  will  allow  me  to  retain  Gurley’s  regi- 
ment, reported  to  be  unarmed,  I tbink  I will  try  to  arm  them. 

None  of  the  Arizona  Brigade  are  armed.  To  these  I issued  225  ot 
the  enemy’s  arms,  whose  garrison  I captured  here. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ J J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major- General , Commanding . 


Mobile,  January  9,  1863. 


Major-General  Buckner: 

The  people  of  Mobile  and  the  country  above  as  far  as  Meridian  are 
dependent  on  the  prairie  lands  of  Mississippi  for  their  supply  of  corn. 
On  the  12th  of  December,  1862,  a military  order  issued  from  headquar- 
ters at  Jackson,  Miss.,  in  the  following  words : 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  orders  that  no  more  corn  for  private  parties  be 
transported  over  your  road  (Mobile  and  Ohio)  within  this  department  till  otherwise 
ordered. 


It  was  said  this  was  designed  to  stop  speculation,  but  its  effect  was 
directly  in  favor  of  speculators,  as  large  amounts  of  corn  in  their  hands 
at  Mobile  and  at  other  points  immediately  advanced  in  price,  thereby 
increasing  the  distress  of  the  country.  Earnest  appeals  were  made  by 
a suffering  people  for  relief  from  this  order.  On  the  6th  of  January^ 
1863,  the  following  order  was  received: 


Jackson,  Miss.,  January  6,  1863. 


L.  J.  Fleming,  , 

General  Superintendent  Mobile  and  Ohio  Bailroaa : 

Corn  for  the  use  of  families  may  be  transported  when 
not  for  speculation. 

By  order  of  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton : 


it  is  satisfactorily  shown  it  is- 


J.  THOMPSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Thereupon  the  general  superintendent  published  the  following  order,, 
which  it  will  be  seen  had  in  good  faith  for  its  object  the  stoppage  of 
speculation  and  the  supply  of  the  wants  of  families.  The  order  was  as 
follows : 


Corn  will  be  transported  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad  in  accordance  with  the 
order  of  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  upon  affidavit  filed  in  my  office  stating  that 
it  is  exclusively  for  family  use  and  not  for  speculation.  ^ ^ FLEMING 

Chief  Engineer  and  General  Superintendent. 

Thereupon  the  following  order  issued  from  headquarters  at  Jackson  r 

Jackson,  January  1. 


L.  J.  Fleming: 

Transport  no  com  on  affidavit  of  private  individuals, 
judge  whether  the  produce  is  for  speculation  or  not. 


The  quartermaster  is  the 


J.  R.  WADDY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- Genei'al. 


To  this  I sent  the  following  reply : 


Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General , Jackson , Miss. : 

By  your  order  to  our  superintendent  you  seem  to  put  private  shipments  of  corn- 
under  the  control  of  quartermasters.  Please  answer  if  this  is  your  design.  I suppose 


938 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 


there  is  some  mistake  about  the  matter.  There  are  four  or  five  quartermasters  on  the 
road  and  the  confusion  will  be  endless.  We  will  expect  quartermasters’  orders  in  j 
regard  to  Government  freight  and  in  all  cases  give  preference  to  such  freight,  but  I 
their  assuming  control  over  private  shipments  is  a different  matter. 

MILTON  BROWN, 

President  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad  Company. 

To  this  I have  received  no  answer.  I therefore  deem  it  my  duty  to 
present  the  facts  of  the  case  to  yon,  and  request  that  if  not  within  your 
proper  jurisdiction  you  presentthem  to  General  Johnston  for  relief.  This 
order  putting  private  shipments  under  the  control  of  quartermasters  is 
plainly  without  authority  of  law  and  opens  a door  to  favoritism  and 
abuse  without  limit. 

Most  respectfully,  yours, 

MILTON  BLOWN, 

President  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad  Company . 


[Indorsements.] 

Headquarters  District  of  the  Gulf, 

Mobile,  January . 12,1863. 

This  subject  is  respectfully  referred  for  the  action  of  General  J.  E.  \ 
Johnston.  Though  the  portion  of  country  from  which  shipments  are 
made  is  not  within  the  limits  of  my  district  the  order  of  Lieutenant-  i 
General  Pemberton,  in  my  opinion,  seriously  affects  this  portion  of  my  j 
command.  The  rule  I have  adopted  with  reference  to  railroads  is  to  j 
require  that  all  Government  freights  should  have  precedence  of  all 
others,  if  necessary,  to  the  temporary  exclusion  of  other  freights  ; j 
but  beyond  this  I regard  an  interference  of  the  military  authorities 
with  the  concerns  of  individuals  and  corporations  as  illegal  and  im- 
politic. 

I think  the  order  of  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  is  liable  to  great 
abuse.  Also  complaints,  whether  just  or  not  I have  not  yet  assured  i 
myself,  are  made  against  quartermasters  for  favoring  their  friends,  and  1 
in  one  case  a speculating  house,  to  the  exclusion  of  individuals  who  are  : 
desirous  of  shipping  for  their  own  use.  The  rule  I have  adopted  is,  I 
think,  the  only  legal  and  politic  course  with  reference  to  railroad  com- 
panies,  and  I therefore  suggest  it  for  the  consideration  of  the  general 
^commanding  in  the  West. 

S.  B.  BUCKNEB, 

Major- General,  Commanding  District . 

January  17,  1363.  1 

Bespectfully  referred  to  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

Jackson , January  18,  1863. 

Bespectfully  returned  to  General  J.  E.  Johnston.  1 do  not  think  it  i 
advisable  to  change  the  spirit  of  my  orders  as  to  transportation. 

On  affidavit  satisfactory  to  the  quartermasters  at  the  particular  de- 
partment that  the  produce  is  not  for  speculation  it  can  be  transported,  j 
-as  heretofore  authorized. 

J.  O.  PEMBEBTON, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


Jhap.  XXYn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


939 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

N0.  38.  ] Galveston . January  9,  1863. 

I.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hardeman,  commanding  the  Arizona  Brigade, 
jvill  proceed  with  his  command,  dismounted,  to  Virginia  Point,  reporti- 
ng his  arrival  there  to  these  headquarters. 

******* 

TBv  command  of  Major-General  Magruder: 

1 J E.  P.  TURNER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.] 


Executive  Department, 
Montgomery , Ala.,  January  10,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis, 

President  of  the  Confederate  States  : 

Sir:  The  enemy  recently  came  in  considerable  force  up  the  Choctaw- 
hatchie  River,  and  made  a raid  into  Coffee  County,  Alabama.  He  re- 
cently dispersed  a company  of  Alabamians  from  that  section  of  the 
State,  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  salt  on  the  Gulf,  and  destroyed 
most  of  their  implements.  The  southeastern  part  of  this  State,  includ- 
ing the  locality  of  the  enemy’s  late  operations,  is  peculiarly  exposed 
and  liable  to  hostile  incursions  from  Pensacola. 

When  informed  of  the  recent  raid,  1 appointed  Col.  James  H.  Clanton, 
a gallant,  experienced,  and  efficient  officer,  my  special  aide-de-camp,  and 
dispatched  him  in  that  direction,  with  instructions  to  raise  and  muster 
into  the  service  of  the  State  for  thirty  days  a force  adequate  to  drive 
out  the  enemy  and  protect  for  the  present  that  part  of  the  State. 
I ventured  also  to  order  him  to  include  in  his  enlistment  men  liable 
to  conscription,  residing  in  Coffee,  Covington,  Dale,  Henry,  Pike,  and 
Barbour  Counties,  which  compose  the  southeastern  angle  of  the  State. 
That  order  was  made  for  reasons  which  I proceed  to  state.  By  includ- 
ing those  within  the  age  of  conscription  I could  greatly  hasten  the 
formation  of  the  corps  and  the  emergency  seemed  to  admit  of  no  delay. 
Furthermore,  it  seemed  to  me,  after  the  most  careful  reflection,  the  most 
effective,  if  not  the  only,  means  of  securing  an  execution  of  the  conscript 
law  in  that  region.  Reluctance  to  leave  their  unprotected  families 
while  there  is  an  immediate  prospect  of  invasion  is  an  excuse  of  some 
speciousness,  which  they  make  and  accompany  with  a profession  of 
readiness  to  take  up  arms  for  the  purpose  of  local  defense.  While  some 
of  them  are  disloyal,  many  of  them  have,  on  account  of  their  unprotected 
families,  availed  themselves  of  the  facilities  which  their  territory,  gen- 
erally poor  and  sparsely  populated,  affords  for  escape  and  concealment. 
I have  no  doubt  that  many,  perhaps  most,  of  those  who  are  thus  evad- 
ing conscription  will  promptly  enlist  in  the  State  service  for  thirty 
days.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time  they  can  be  by  aid  of  the  military 
organization  enrolled  as  conscripts  and  transferred  to  the  service  of  the 
Confederate  States  if  Your  Excellency  should  require  it.  An  object 
will  thus  be  accomplished  which  is  doubtful  and  difficult  of  attainment 
by  any  other  means.  Nor  will  any  increased  delay  result.  The  preva- 
lence of  small-pox  in  the  camp  of  instruction  has  suspended  the  gather- 
ing of  the  conscripts,  and  there  is  no  probability  that  those  whom  I may 
enlist  would  be  summoned  to  the  camp  within  thirty  days,  even  if  a 
willing  obedience  to  the  mandate  of  the  law  were  yielded. 

Convinced  that  the- order  which  I gave  to  Colonel  Clanton  was  essen- 


940 


W.  FLA  , S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVLL 

tial  to  the  protection  of  the  defenseless  and  exposed  sections  and  would  i 
operate  as  a valuable  aid  in  the  enforcement  of  the  conscription  I ven- 
tured to  give  it.  The  subject  could  not  be  made  intelligible  through  j 
the  telegraph,  and  the  emergency  would  not  allow  of  the  delay  neces- 
gary  to  exchange  communications  by  letter.  I therefore  took  the  stepr 
confidently  believing  that  its  obvious  propriety  and  utility  no  less  to 
the  Confederate  States  than  to  Alabama  would  secure  your  approval 
and  vindicate  my  motives. 

Col.  James  H.  Clanton  has  authority  from  the  War  Department  to 
raise  for  six  months’  service  a regiment  of  cavalry,  to  be  composed  of 
men  not  subject  to  conscription,  and  to  be  employed  “in  the  defense  of 
the  coast  of  Alabama  and  Florida  west  of  the  Apalachicola  Fiver.” 
He  is  progressing  very  slowly  in  the  formation  of  the  regiment.  In 
view  of  the  exposed  and  undefended  condition  of  the  section  indicated 
and  of  the  necessity  for  a speedy  organization  of  an  effective  force  and 
of  the  ability  of  Colonel  Clanton  and  his  peculiar  fitness  for  such  serv- 
ice, I respectfully  ask  Your  Excellency  to  permit  him  to  enlist  in  his 
corps  men  subject  to  conscription  within  the  counties  above  described 
(Coffee,  Covington,  Dale,  Henry,  Pike,  and  Barbour).  One  of  the  most 
serious  impediments  to  the  formation  of  Colonel  Clanton’s  regiment  is 
that  his  authority  does  not  allow  him  to  enlist  companies  or  any  num- 
ber less  than  a regiment.  I trust  that  the  order  will  be  so  modified  as 
to  allow  him  to  enlist  by  companies  or  even  smaller  squads.  The  pro- 
hibition of  the  enlistment  of  less  than  a regiment  is  so  obviously  pro- 
ductive of  delay,  embarrassment,  and  difficulty  that  1 need  make  no 
comments  upon  the  subject.  Without  the  authority  to  enlist  men  of 
conscript  age  and  to  enlist  in  smaller  numbers  I do  not  believe  Colonel 
Clanton’s  regiment  can  be  raised  without  very  great  delay,  if  at  all.  I 
regard  the  speedy  organization  of  the  regiment  to  be  under  the  com- 
mand of  Colonel  Clanton  as  a matter  of  the  highest  importance,  and 
I hope  Your  Excellency  will  pardon  me  for  urging  a modification  of  his 
authority  to  the  extent  above  stated. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  GILL  SHORTER, 

Governor  of  Alabama. 


[Indorsement.] 

Secretary  of  War: 

As  far  as  consistent  I wish  to  comply  with  Governor  Shorter’s  request. 
It  may  be  done,  I think,  by  allowing  the  men  subject  to,  and  enrolled  to 
serve  with  Colonel  Clanton  for  the  short  period  named. 

It  is  obviously  a mistake  to  suppose  that  the  companies  cannot  be 
mustered  in  when  offered.  The  organization  of  the  regiment  must  be 
delayed  until  ten  companies  have  been  mustered  in. 

JEFFEFSOH  DAYIS. 


Bichmond,  January  10,  1863. 

Dear  Sir  : My  attention  having  been  invited  to  an  order  now  on  file 
purporting  to  have  been  issued  by  Col.  John  K.  Baylor,  while  in  Ari- 
zona, relative  to  the  extermination  of  certain  Apache  Indians,*  the 

* Order  not  found,  but  see  Randolph  to  Magruder  November  7,  and  Baylor  to  Ma- 
gruder  December  29,  1862. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  941 

effect  whereof  having  been  seriously  to  complicate  the  relations  of  that 
officer  with  this  Government,  I feel  it  but  an  act  of  justice  toward  one 
whom  I should  deplore  to  see  condemned  without  at  least  a hearing  to 
submit  a brief  statement  in  his  justification. 

Colonel  Baylor  has  never  held  any  commission  in  the  Confederate 
States  service  other  than  that  of  lieutenant-colonel  Texas  Mounted 
Rifles.  At  the  date  of  said  order  he  was  not  acting  under  or  by  virtue 
of  such  commission.  It  was  likewise  antecedent  to  notice  of  his  ap- 
pointment as  Governor  of  Arizona.- 

For  several  months  prior  to  the  issuance  of  said  order  it  was  cur- 
rently believed  in  that  Territory  that  extermination  of  the  hostile  sav- 
ages was  the  publicly  declared  policy  of  this  Government.  It  was  so 
published  in  sundry  newspapers  there  received,  which  then  constituted 
the  only  medium  of  information  in  that  remote  region  ot  the  public  acts 
of  the  Confederate  Government,  At  this  time  these  Indians  were  actu- 
ally exterminating  the  white  population  of  Arizona.  Treaties  were  suc- 
cessively made  and  broken  by  them  for  the  mere  sake  of  presents  usually 
distributed  on  such  occasions.  Their  policy  was  to  omit  no  opportunity 
to  plunder  and  massacre.  They  had  without  provocation  desolated 
nearly  the  entire  Territory.  Hundreds  of  our  best  citizens  had  been 
wantonly  put  to  death  during  the  previous  year  by  every  species  of  tor- 
ture their  fiendish  ingenuity  could  devise.  They  spared  neither  age, 
sex,  nor  condition.  They  occupied  the  mountain  fastnesses  of  the 
Sierra  Madre,  whither  no  troops  could  possibly  follow.  They  could 
only  be  dislodged  by  means  of  the  stratagen*  indicated  in  Colonel  Bay- 
lor’s order.  They  were  better  armed  than  our  own  soldiery.  They  de- 
fied chastisement.  It  became  necessary  for  the  white  population  either 
to  abandon  the  country  or  extirpate  the  Indians.  Humanity  to  them 
was  but  incentive  to  greater  atrocity.  Every  instance  of  mercy  toward 
the  perfidious  Apache  had  cost  scores  of  valuable  lives.  Existing  cir- 
cumstances demanded  immediate  action.  Extermination  seemed  to 
imply  that  the  ends  justified  the  means  to  be  employed.  All  ordinary 
means  had  failed.  Extraordinary  measures  were  employed  as  a dernier 
ressort. 

It  was  under  circumstances  such  as  these  that  Baylor  appears  to  have 
issued  this  order.  Reference  thereto  proves  it  to  have  been  predicated 
upon  the  supposed  Indian  policy  of  the  General  Government.  What 
less  could  he  have  done  under  the  circumstances  ? What  other  meas- 
ures could  have  been  devised  that  had  not  already  proven  futile  ? The 
commonest  instincts  of  necessity  and  self-preservation  would  appar- 
ently of  themselves  have  prompted  such  a course.  Extermination  of  the 
whites  had  already  been  proclaimed  by  the  savage  foe.  They  neither 
asked  nor  expected  mercy.  When  tendered,  they  scorned  it.  Pacifi- 
cation was  an  impossibility.  In  yielding  to  a supervening  necessity, 
Colonel  Baylor  innocently  believed  himself  likewise  performing  a pub- 
lic duty. 

With  reference  to  that  clause  in  his  order  directing  the  women  and 
children  to  be  sold  into  slavery,  I can  only  say  that  it  has  been  the  un- 
varying custom  of  the  country  from  the  time  of  the  Spanish  colonists 
down  to  the  present  day ; and  I cannot  recollect  a single  instance  wherein 
Indian  captives  have  ever  been  set  free  by  the  people  of  that  country. 
In  Mexico  the  long-continued  practice  had  acquired  the  force  of  law. 
The  usage  was  recognized  and  guaranteed  by  treaty  between  the  United 
States  and  Mexico.  From  this  custom  originated  the  peonage  system 
of  New  Spam  and  Mexico  and  that  admixture  of  the  European  and 
Indian  races  which  for  nearly  three  centuries  has  been  slowly  but  grad- 


942  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

ually  absorbing  and  civilizing  the  Once  powerful  aboriginal  tribes  of 
Spanish  America.  Captive  Indian  women  and  children  are  reckoned 
in  the  same  caste  as  peons,  perform  similar  duties,  and  are  treated 
with  moderation  and  humanity.  This  state  of  servitude,  it  would  nat- 
urally seem,  is  infinitely  preferable  to  the  only  other  alternative  of 
leaving  them  to  perish  of  starvation  and  exposure  among  the  mountains 
and  deserts,  and  is  certainly  characterized  by  none  of  that  atrocity  and 
barbarity  which  Colonel  Baylor’s  order  might  seem  to  imply  in  the 
judgment  of  those  not  conversant  with  the  circumstances  under  which 
it  was  issued. 

Trusting  this  brief  explanation  may  at  least  serve  to  mitigate  the 
severity  of  opprobrium  against  a tried,  trusty,  and  efficient  public 
servant,  I have  the  honor  to  remain,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,. 

M.  H.  McWILLIE, 
Delegate  from  Arizona. 


Headquarters  Arizona  Brigade, 

Columbus , January  11,  1863. 
Maj.  B.  Bloomfield,  Chief  Quartermaster : 

Sir  : Your  messenger,  with  dispatches  for  Colonel  Hardeman,  arrived 
on  the  cars  last  night.  I keep  him  until  the  cars  return  to  morrow 
morning.  Colonel  Hardeman  has  sent  Major  Madison  with  25  men  to 
La  Grange,  Lieutenant  Stone  with  25  to  Bellville,  and  he  left  this  morn- 
ing with  50  men  for  the  purpose  of  arresting  the  ringleaders  and  dis- 
arming all  the  disloyal  citizens. 

All  is  now  apparently  quiet.  I think  the  prompt  action  of  the  general 
in  sending  a force  to  put  down  all  insurrectionary  movements  and  our 
success  at  Galveston  will  and  has  had  the  effect  of  inducing  them  to 
return  to  their  homes,  and  as  far  as  heard  from  they  have  and  are 
complying  with  the  conscription  law  and  draft  ordered  by  the  Gov- 
ernor. 

The  dispatch  you  sent  up  was  an  order  announcing  to  Colonel  Harde- 
man that  a part  of  Colonel  Debray’s  regiment  had  been  ordered  to  re- 
enforce him  (Colonel  Hardeman).  As  they  are  not  wanted,  I am  ordered 
by  Colonel  Hardeman  to  order  them  to  return  to  Harrisburg  or  t6  the 
encampment  they  left  and  report  to  their  colonel.  I think  Colonel 
Hardeman  and  his  officers  will  by  the  last  of  this  week  complete  the 
arrest  and  disarming  of  the  disaffected,  and  the  command  will  be  ready 
to  return  to  Harrisburg  by  Saturday. 

I write  this  for  your  own  information  and  not  officially,  presuming 
you  would  be  pleased  to  know  how  matters  stand  in  the  country.  You 
will  please  forward  the  dispatches  to  headquarters  that  I send  by  your 
messenger. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENEY  L.  WEBB, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General* 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson,  La.,  January  12,  1863. 

Major  Waddy, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana: 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  my  latest  information  from 
Baton  Eouge  gives  thirty-two  regiments  at  that  place;  but  I do  not  be- 


3HAP.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


943 


lieve  it,  as  it  does  not  come  as  direct  as  my  previous  information,  and  there 
have  been  no  late  arrivals  reported.  I have  information  from  a gentleman 
from  New  Orleans  that  the  enemy  have  nineteen  war  vessels  of  different 
kinds  at  New  Orleans,  two  at  Donaldson ville,  one  at  Plaquemine,  and  the 
Essex  and  two  steam  sloops  of  war  at  Baton  Bouge.  It  is  reliably  re- 
ported that  there  are  not  more  than  2,000  men  left  in  New  Orleans  and 
that  Major-General  Banks  is  sick;  also  that  800  men  have  been  sent  from 
Baton  Rouge  to  Plaquemine,  and  that  there  are  one  regiment  of  in- 
fantry and  one  company  of  cavalry  at  West  Baton  Rouge.  I have  had 
no  direct  information  lately  from  the  city.  General  Sibley  commu- 
nicated with  me  yesterday  from  Rosedale.  He  asks  me  for  re- enforce- 
ments of  infantry  and  cavalry.  I shall  be  obliged  to  keep  my  cavalry 
on  the  west  side  of  the  river. 

I have  concluded  to  establish  a general  hospital  at  Woodville,  if  it 
meets  the  general’s  approbation,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  trans- 
portation to  Magnolia.  No  wagons  can  be  had  in  the  country.  I can 
have  river  transportation  to  Bayou  Sara  and  thence  by  a good  railroad 
to  Woodville. 

The  work  at  this  post  is  progressing  well.  Nothing  else  to  report. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 
Major-  General , Commanding . 


Inspector  General’s  Office, 
Jackson,  Miss.,  January  12,  1863. 

General  J.  E.  Johnston, 

Commanding , &c.,  Jackson , Miss.  : 

General:  Your  order  to  inspect  the  troops  and  defenses  at  Port 
Hudson,  La.,  under  the  immediate  command  of  Major-General  Gardner, 
having  been  complied  with,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following 
report : 

To  Lieutenant-Colonel  Harvie,  assistant  inspector  general,  was  as- 
signed the  special  duty  of  verifying  the  muster  rolls,  noting  deficiencies* 
general  conduct,  &c.,  of  the  iroops;  herewith  is  inclosed  his  report  in 
full,*  the  most  prominent  feature  of  which,  namely,  lack  of  discipline 
and  instruction  among  Hie  troops,  with  the  very  general  inefficiency  of 
the  officers  of  the  con  nm.id.  t w*  idd  particularly  direct  your  attention. 

The  several  I uttcries  i pon  tin-  hold  riverfront,  extending  over  a mile,, 
are  very  to  midalde,  both  from  ilmir  commanding  position  and  num- 
ber tird  character  of  me  guns  i:i  position,  except  perhaps  the  two 
32  pounders  under  1 he  b uft‘ railed  t he  Water  Battery.  The  location  of 
i lie  seventeen  guns  is  good  throughout,  but  I consider  the  defenses  of 
Hie  iivrr -detective  from  the  fact  that  all  the  magazines  are  placed  sa 
immediately  upon  the  banks  ml  hui  It  so  high  above  it  as  to  render  prob- 
sihle  i In*  dost  i net  ion  of  each  ami  all  of  t In  in  by  the  shells  of  the  enemy. 
'Jhisdehet  has  presented  itscli  to  General  Gardner  so  that  if  time  be 
allowed  it  will  be  remedied. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith,  forme.lv  an  < fiieer  of  the  U.  S.  Navy,  after- 
ward a colonel  commanding  a n giim  ut  of  Louisiana  Volunteers  in  the 
Army  of  the  West,  has  been  charged  with  tin*  immediate  command  of 
all  the  heavy  batteries  by  order  of  Genera!  (la:dner.  The  selection  of 

* Not  tumid. 


944 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL  j 

this  most  competent  officer  promises  every  success  in  case  of  an  attack 
by  the  gunboats  of  the  enemy. 

The  men  and  officers  are  already  well  instructed  in  the  use  of  these 
heavy  guns.  Ammunition  is  needed  and  has  been  required  for. 

On  the  land  side  the  defenses  consist  of  a cremaillere  line,  connected  ! 
by  redans  and  curtains,  extending  over  the  distance  of  2J  miles,  the  ! 
most  important  portion  of  which  has  already  been  completed,  whilst 
the  remaining  part  is  being  pushed  forward  by  a large  addition  recently 
to  the  negro  force  employed  on  the  work.  Another  line,  extending  for 
6 miles,  had  been  commenced  and  considerable  time  and  labor  expended 
upon  it,  to  be  abandoned  by  order  of  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  as  1 
I understand.  The  general  commanding  at  Port  Hudson  considers 
the  most  important  portion  of  the  entire  defenses  completed  when 
he  shall  have  connected  the  unfinished  half  mile  of  the  work  on  the 
north  side  by  a succession  of  rifle  pits,  nature  having  already  assisted 
in  the  defense  thereabout  by  a number  of  impracticable  gorges. 

The  quartermaster  and  commissary  of  the  post  report  an  estimate  of 
six  weeks’  supplies  on  hand.  Withia  my  observation  there  has  been 
the  grossest  neglect  in  suffering  a very  large  amount  of  corn  to  accu- 
mulate upon  the  river  landing,  to  be  damaged  by  exposure  and  lost  by 
the  daily  increase  of  water.  Hundreds  if  not  thousands  of  bushels  of 
corn  will  have  been  so  lost.  General  Gardner’s  attention  was  especi- 
ally directed  to  this  evil,  which  had  grown  before  he  had  assumed  com- 
mand of  the  post. 

Much  of  the  subsistence  already  accumulated  is  likely  to  be  damaged 
from  insufficient  protection.  Houses  suitable  for  the  purpose  should 
have  been  long  since  built.  In  my  opinion  too  much  attention  cannot 
be  bestowed  upon  the  care  and  saving  of  the  subsistence  both  for  man 
and  beast  at  this  post,  especially  when,  in  case  of  an  attack,  a large 
number  of  cattle  at  present  subsisting  on  the  adjacent  farms  will  have 
to  be  cared  for  within  the  lines.  The  chief  quartermaster  of  the  post, 
Major  Bennett,  reports  a daily  consumption  of  forage  by  animals  in  the 
public  service  to  be  within  a fraction  of  625  bushels  of  corn,  this  ex- 
penditure having  been  largely  increased  by  the  recent  accession  to  the 
forces  of  both  cavalry  and  artillery  horses.  I incline  to  the  belief  that 
his  estimate  of  “sixty  days’  forage  on  hand”  is  largely  in  excess  of  the 
fact.  A very  large  proportion  of  the  quartermasters  of  this  command 
are  not  bonded,  nor  have  they  heretofore  rendered  their  accounts  in 
accordance  with  regulations. 

Quartermaster  Captain  McCluer  is  at  present  engaged  in  paying  up 
the  troops  to  the  1st  of  October;  the  officers  to  1st  of  December.  From 
all  that  I have  heard  serious  detriment  to  the  public  service  has  grown 
out  of  the  neglect  to  pay  off  at  an  earlier  day  the  troops  of  this  com- 
mand. Captain  McCluer  reports  that  he  has  been  unable  to  procure 
bounty  money  for  any  portion  of  them. 

The  commissary  department  appears  to  be  efficiently  administered 
by  Major  Stockdale,  so  far  at  least  as  his  books  and  accounts  present 
upon  inspection.  Very  few  of  the  commissaries  of  the  brigades  are 
bonded.  The  medical  department,  under  Surg.  T.  R.  Barnett,  is  ap- 
parently well  cared  for.  He  has  besides  the  hospital  of  the  post  two 
others  of  large  capacity — one  at  Jackson,  La.,  12  miles  to  the  north  of 
the  post,  with  one  at  Clinton,  22  miles  east  on  the  line  of  communica- 
tion with  Camp  Moore.  As  this  position  is  most  liable  to  molestation 
by  the  enemy  I suggested  to  the  surgeon  the  propriety  of  removing  to 
some  safer  point. 

The  transportation  at  the  post  appears  to  be  sufficient  for  all  pur- 


Chap.  XXvtt.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


945 


poses.  The  medical  department  reports  abundant  arrangements  for 
the  sick  and  wounded  except  ambulances,  there  being  but  three  at  the 

post. 

The  commanding  officer  appeared  to  be  much  embarrassed  by  the 
presence  of  a number  of  women  and  children  at  this  point  remaining 
in  spite  of  his  recommendations  to  remove — persons  who  have  come  to 
occupy  the  houses  made  vacant  by  owners  removed  away.  It  struck 
me  as  a matter  of  importance  to  the  command  to  have  possession  of 
most  of  these  houses  for  storage  and  hospital  purposes. 

I submit  for  your  view  several  papers  relating  to  the  condition  of  the 
post. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

OHS.  M.  FAUNTLEROY, 

Colonel , Inspector-General . 


Hdqrs.  Twenty-second  Brigade  Texas  State  Troops, 

Columbus , Tex.,  January  12,  1863. 

Lieut.  Ool.  H.  L.  Webb, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General , &c. : 

Colonel  : On  Thursday  last  a committee  of  Germans  waited  on  me 
at  La  Grange,  professing  to  represent  120  Germans  of  Fayette  County, 
and  presented  a written  declaration,  in  which  they  set  forth  the  situa- 
tion of  their  families,  and  stated  their  willingness  to  defend  the  State, 
provided  they  had  guarantees  that  their  families  should  be  supported 
in  their  absence,  but  they  expressly  declared,  that  they  declined  to  take 
the  oath  to  the  Confederate  States , because  they  lcnew  of  no  laic  requiring 
State  troops  to  take  that  oath.  The  declaration  also  stated  in  substance 
that  they  were  called  upon  to  defend  principles  far  removed  from  them. 

The  Governor  has  the  original  declaration,  and  will  send  a copy  to 
me  and  also  to  you,  and  I request  that  you  wait  for  the  receipt  of  the 
paper  in  order  that  you  may  judge  the  more  fairly  of  its  contents,  as 
my  memory  may  not  serve  me  fully.  The  declaration,  however,  will 
support  an  indictment  and  arrest  under  the  State  laws,  and  it  is  the 
purpose  of  the  Governor  to  have  the  ringleaders  arrested  and  dealt 
with.  The  punishment  is  the  penitentiary,  not  less  than  two  nor  more 
than  five  years. 

The  Governor  arrived  at  La  Grange  on  Thursday  last  and  remained 
until  Saturday  and  saw  this  committee,  and  gave  them  a very  plain, 
positive  talk,  which  I have  no  doubt  had  a good  effect,  and  I have  hope 
that  the  victory  at  Galveston  and  the  knowledge  of  the  conspirators 
of  our  being  on  the  alert  will  have  a good  effect,  and  that  most  of  the 
men  will  come  to  the  rendezvous  at  this  place  to-day,  it  being  the  day 
fixed  for  it,  but  if  there  should  be  any  reverse  to  our  arms  or  a landing 
in  force  I anticipate  trouble. 

I have  sent  commissioners  to  all  the  disaffected  regions — men  of  in- 
fluence, true  to  our  cause — who  have  used  persuasion  and  mild  repre- 
sentations of  the  consequences  to  the  conspirators,  and  a happy  effect 
has  been  the  consequence ; and  my  belief  now  is  that  a few  will  desert, 
but  that  a large  majority  of  the  disaffected  will  come  here  to-day.  I 
am  credibly  informed  that  one  man  declared  to  B.  B.  Hudnall  that  he 
and  others  meant  to  go,  but  that  at  a good  opportunity  they  would 
hoist  the  white  flag  and  go  over  to  the  enemy.  I am  now  trying  to 
get  this  statement  on  oath,  and  will,  if  able,  submit  it  in  form. 

60  R R — YOL  XY 


946 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


In  conclusion,  I will  state  that  this  movement  is  not  confined  alone 
to  Germans,  but  men  of  our  own  race  and  country  are  concerned  in  it. 
Mild  measures  have  been  determined  upon  by  the  State  officers  as  long 
as  they  will  avail,  but  after  the  men  are  all  (that  will  go)  got  into 
service  then  the  Governor  intends  to  deal  with  the  ringleaders. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

WILLIAM  G.  WEBB, 

Brigadier- General,  Twenty -second  Brigade  Texas  State  Troops. 

P.  S. — At  present  please  address  me  here  at  Columbus. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  District  of  Texas , New  Mexico , and  Arizona,  commanded  by 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  Bankhead  Magruder,  January  12,  1863  ( headquarters  Galveston , Tex.). 


Commanding  officer. 

Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Horses. 

Pieces  of 
artillery. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present  and 

absent. 

£ 

s 

© 

1 

Men. 

Serviceable. 

Unserviceable. 

I Heavy. 

Mountain. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee. . 

Col.  X.  B.  Debray 

Grand  total 

Western  Sub-District 
of  Texas. 

Eastern  Sub-District 
of  Texas. 

142 

203 

2, 292 

3,042 

1, 189 

1,365 

5 

5 

13 

1 

2,  811 

4,027 

3,912 

5,410 

345 

5,  334 

2,  554 

1 5 

18 

1 | 6,838  9,322 

Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Galveston , January  13,  1863. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Hardeman  : 

Commanding  Arizona  Brigade , Harrisburg : 

General  Magruder  directs  that  without  unpacking  you  will  proceed 
at  once  to  carry  out  your  original  instructions  in  regard  to  quelling  the 
Germans. 

E.  P.  TURNER, 

Captain  and  Assistant- Adjutant- General. 


Executive  Department, 
Montgomery , Ala.,  January  14,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War,  Riclvmond : 

Sir:  I have  deputed  one  of  ray  aides,  Col.  Eli  S.  Shorter,  to  visit  Rich- 
mond and  communicate  in  person  with  you  upon  the  military  defense 
of  Southeastern  Alabama  and  West  Florida,  adjoining  our  exposed 
territory.  With  this  I hand  yQu  a copy  of  a letter*  addressed  by  me 
to  the  President  on  the  10th  instant,  to  which  I respectfully  and  ear- 
nestly ask  your  attention. 

I hope  you  will  excuse  the  length  of  this  communication  and  my  im- 


Not  found. 


(’hap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  94? 

portunity,  for  the  reason  that  I desire  definite  and  satisfactory  advices 
from  the  War  Department  upon  the  several  matters  submitted. 

As  early  as  the  4th  of  November  last  I prepared  and  signed  a letter 
to  the  President,  a copy  of  which  is  herewith  inclosed,  which  letter  was 
forwarded  for  the  signatures  of  the  Governors  of  Georgia  and  Florida, 
and  which,  I am  informed,  was  signed  by  them  and  duly  forwarded  to 
the  President.  The  object  of  this  letter  was  to  secure  the  organization 
of  a new  military  district  in  the  territory  described  and  for  the  pur- 
poses mentioned  in  the  letter.  I have  never  been  advised  whether  the 
letter  reached  the  President  or  whether  any  action  was  had,  as  requested 
by  the  Governors  of  the  three  States  named.  In  a hasty  interview  with 
tbe  President  when  he  passed  through  Montgomery  on  his  way  to  Mis- 
sissippi he  remarked  that  General  Cobb’s  command  extended  to  the 
Choctawhatchie  River  in  West  Florida.  General  Cobb,  in  a letter  of 
the  27th  December,  says:  i4My  district  is  150  miles  wide,  and  extends 
from  the  Suwannee  to  the  Choctawhatchie^”  In  reply  to  a telegram 
asking  the  boundaries  of  General  Cobb’s  district,  General  S.  Cooper 
dispatched  me  on  the  28th  December  that — 

The  boundaries  of  General  Cobb?s  district  extend  from  the  Suwannee  to  the  Chat- 
tahoochee Rivers  in  Florida.  He  is  principally  charged  with  the  defense  of  the  Chat- 
tahoochee and  Apalachicola  Rivers  against  approaches  of  the  enemy’s  boats,  and  his 
jommand  necessarily  embraces  both  sides  of  these  rivers. 

You  see,  therefore,  I am  still  in  doubt  and  uncertainty  as  to  the  pre- 
use  territory  in  Georgia,  Alabama,  and  Florida  which  is  embraced  in 
the  district  commanded  by  General  Cobb.  On  this  point  I ask  for 
lefinite  information,  and  in  the  same  connection  ask  to  be  furnished 
vith  copies  of  the  official  orders  fixing  both  the  district  of  General 
Jobb  and  the  Mobile  district,  now  commanded  by  General  Buckner. 

I wish  also  to  call  your  attention  to  the  condition  of  a company  of 
sharpshooters  now  in  the  service  of  the  State,  and  employed  as  a guard 

0 the  works  being  constructed  on  the  Chattahoochee  River.  This  com- 
pany was  raised  in  the  summer  of  1862,  at  Eufaula,  Barbour  County, 
Alabama,  and  tendered  to  the  State  as  one  of  the  companies  forming 
>ur  State  Guard.  The  members  of  the  company  were  nearly  all  ex- 
empts, over  the  age  of  thirty-five  years,  but  many  of  them  are  now 
iable  to  enrollment  as  conscripts.  It  is  a very  efficient  organization, 
tnd  the  company  is  positively  needed  in  the  valley  of  the  Chattahoo- 
hee.  I have  therefore  to  request  that  this  company  be  allowed  to 
olunteer  or  to  be  turned  over  from  the  State  service  into  the  Confed- 
rate  service  for  six  months  or  twelve  months,  and  to  report  to  General 
pobb  for  duty  at  one  of  the  batteries  on  the  Chattahoochee  River. 
?he  company  is  commanded  by  Capt.  John  Hardy,  an  efficient  officer, 
pith  lieutenants  of  skill  and  gallantry. 

I beg  your  co-operation  also  in  securing  suspension  of  the  enrollment 

1 u the  counties  of  Barbour,  Pike,  Henry,  Dale,  Coffee,  and  Covington, 
nd  authority  for  conscripts  in  those  counties  to  join  the  organization 
f Col.  James  H.  Clanton  for  coast  defense.  The  fact  is  that  West 
Florida  is  so  thinly  populated  and  the  contiguous  counties  of  Alabama 
o denuded  by  their  contributions  to  the  Army  that  unless  an  efficient 
arce  is  sent  to  that  section  a few  hundred  men  will  be  able  to  sally  out 
rom  Choctawhatchie  Bay  and  rob  and  lay  waste  the  country.  The 
ountry  near  the  coast  is  the  common  retreat  of  deserters  from  our 
rmy,  tories,  and  runaway  negroes.  If  Colonel  Clanton  can  complete 
is  regiment  of  cavalry  and  has  authority  to  accept  and  muster  in  two 
r three  companies  of  infantry  and  can  get  a section  of  artillery,  he 


948 


W.  fLA.,  S.  ALA.,  8.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  ' 


“NT.  [Chat*.  XXyit. 


can  drive  the  enemy  to  their  gunboats,  protect  our  salt  manufactories 
on  the  coast,  which  are  of  urgent  and  great  importance,  and  give  secur- 
ity and  confidence  to  the  whole  population  engaged  in  their  peaceful 
pursuits : and  these  results  cannot  be  accomplished  m any  other  way. 

1 „ 7 , (•  n TKTr.f-f-cs  VTaimr'  SWSinSATl  hfl.S  VftrV 


On  account  of  sinall-pox  at  Camp  Watts  Major  Swanson  has  very 

. • i i.  ^ 1-v  /a  n/\T>4*  frv  nnmn  lirirl  I 


VJI1  accuuut  U1  OLiJcwriwA  T *'  , , i-! 

properly  directed  that  the  conscripts  must  not  be  sent  to  camp  until 

1 i v _ ,,  -i,  • • 1 * , L , , » » oprl  ho  hn  onrhnr. 


Ill  tUdt  LHC  puuovn^vo  _ - , 

further  orders.  If  allowed  to  join  Colonel  Clanton,  and  he  be  author- 


iuruicr  uiucio.  ai  w jv*** / , , „nTT 

ized  to  muster  them  in  as  infantry,  cavalry,  or  artillery,  they  may 
agree,  the  public  service  will  be  promoted.  I shall  have  to  depend 
mainly  upon  the  volunteers  without  the  conscript  age,  tor  in  the  coun- 
ties enumerated  there  are  but  a few  hundred  conscripts  left.  No  coun- 
ties in  Alabama  have  contributed  their  resources  more  freely  and  unre- 
servedlv  than  they,  and  now,  in  their  weakness  and  isolation,  I appeal 
to  the  Confederate  Government  to  allow  their  remaining  few  able  to 
render  military  service  to  organize  for  the  protection  of  their  own 
homes.  I insist  that  this.ap plication  is  a most  reasonable  one,  and  the 
country  referred  to  has  a right  to  expect  a favorable  response  to  it. 
General  Cobb  reports  on  the  27th  December  last  only  800  men  under 
his  command  in  his  entire  district.  I trust  it  may  be  compatible  with 
the  public  service  to  allow  him  to  re-enforce  his  command  upon  the 
plan  submitted  by  him  to  the  Department.  f 

In  conclusion  allow  me  to  express  the  hope  that  the  mission  of  my 
aide  de  camp  may  not  be  unavailing,  and  that  the  people  of  West 
Florida  and  Southeastern  Alabama,  who  are  advised  of  my  efforts  in 
their  behalf  as  well  as  myself,  may  not  be  disappointed  in  their  and 
my  own  reasonable  expectations. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^  ^ gH()RTER) 

Governor  of  Alabama. 


Special  Orders, 
No.  11. 


Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

Richmond , January  14, 1863. 


XVIII.  Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith  is  assigned  to  the  command  ol 
the  Southwestern  Army,  embracing  the  Department  of  West  Louisiana 
•r.ul  Texas.  The  geographical  limits  of  this  command  will  hereattei 
bo  separate  and  distinct  from  the  command  of  the  Trans-Mississipp 
Department,  named  in  previous  orders. 

Lieutenant-General  Smith  will  proceed  with  his  staft  to  Alexandria 
La.,  and  assume  this  command. 

" At.  # 


By  command  of  the  Secretary  ot  War : 


JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


Special  Orders,  \ Headquarters, 

No.  17.  1 Port  Hudson,  La .,  January  14,  18( 

m * * * * * * 

IX.  The  following  disposition  will  be  made  of  the  cavalry  of  this  dis 

U Colonel  Wingfield’s  regiment,  to  be  stationed  at  this  post,  to  furmsl 
all  the  details  required  in  this  immediate  vicinity. 


Chat.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  949 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Gantt  to  have  command  of  the  outpost,  scouts, 
and  pickets  for  the  protection  of  the  approaches  from  Baton  Rouge  to 
this  point  and  Clinton.  He  will  establish  his  main  camps  at  suitable 
points  in  front  of  Clinton  toward  Baton  Rouge.  His  command  will  con- 
sist of  his  own  battalion,  Wil  bourn’s  battalion,  Plain’s,  Daigre’s,  Nor- 
man’s, Stockdale’s,  Terrell’s,  and  Stuart’s  companies. 

Major  Garland  will  have  charge  of  the  approaches  from  Baton  Rouge 
to  Camp  Moore  with  his  own  battalion  and  Rhodes’  company.  Lester’s 
and  Herren’s  companies,  of  Pinson’s  regiment,  will  take  post  near  Pon- 
chatoula,  under  the  orders  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Shields. 

Any  other  cavalry  commands  not  named  in  the  foregoing  orders  will 
remain  in  their  present  positions  until  further  orders,  and  report  by  let- 
ter to  these  headquarters. 

The  movements  above  ordered  will  take  place  as  soon  as  practicable. 
All  details  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  this  post  will  be  relieved  by 
Colouel  Wingfield’s  regiment  as  soon  as  practicable. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner: 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters, 

: Lavaca , Tex .,  January  15,  1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Acting  Adjutant-General,  P.  8.  Army , Galveston , Tex. : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  two  com- 
munications of  the  8th  and  9th  instant,  and  state  for  the  information  of 
the  major-general  commanding  that  the  land  adjacent  to  the  position  of 
the  armed  blockaders  (now  off  Saluria)  is  unfavorable  for  land  opera- 
tions except  with  the  lighte'st  pieces,  and  then  the  range  is  too  great. 
The  bridges  and  flat-boats  affording  communication  between  Indianola 
and  Saluria  have  been  burned  or  removed.  The  land  is  low  and  flat, 
and  the  only  road  to  the  Pass  is  on  the  margin  of  the  bay. 

I would  respectfully  submit  the  following  for  the  general’s  approval : 

If  it  is  the  intention  of  the  major-general  to  attack  the  enemy’s  ves- 
sels in  this-bay  with  a fleet  from  the  east,  I will  fit  up  and  man  a 
schooner  now  in  those  waters  of  about  70  tons  burden.  There  is  also 
a small  high-pressure  steamboat,  but  of  very  little  power,  old  and  frail, 
and  very  slow.  She  may  act  as  a tender,  with  a reserve  of  boarders  and 
launches.  Small  sail-boats  can  be  procured,  dismantled,  and  used  as 
launches.  1 can  mount  on  the  schooner  mentioned  about  two  24- 
pounders  and  one  12-pouuder. 

I have  about  forty  lances  ; no  six-shooters  nor  cutlasses.  My  com- 
mand at  this  post  is  very  small — only  two  companies  ; but  if  the  gen- 
eral approves  of  my  fitting  up  the  vessels  mentioned  I will  order  a suf- 
ficient force  from  the  command  at  Corpus  Christi  to  fill  up  the  number 
required.  It  would  be  necessary  to  order  Colonel  Brown  to  have  a com- 
pany of  his  cavalry  battalion  on  the  peninsula  to  cover,  if  necessary,  a 
gun  detachment.  The  vessels  off  Saluria  are  a three-masted  schooner, 
with  six  heavy  guns,  and  a mortar  schooner,  with  a 10-inch  mortar  aud 
two  32-pounders,  and  between  80  and  100  men  on  both  vessels. 

My  orders  from  General  Bee  confine  me  to  this  post,  and  I have  not 
the  power  to  detach  a portion  of  my  command  even  were  I sure  of  suc- 
cess. I most  respectfully  ask  the  major-general  commanding  that  I 


950 


W.  FLA  , S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

may  liave  through  General  Bee  discretionary  power  to  act  as  my  judg- 
ment may  direct  in  the  management  of  my  battalion,  at  the  same  time 
to  act  with  prudence,  and  only  attack  or  defend  where  there  is  a pros- 
pect of  success. 

If  the  general  orders  to  be  put  in  commission  the  water  forces  referred 
to  I will  await  his  orders,  and  if  the  eastern  fleet  needs  a good  pilot 
from  this  place  I will  send  one  who  can  be  relied  on,  though  I need  his 
services  here. 

It  is  humiliating  to  us  to  see  in  our  bay  a small  force  of  the  enemy 
and  we  have  not  the  means  to  attack  or  destroy  them. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAN.  D.  SHEA, 

Major , Commanding  Artillery  Battalion. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  12.  J Richmond , Va .,  January  15,  1863. 

# # # * * * * 

XII.  Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder,  commanding  District  of  Texas,  will 
turn  over  to  Lieut.  Commanding  J.  N.  Barney,  0.  S.  Navy,  the  steamer 
Harriet  Lane,  lately  captured  in  the  waters  of  Texas. 


# # # # 


* 


By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 


JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Goliad,  Tex.,  January  17,  1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Houston  : 

Sir  : A copy  of  a communication  from  His  Excellency  the  Governor 
of  the  State  of  Texas,  under  date  of  January  12,  1863,  has  been  for- 
warded from  my  headquarters  at  San  Antonio  for  the  perusal  of  the 
general  commanding.  . 

As  the  protection  of  the  frontier  of  Texas  from  Indian  depredations 
is  a very  important  and  sensitive  question,  I would  respectfully  inquire 
if  it  is  the  wish  of  the  general  commanding  that  I should  still  continue 
to  be  charged  with  that  duty.  The  great  distance  of  my  contemplated 
headquarters  at  Brownsville  from  this  responsibility  may  induce  the 
naming  of  another  officer  for  that  duty ; and  in  the  mean  time  I would 
state  that  there  will  be  six  companies  of  mounted  men  left  on  the  In- 
dian frontier  after  removing  the  five  companies  of  the  State  regiment, 
as  ordered  by  the  general  commanding,  to  proceed  to  the  Rio  Grande, 
which  if  increased  to  100  men  each  will,  I think,  be  sufficient  to  gue  as 
much  protection  as  the  frontier  has  ever  had  ; and  I would  respectfully 
recommend  that  the  colonel  of  the  State  regiment,  after  it  is  mustered 
into  the  Confederate  service,  be  placed  specially  in  charge  of  that  line, 
and  be  held  responsible  for  such  disposition  of  his  command  as  his 
practical  knowledge  of  the  frontier  will  enable  him  to  make  j then,  with 
the  necessary  orders  to  the  quartermaster,  commissary,  and  ordnance 
departments,  to  keep  the  command  abundantly  supplied  with  the  nec- 
essary supplies,  I think  the  expectations  of  the  country  will  be  met. 
shall  (if  not  otherwise  directed),  so  soon  as  I am  informed  of  the 


051 


3hap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

muster  into  Confederate  service  of  the  said  regiment,  issue  the  neces- 
sary orders,  based  on  the  above  plan,  but  there  will  necessarily  be  a ♦ 
delay  in  my  action. 

The  six  companies  above  alluded  to  are  the  five  companies  of  the 
State  regiment,  and  Captain  Navarro’s  company  of  Mexican  citizens, 
uow  stationed  on  the  upper  line  of  Atascosa  County,  guarding  a very 
important  and  much-frequented  pass  of  the  Indians. 

The  company  commanded  by  Captain  Stucken,  now  escorting  Fed- 
eral prisoners  to  Vicksburg,  would  be  properly  placed  by  attaching  it 
to  the  frontier  regiment.  They  are  Germans  from  the  frontier  counties — 
so  that  the  force  will  consist  of  seven  companies. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 
Brigadier-  General. 

P.  S. — Since  writing  the  above  I have  deemed  best  to  issue  the  in- 
closed order,  which  I send  to  Governor  Lubbock  to  be  delivered  to  the 
colonel  commanding  the  State  regiment  after  the  muster  into  the  Con- 
federate service. 

There  will  be  time  for  the  general  commanding  to  countermand  or 
annul  the  orders  by  sending  his  communication  to  the  Governor  at 
Austin. 

H.  P.  BEE, 
Brigadier-  General. 

[Inclosure.] 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Western  Sub-District, 

No.  3.  J . Goliad , January  17,  1863. 

I.  Col.  , commanding  the  regiment  transferred  by  the 

Governor  of  the  State  of  Texas  to  the  service  of  the  Confederate  States, 
is  hereby  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  frontier  of  the  State  of  Texas 
bordering  on  the  Indian  Territory. 

II.  In  compliance  with  the  special  order  of  Major-General  Magruder, 

commanding  the  District  of  Texas,  Col. will  order  five 

companies  of  his  regiment,  with  a field  officer,  to  march  forthwith  to 
Ringgold  Barracks,  for  service  on  the  Bio  Grande. 

III.  Capt.  Angel  Navarro’s  company  of  Texas  Cavalry  is  temporarily 
assigned  to  duty  with  the  frontier  regiment,  and  will  report  to  Col. 
forthwith. 

IV.  Five  companies  of  the  frontier  regiment,  together  with  Captain 
Navarro’s  company,  will  constitute  a command  for  the  special  protection 
)f  the  frontier  against  Indian  depredations.  The  colonel  commanding 
will  make  such  disposition  of  this  force  as  his  practical  knowledge  of 
:ke  frontier  shall  seem  to  him  best  calculated  to  give  permanent  protec- 
tion to  the  people  of  the  frontier,  and  will  be  held  responsible  for  the 

, fificient  service  of  his  command. 

V.  The  six  companies  above  mentioned  are  authorized  to  recruit  their 
ranks  to  100  men  each,  and  for  this  purpose  may  enlist  men  between 
;he  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty  not  already  assigned  to  companies  in 
service. 

VI.  The  quartermaster,  commissary,  and  ordnance  departments  of 
his  brigade  will  make  the  necessary  arrangements  for  the  efficient 
mpply  of  this  command  for  twelve  months. 

H.  P.  BEE, 
Brigadier • Generah 


952 


W.  FLA.,  8.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYLL 

State  of  Texas,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office, 

Austin , January  17,  1863. 

Major-General  Magruder, 

Commanding , &c. : 

The  Governor  has  instructed  me  to  transmit  to  you  a copy  of  a com- 
munication from  the  Secretary  of  War,  of  date  December  13  ultimo, 
and  to  bring  to  your  consideration  that  i>ortion  of  it,  to  wit— 

There  is  too,  I suppose,  little  probability  that  the  conscripts  to  be  mustered  into 
service  from  your  State  will  be  largely  drawn  upon  during  the  winter  months,  and 
while  otherwise  unoccupied  at  the  camps  of  instruction  they  might  in  case  of  press-  ji 
ing  necessity  be  temporarily  employed,  in  conjunction  with  your  State  troops,  under  ji 
the  general  authority  of  the  commanding  general  of  your  department,  m repelling  j. 
invasion — 


as,  in  the  view  of  His  Excellency,  fully  corroborating  and  confirming 
the  policy  already  adopted  by  yourself  in  relation  to  the  conscripts  now 
within  the  State. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  Y.  DASHIELL, 
Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

January  17,  1863. 

Maj.  H.  H.  Haynie,  Brigade  Commissary : 

Sir  : The  general  commanding  directs  that  you  write  to  Colonel 
Gorgas  for  arras  for  this  district.  You  will  represent  that  the  insurrec- 
tion by  the  Germans  in  several  counties,  the  transporting  of  troops  by 
the  enemy  to  the  Rio  Grande,  and  the  large  number  of  unarmed  troops , 
in  the  district  render  it  indispensably  necessary  to  the  defense  of  the 
State  that  arms  should  be  furnished  by  the  Government  without  delay. 

You  will  telegraph  to  Colonel  Gorgas  to  send  some  guns  (artillery) 
of  the  Williams  pattern.  With  the  cavalry  they  can  be  used  to  great, 
advantage  on  the  prairies. 

You  will  proceed  to  Monroe,  ascertain  whether  the  arms  held  subject 
to  General  Magruder’s  order  are  on  this  side  or  the  other  side  ot  the 
Mississippi.  You  will  impress  all  teams  necessary  for  the  transporta- 
tion of  these  arms,  obtaining  the  authority  from  Lieutenant-General 
Holmes.  You  will  proceed  to  Richmond  if  necessary  to  procure  arms. 

J.  B.  EUSTIS, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Senate  Chamber,  January  19, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I inclose  you  a copy  of  the  order  from  General  A.  G.  Blanchard, 
in  command  at  Monroe,  La.,  to  the  captain  of  a company  of  cavalry 

stationed  at  Lake  Providence.  ^ . 

His  order  was  given  at  the  time  the  enemy  made  the  recent  i aid  m 
the  parishes  of  Madison  and  Carroll,  when  they  destroyed  the  bridges 
of  the  Yicksburg  and  Shreveport  Railroad  over  the  Tensas  River  and 
the  Bayou  Macon  and  otherwise  damaged  the  road,  and  also  burned 
the  depot  at  Delhi,  destroying  considerable  private  and  public  property. 


!map.  XITH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


953 


From  the  best  information  I can  get  the  enemy,  it  is  believed,  left 
he  Mississippi  River  with  about  2,000  men,  principally  infantry.  The 
mint  at  which  they  left  the  river  is  known  as  Omega  and  is  in  the 
ipper  part  of  Milliken’s  Bend,  25  miles  below  Lake  Providence  and  4 
)r  5 miles  below  Terrapin  Neck,  which  is  spoken  of  in  the  order,  and 
svhere  there  was  a squadron  of  cavalry  and  an  artillery  company. 

The  whole  force  of  the  enemy  marched  out  to  Dallas,  where  the  rail- 
road crosses  the  Tensas  River,  and  from  there  they  sent  out  a squad  of 
cavalry,  numbering  41  or  42, 10  miles  to  Delhi.  This  small  detachment 
remained  at  Delhi  several  hours,  committing  various  outrages,  and  as 
hey  returned  left  several  of  their  number,  who  had  become  intoxicated, 
straggling  by  the  way.  When  they  got  back  to  Dallas  the  whole  force 
eisurely  returned  to  the  Mississippi  River  without  losing  a man  except 
t>y  desertion. 

The  enemy  were  permitted  to  penetrate  the  country  35  miles  and  to 
commit  the  depredations  I have  spoken  of,  and  also  to  burn  one  or  two 
gin-houses  and  several  hundred  bales  of  Government  cotton,  and  to  steal 
a number  of  negroes,  mules,  and  cattle,  without  any  molestation.  At 
the  time  we  had  within  striking  distance,  in  my  opinion,  from  800  to 
1,200  men,  principally  cavalry,  armed  with  double-barreled  shot-guns. 
We  would  have  had  more,  but  two  or  three  of  the  companies  belonging 
to  the  Thirteenth  Battalion  Louisiana  Partisan  Rangers  were  at  home 
under  furloughs  granted  to  them  as  companies  and  including  all  from 
captain  down. 

An  illegal  attempt  to  disband  this  battalion  and  to  force  it  to  become 
part  of  the  Third  Louisiana  Cavalry,  and  the  lieutenant-colonel  to  be- 
come the  lieutenant-colonel  of  that  regiment,  assisted  in  producing  the 
confusion  which  has  brought  this  disgrace  upon  us.  Even  as  it  was, 
however,  knowing  as  I well  do  the  gallantry  of  the  officers  and  men 
stationed  in  the  parishes  of  Tensas,  Madison,  and  Carroll,  I am  sure  if 
a peremptory  order  had  not  been  given  them  to  retreat  they  would  have 
made  the  enemy  pay  dearly  for  their  temerity. 

I bring  the  matters  presented  in  this  letter  to  your  attention  with 
regret,  but  in  my  opinion  some  change  should  at  once  be  made  in  the 
commander  at  Monroe. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

EDW.  SPARROW. 


[Indorsement.  ] 

Direct  Major-General  Taylor  to  investigate  the  case  and  give  the 
necessary  orders.  ^ ^ 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Hdqrs.  Military  District  of  North  Louisiana, 

Monroe , December  27,  1862. 

Capt.  J.  McKoin,  Commanding  at  Lalce  Providence : 

Captain  : Bring  all  your  men  to  this  place.  Take  care  not  to  be  cut 
off.  The  enemy  is  at  Delhi  and  may  go  up  to  Prairie  Mer  Rouge  to  get 
here.  Send  word  to  the  squadron  at  Terrapin  Neck  and  the  artillery 
to  join  you  as  soon  as  possible. 

Your  obedient  servant, 


A.  G.  BLANCHARD, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


954 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  6.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


P.  S. — If  you  learn  positively  that  Monroe  is  taken,  you  had  better  go 
to  Bastrop  and  cross  the  river  up  there  and  then  find  me. 

A.  G.  B., 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Hdqrs.  Military  District  of  North  Louisiana, 

Monroe , November  25,  1802. 

Col.  J.  F.  Pargoud, 

Commanding  Third  Louisiana  Cavalry: 

Colonel:  The  following  has  been  received  from  the  major-general 
commanding  Western  Louisiana: 


Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 

Alexandria,  November  21,1862. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Chambliss  will  he  considered  as  the  lieutenant-colonel  of  the 
Third  Louisiana  Cavalry,  and  the  brigadier-general  commanding  will  take  the  neces- 
sary steps  to  enforce  his  orders. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Taylor:  . 

E.  SURGET, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.  1 

General  Blanchard  directs  that  you  order  Lieutenant-Colonel  Cham- 
bliss to  duty  as  the  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  regiment  under  your  com- 
mand without  delay,  and  instructs  you  to  enforce  any  orders  you  may 
give  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Chambliss  in  the  capacity  of  his  command- 
ing officer  by  arrest,  as  provided  by  the  Army  Regulations,  if  he  refuses 
to  obey. 

I am,  colonel,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  L.  RIDDICK, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Richmond,  January  20,  1863. 


Maj  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder, 

Commanding , &c .,  San  Antonio , Tex. : 

General  : The  President  directs  that  the  inclosed  order,  requiring 
Sibley’s  brigade  to  proceed  to  Opelousas,  La.,  be  carried  into  immediate 
effect. 


Yery  respectfully,  &c., 


S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


[ Inclosure.  1 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  16.  ) Richmond , January  20,  1863. 

******* 

X.  Sibley’s  brigade  of  Texas  Volunteers  will  immediately  proceed  to 
Opelousas,  La.,  and  report  for  duty  to  Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor. 
******* 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JNJ.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General 





HAP.  XXYII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


955 


Jackson,  Miss.,  January  21,  1863. 
laj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner,  Port  Hudson: 

There  are  indications  of  another  attempt  on  Vicksburg.  It  is  proba- 
le they  may  make  one  simultaneously  on  you.  Be  on  the  alert. 

J.  0.  PEMBEBTON, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


Auleyton,  January  21,  1863. 

laj.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir:  The  Germans  and  others  who  had  been  in  rebellion  have  all 
uietly  submitted  to  the  draft  and  all  have  come  to  the  different  ren- 
ezvous  and  been  enrolled  as  soldiers.  Those  who  were  not  drafted  and 
re  at  home  profess  to  be  loyal  and  promise  to  submit  cheerfully  to  the 
iws  of  the  State  and  Confederacy.  I shall  soon  hear  from  all  the  dis- 
ffected  portions  of  the  country,  and  will  advise  you  if  the  favorable  re- 
torts are  true. 

Colonel  Hardeman’s  command  are  the  most  disorderly,  outrageous  set 
f men  I ever  knew.  Their  officers  have  no  control  over  them.  They 
re  guilty  of  all  kinds  of  excesses.  The  planters  and  inhabitants  gen- 
rally  complain  to  me  that  they  nearly  strip  them  of  everything  they 
an  lay  hands  on,  and  kill  their  beeves  and  hogs  and  steal  their  poul- 
ry.  1 have  this  day  issued  a special  order,  and  directed  it  to  be  read 
t dress  parade  this  evening.  I have  talked  to  the  officers,  and  they 
(•knowledge  they  cannot  restrain  these  men.  I inclose  you  a copy  of 
he  orders  to  show  the  general  commanding  for  his  approval.  I also 
iclose  a copy  of  an  order,  which  I should  have  sent,  together  with  the 
itter  asking  General  Magruder  to  issue  an  order  to  Captain  Baker  to 
emain  with  the  Arizona  Brigade. 

I wish  you  would  inclose  me  a few  printed  copies  of  General  Orders, 
fo.  39,  issued  January  8,  1863,  ordering  martial  law  in  Colorado,  Fay- 
tte,  and  Austin  Counties.  I have  only  one  copy.  None  has  reached 
ic  by  letter. 

After  consultation  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hardeman  and  others  I 
ecommend  the  following-named  gentlemen  to  be  appointed  provost- 
larshals,  viz : Capt.  William  I.  Hebert,  for  Colorado  County;  P.  J. 
Laver,  esq.,  for  Fayette  County,  and  A.  J.  Bill,  esq.,  for  Austin  County. 
You  will  please  inform  me  if  the  commanding  general  will  appoint 
he  military  commissioners. 

I was  to-day  informed  by  Captain  Garey  that  no  more  corn  can  be 
ad  in  this  vicinity.  Many  persons  of  whom  he  expected  to  get  some 
ow  decline  to  sell,  and  indeed  to  my  own  knowledge  there  is  very 
ttle  surplus  in  the  country.  The  great  demand  for  it  in  Western 
’exas  has  caused  the  scarcity  here.  Immense  quantities  have  been 
hipped  to  supply  that  country.  Captain  Garey  also  informs  me  he 
as  already  issued  4,000  bushels  to  the  Arizona  Brigade  since  they 
rrived  here.  They  consume  8,000  bushels  per  month.  It  would  be 
heaper  and  a great  saving  to  the  Government  to  dismount  the  men 
nd  send  their  horses  home  to  live  in  the  ranges,  and  if  necessary 
i ereafter  to  remount  them  to  repurchase  their  horses.  Colonel  Baylor 
5 here  on  his  way  to  San  Antonio.  He  wished  me  to  suggest  to  the 
ommanding  general,  as  coming  from  him,  the  propriety  of  removing 
Lis  brigade  to  Marlm,  or  near  that  place,  in  Falls  County.  He  say& 


956 


W.  FLA.,  8.  ALA.,  8.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


forage  is  plenty,  and  subsistence  for  the  command  can  be  easily  obtained 
in  the  vicinity  of  that  place. 

By  request  of  Captain  Garey,  quartermaster,  I authorized  E.  B. 
Foulkes,  esq.,  to  retain  at  home  7 negro  men,  his  quota  to  be  furnished 
the  Government,  as  he  had  them  engaged  in  shelling  and  shucking 
corn  for  the  Government,  Mr.  Foulkes  having  sold  the  Government  6,000 
bushels.  The  order  to  the  troops,  a copy  of  which  I inclose,  and  this 
detail  is  all  I have  done  without  first  consulting  the  commanding  gen- 
eral. I am  anxious,  and  will  avoid  doing  any  act  or  making  an  order 
without  first  advising  with  the  general  headquarters. 

The  colonel  commanding,  by  my  recommendation,  has  prohibited  the 
sale  of  intoxicating  liquors.  It  meets  the  cordial  approbation  of  all 
good  citizens. 

I will  keep  you  informed  of  all  that  transpires  regularly. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  L.  WEBB, 
Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Adjutant- General. 

P.  S. — Direct  to  me  at  Alleyton,  as  I live  here,  and  when  I receive 
your  communication  I can  reply  at  once,  as  the  mail  leaves  the  morn- 
ing after  it  arrives  at  8 a.  m.,  and  if  sent  to  Columbus  I cannot  receive 
an  answer  until  two  days  after. 

[Inclosnre.] 

Special  order,  issued  at  Columbus , Colorado  County , Tex.,  January  21, 

1863. 

Complaints  having  been  made  to  these  headquarters  that  the  sol- 
diers composing  the  Arizona  Brigade,  under  the  command  of  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Hardeman,  encamped  near  this  place,  have  been  commit- 
ting, and  continue  to  commit,  depredations  on  the  peaceable  citizens  of 
the  county : 

It  is  hereby  ordered  that  the  soldiers  be  encamped  in  military  order, 
and  regular  guards  and  sentinels  posted  as  in  the  Army  of  the  Confeder- 
ate States,  and  no  officer,  non-commissioned  officer,  or  private  soldier 
will  be  permitted  to  pass  the  sentinels  in  the  day  or  night  without  per- 
mission from  the  officer  in  command,  and  at  no  time  will  more  than  two 
men  from  any  company  be  allowed  leave  of  absence  at  the  same  time, 
and  no  furlough  will  be  granted  under  any  circumstances. 

The  officers  of  the  different  companies  will  be  answerable  and  held 
to  strict  accountability  for  any  and  all  depredations  committed  by  their 
men. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  J,  Bankhead  Magruder,  commanding  Texas 
and  Arizona  and  New  Mexico : 

HENRY  L.  WEBB, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Port  Hudson,  La.,  January  22, 1863. 
Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

Banks  has  arrived  at  Baton  Rouge  with  re-enforcements.  Number 
not  known. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major- General. 


UP.  xxvli.)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


95? 


Galveston,  January  22, 1863. 
[ajor-General  Magruder,  Houston: 

Sir-  From  all  I can  gather  it  does  not  seem  the  enemy  meditates  an 
tternpt  to  come  into  the  harbor.  The  gunboat  inside  the  bar  about 
mile,  nearly  opposite  Strand  street,  and  something  over  2 miles 
’om  Fort  Point,  is  evidently  a feeler.  The  enemy’s  force  is  no  greater 
ban  it  has  been  for  the  past  fifteen  days.  Commodore  Bell’s  com  - 
i unication  would  indicate  his  belief  in  your  ability  to  withstand  anj 
ttack  he  can  make  with  his  present  force.  In  support  of  this  opinion 
will  quote  you,  in  substance:  An  attack  by  the  enemy's  gunboats  in- 
ide  the  harbor  would  be  fruitless  in  its  results  to  the  enemy  without 
, sufficient  land  force  to  occupy  the  city.  The  sharpshooters  we  can 
•ring  to  bear  upon  him  in  the  channel  will  discomfort  him  greatly 
hould  he  come  in.  In  short,  general,  in  my  humble  opinion,  the  enemy 
annot  drive  us  out  of  the  city  with  the  means  he  has  at  his  command 
t present.  Adopting  this,  we  may  place  more  confidence  in  the  use  of 
he  railroad  bridge  as  the  means  of  securing  our  guns  in  case  ot  an 
>mer£rencY. 

Colonel  Debray  feels  seriously  tbe  want  of  one  or  two  guns  at  Fort 
Joint,  and  an  intermediate  gun  between  Fort  Point  and  South  Battery, 
die  colonel  has  instructed  Slajor  Kellersberg  to  investigate  thepracti- 
;ability  of  placing  one  or  more  guns  at  Fort  Point  to  night  and  report 
m mediately  to  you.  I trust  he  will  report  favorably,  and  you  will  order 
runs  placed  there.  If  the  enemy  is  not  re-enforced  with  land  and  naval 
brces  I have  the  grand  confidence  we  can  hold  this  little  sand  bank  for 

ill  time  to  come.  ^ , ... 

I leave  on  the  Lucy  Gwinn  for  Nest  Buy ; expect  to  return  this  p.  in. 
The  flags  of  truce  as  arranged  by  you  will  keep  off  any  bombardment 
7or  a day  or  two.  To-day’s  truce  will  be  so  arranged  as  to  consume  the 
whole  day. 

Bespectfully,  B B m0HOLS. 

Colonel  Debray  has  read  the  above  and  concurs. 


January  23—4.30  p.  m. 

Captain:  Your  dispatches  concerning  flag  of  truce  and  disposition 
>f  artillery  and  rams  just  received  on  my  return  from  a visit  to  works, 
>f  which  I will  give  a statement  when  I have  seen  Majors  Von  Harten 
rod  Kellersberg.  The  Tennessee  may  have  500  men  on  board.  I 
lave  not  the  least  apprehension  of  an  attack  to-night  with  only  the 
;wo  gunboats  and  the  Brooklyn;  they  are  all  looking  very  tame,  W e 
will,  however,  be  ready  for  an  emergency.  Will  not  courtesy  require 
ne  to  send  the  general’s  dispatch  to  Commodore  Bell,  even  it  he  does 
lot  threaten  to-morrow*?  I may  announce  in  my  accompanying  letter 
Colonel  Burrell’s  statement,  which  will  give  me  an  opportunity  lor  an 
ntercourse  day  after  to-morrow.  Watkins  seems  to  have  slightly  in- 
terfered with  their  programme.  DEBRAY 


Vicksburg,  January  24,  1863. 
Major-General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson , La. : 

Enemy  endeavoring  to  get  below  Vicksburg.  pEMBEKTON> 

TAcutenant- General , Commanding. 


958 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MlSS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYli 


Vicksburg,  January  24,  1863.  : 

Major-General  Gardner, 

Port  Hudson , La. : 

All  steamboats  in  the  Mississippi  River  between  Vicksburg  and  Port 
Hudson  will  at  once  pass  up  Red  River  and  there  remain  until  further 
orders.  Should  any  of  these  boats  be  in  danger  of  falling  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy  they  must  be  destroyed.  Enforce  this  order.  Dc 
your  utmost  to  do  so. 


J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant - General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Port  Hudson, 

January  24,  1863. 


Maj.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Jackson , Miss. : 


Major:  I inclose  herewith  a copy  of  a correspondence  with  Major- 
General  Augur,  commanding  United  States  forces  at  Baton  Rouge.* 

I report  the  following  summary  of  affairs  : 

I had  received  accurate  information  that  the  enemy’s  strength  at! 
Baton  Rouge  some  time  since  consisted  of  twenty -four  regiments  of) 
infantry,  four  batteries,  and  three  squadrons  of  cavalry.  I have  only 
had  positive  information  of  the  arrival  of  four  transports  with  troops 
since.  I estimate  their  force  at  about  19,000.  They  have  felled  trees 
and  obstructed  the  roads  and  erected  some  fortifications  around  the 
land  side  and  have  been  fortifying  on  the  river  front.  Their  pickets  are 
kept  close  into  town.  They  make  an  occasional  expedition  to  the  east- 
ward and  south,  and  obtain  sugar,  molasses,  and,  it  is  supposed,  cotton. 

They  have  withdrawn  their  encampment  on  the  west  side  of  the  river,! 
but  occasionally  make  a foraging  expedition  on  that  side.  It  has  been 
at  different  times  reported  that  there  are  a considerable  number  of  men 
in  the  penitentiary  for  refusing  to  do  duty.  Major-Generals  Banks, 
Augur,  and  Brigadiers  Shepley,  Grover,  and  Billy  Wilsou  are  there. 

I need  very  much  additional  cavalry  and  a good  cavalry  commander. 

I am  still  obliged  to  keej)  two  companies  of  cavalry  on  the side 

of  the  river. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 

New  Iberia , January  24,  1863. 


General  Johnston, 

Commanding  Western  Department , C.  8.  Army : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
munication dated  Jackson,  December  31,  1862,  which  reached  me  only 
to-day.* 

The  information  communicated  to  you  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Broad- 
well,  relative  to  the  disposition  of  salt,  is  incorrect.  The  proportion  of 
the  salt  gotten  out  of  the  mines  near  this  place,  required  and  used  lor 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.  — CONFEDERATE. 


959 


packing  beef,  is  comparatively  small,  and  of  the  beef  cured  at  the  pack- 
ery  the  greater  part  of  it  has  been  ordered  by  me  to  be  shipped  to 
Vicksburg  for  the  use  of  the  troops  in  your  department.  So  far’from 
withholding  a supply  of  salt  from  thetroops  east  of  the  Mississippi, 
I am  using  every  means  within  my  power  to  ship  a large  quantity  to 
that  country. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  TAYLOR, 
Major-General . 


The  President  : 


Navy  Department, 
Richmond , January  24,  1863. 


Sir:  For  your  information,  with  reference  to  the  steamer  Harriet 
Lane,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  10th  instant,  in  anticipa- 
tion of  the  War  Department's  order  to  turn  the  vessel  over  to  the  Navy, 
I ordered  Lieut.  J.  N.  Barney,  0.  S.  Navy,  then  at  Mobile,  to  command 
her,  and  sent  her  full  complement  of  officers  to  report  to  him  at  Gal- 
veston. I could  send  him  but  20  seamen,  but  called  upon  Admiral 
Buchanan  and  Commander  Brown  to  aid  him  in  making  up  a crew,  and 
instructed  him  to  appeal  to  General  Magruder  to  aid  him  to  complete 
one. 

I instructed  him  to  report  the  condition  of  the  vessel  at  once,  hold 
himself  in  readiness  to  go  to  sea,  and  await  orders.  He  has  instruc- 
tions for  his  cruise  and  funds  to  defray  expenses. 

If  Galveston  is  to  be  held  she  could  render  important  service  in  the 
bay ; otherwise  I propose  to  send  her  to  sea,  if  you  shall  approve,  at 
the  earliest  moment. 

Lieut.  Catesby  Ap  R.  Jones,  for  whom  General  Magruder  applies,  can 
be  detailed  for  service  with  him.  He  is  now  commanding  the  Chatta- 
hoochee. 

The  appointment  of  a citizen  to  a post  captaincy  over  the  heads  of 
nine-tenths  of  the  naval  officers,  as  recommended  by  General  Magruder, 
could  only  be  justified  in  my  judgment  by  considerations  which  the 
case  he  cites  does  not  present,  even  could  it  be  done  legally,  which  it 
cannot.  . 

With  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  R.  MALLORY, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy. 

P*  S- — The  dispatch  of  General  Magruder  is  herewith  returned.* 


Port  Hudson,  January  25, 1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

The  troops  that  arrived  at  Baton  Rouge  yesterday  were  two  negro 
regiments,  and  increased  the  dissatisfaction.  The  council  of  war  has 
oot  come  to  any  conclusion.  One  week  will  determine  an  advance  if 
re-enforcements  come,  or  evacuation  if  not.  The  new  regiments  are  not 
trusted. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-  General. 

*See  Magruder  to  Seddon,  January  6,  p.  931. 


960 


W.  FLA.,  S.  Ala.,  S.  Miss.,  LA.,  TEX.,  1st.  MftX.  IChap.  XXVlt. 


Headquarters  Arizona  Brigade, 

Columbus , January  26,  1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General : 

Sir:  The  general  commanding  wishes  to  know  why  I have  not 
reported.  In  reply  I would  say  that  I have  made  two  reports  to 
headquarters,  and  think  it  very  strange  that  they  have  not  made 
their  appearance. 

The  Germans  in  this  section  have  become  very  quiet.  Nearly  all  of 
them  have  gone  into  the  militia  service.  I have  had  scouts  out  in  the 
country  in  different  directions.  They  report  everything  quiet.  1 start 
out  myself  this  morning  with  a detachment  of  50  men.  I understand 
there  are  some  of  the  leaders  of  the  insurrection  still  in  the  country 
that  have  not  gone  into  service.  I will  hunt  them  up  and  report  to 
headquarters  on  my  return.  Brigadier-General  Webb,  of  La  Grange,  is 
here ; he  reports  everything  going  on  moothly  in  that  country ; says 
there  was  considerable  excitement  there  at  one  time. 

I will  report  on  my  return  from  this  expedition. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  HARDEMAN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Arizona  Brigade. 


Headquarters  Lower  Rio  Grande, 

Fort  Brown , January  26,  1863. 

Maj.  A.  G.  Dickinson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Houston,  Tex.; 

Major  : Owing  to  the  fact  that  Brigadier-General  Bee  is  en  route  to  this 
post,  I think  it  proper  to  address  the  commanding  general  directly,  that 
he  may  be  informed  of  the  state  of  this  frontier  up  to  the  latest  moment 
without  an3r  unnecessary  delay. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I arrived  at  this  post  on  the  16th  in- 
stant, having  a large  amount  of  Government  funds  in  charge,  which 
have  been  turned  over  to  the  proper  disbursing  officers. 

On  the  17th  I assumed  command  of  the  Lower  Rio  Grande,  and  im- 
mediately issued  orders,  and  took  the  necessary  steps  to  carry  out  as 
soon  as  practicable  the  orders  of  the  commanding  general,  as  expressed 
in  his  orders  to  Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee. 

I have  to  report  a great  want  of  transportation  on  this  line,  also  a 
remarkable  scarcity  of  grass,  of  which  indeed  the  country  is  literally 
almost  bare.  As  to  corn,  none  can  be  purchased  at  present.  These 
difficulties,  together  with  the  extremely  low7  stage  of  water  on  the  Rio 
Grande,  which  prevents  steamboat  navigation,  do  not  permit  as  rapid 
a movement  of  the  troops  as  is  to  be  desired. 

I have  consulted  fully  with  Major  Hart,  quartermaster,  and  have 
given  such  orders  to  Oapt.  F.  J.  Lynch,  assistant  quartermaster,  as  to 
secure  a full  supply  of  rations  within  sixty  days  for  5,000  men  for  six 
months.  These  supplies  have  generally  to  be  ordered  from  the  West 
Indies — more  particularly  corn.  There  is  said  to  be  a sufficient  amount 
of  flour  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  but  the  process  of  unloading  vessels 
is  very  slow  during  the  winter  months.  Last  month,  I understand, 
there  were  only  two  working  days  for  the  lighters. 

I have  had  a special  interview  with  the  Governor  of  Tamaulipas, 
Mexico,  also  with  several  leading  officials  of  the  city  of  Matamoras. 
They  do  not  deny  that  there  is  a band  of  robbers  and  marauders  in  and 
about  Mier,  in  their  State,  menacing  our  peaceful  frontier  relations,  bat 


Chap.  XXVlI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  961 

owing  to  the  absence  of  their  military  forces  on  service  against  the 
French  at  Tampico  they  are  unable  to  lay  hands  on  the  outlaws. 

There  is  no  Mexican  force  at  this  time  on  the  Lower  Rio  Grande. 
All  their  troops  have  been  sent  to  Tampico,  which  place  was  evacuated 
by  the  French  on  the  14th  instant  and  occupied  the  same  day  by  the 
Mexican  forces. 

The  Governor  and  other  authorities  assure  me  of  their  determination 
to  aid  in  every  manner  within  their  power  to  put  a stop  to  all  difficul- 
ties, tendering  to  me  the  authority  to  cross  over  on  their  soil  to  punish 
the  outlaws. 

I have  not  opened  an  official  correspondence,  preferring  to  await  the 
arrival  of  Brigadier-General  Bee,  who  is  daily  expected  here. 

The  Mexican  authorities,  since  the  reported  increase  of  our  forces  on 
this  line,  are  evidently  disposed  to  take  more  active  steps  to  rid  them- 
selves of  the*renegades  who  have  infested  Matamoras. 

Major  Hart,  quartermaster,  who  returned  from  the  mouth  of  the 
river  last  night,  informed  me  that  on  the  24th  and  25th  instant  from 
150  to  200  renegades  were  sent  aboard  the  Abolition  gunboat  at  the 
mouth  of  the  river,  and  that  the  vessel  was  about  to  leave  with  them, 
destination  supposed  to  be  New  Orleans.  This  departure  will  leave  the 
mouth  of  the  river  and  Brazos  Saint  Iago  clear  of  Abolition  war  vessels. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  the  departure  of  the  Hon.  L.  Q.  C.  Lamar, 
minister  of  the  Confederate  States  to  the  Court  of  Russia,  on  the  25th 
instant,  by  the  French  vessel  Malabar,  bound  to  Havana.  The  Hon.  A. 
Superville  was  to  have  left  on  the  same  vessel. 

There  are  two  French  war  vessels  and  one  English  at  the  mouth  of 
the  river. 

I respectfully  call  the  commanding  generafs  attentien  to  the  fact  of 
there  being  numerous  Government  agents  on  the  frontier.  As  a gen- 
eral thing  they  are  men  totally  incompetent  to  transact  properly  the 
most  ordinary  commercial  business.  They  are  constantly  bidding  one 
against  another,  causing  the  Government  to  pay  excessive  prices,  and 
besides  they  throw  a cloud  of  doubt  over  the  transactions  of  useful 
and  competent  agents.  Through  them  and  others  cotton  permits  are 
hawked  about  in  Matamoras  at  the  rate  of  a dollar  a bale. 

With  the  proper  organization  of  a purchasing  department  the  Gov- 
ernment within  the  next  six  months  can  supply  an  army  of  50,000  men 
with  everything  needed  (except  arms)  through  this  port.  But  in  order 
to  accomplish  this  there  must  be  but  one  agency,  having  at  the  same 
time  entire  control  of  cotton  and  transportation. 

The  Government  need  not,  except  in  special  instances,  for  a particu- 
lar purpose  or  exigency,  send  abroad  for  supplies,  but  simply  turn  over 
the  cotton  upon  delivery  of  goods  at  this  place. 

I call  the  general^  attention  to  this  subject  for  the  reason  that  action 
upon  this  subject  will  be  necessary  to  sustain  the  troops  on  the  Lower 
Rio  Grande. 

Up  to  this  date  I have  not  heard  of  the  arrival  of  any  of  the  forces 
ordered  to  the  Rio  Grande.  Willke’s  battery  at  latest  date  had  not 
moved  from  Corpus  for  want  of  horses.  Four  days  ago  I sent  an  ex- 
press, directing  the  officers  to  press  the  necessary  transportation  and  to 
move  for  this  post  as  soon  as  possible. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  N.  LUCKETT, 

Colonel , Commanding  Lower  Rio  Orande . 

P.  S.— We  have  a New  York  Herald  of  the  10th  instant,  which  ad- 
nits  fully  the  repulse  of  the  Abolition  forces  at  Vicksburg. 

61  R R-— yol  xy 


962 


W.  FLA., 


Mississippi  River,  January  27, 1863. 
General:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  the  following  reports: 
Yesterday  the  Yankees  landed  a small  foraging  force  from  two  trans- 
ports on  this  side,  and  had  collected  about  5,000  bushels  of  corn  at  Mrs. 
Barrow’s  place,  1 mile  above  Baton  Rouge.  They  succeeded  in  moving 
onl  v a small  portion  of  it  on  board  their  boats  by  night,  leaving  the  re- 
mainder, the  amount  above  specified,  on  shore with°ut  a guard, 
young  men  of  the  Signal  Corps,  W.  C.  Miller,  D.  M.  Bedford,  Edward 
B Roberts,  John  Ducker,  and  J.  B.  Holden,  assisted  by  two  young  men 
citizens  of  the  vicinity,  Mr.  Robinson  and  Mr.  Clark,  conceived  the  pro_ 
iect  of  destroying  it,  provided  I gave  them  the  authority  to  do  so.  I 
consented,  upon  the  belief  that  I would  be  doing  our  Government  a 
service  by  cutting  off  their  supplies,  especially  in  corn,  as  it  would  in- 
crease their  difficulties  in  maintaining  a Large  force ; ol .cavalry  either  on 
this  or  the  other  side.  Major  Beard,  commanding  a battalion  of  infantry 
of  General  Sibley’s  command,  also  gave  his  consent. 

The  young  men  above  mentioned  proceeded  to  the  place  about  10 
o’clock  ^and  without  any  difficulty  succeed  in  setting  fire  to  the  corn, 
completely  destroving  it  in  less  than  two  hours. 

The  Yankees  came  up  after  the  sheds  and  cribs  containing  it  were 
in  full  blaze  and  attempted  to  save  them,  but  were  too  late;  and  alter 
some  ineffectual  efforts  retired  to  their  boats. 

1 hope  I have  done  right  in  this  matter;  and,  if  so,  I wdi  destroy  aj^v 
other  they  may  attempt  to  remove,  it  unattended  by  any  serious  diffi- 

CUThere  is  no  doubt  now  that  the  river  will  be  over  the  bank  in  a day 
or  two,  as  the  levee  is  entirely  washed  away  at  Captain  Chinn  s place 
and  the  water  is  beginning  to  run  over  now.  The  crevasse  will  separate 
two  of  my  signal  posts  and  cut  the  cavalry  off  from  us  ^ *\e 

srreatest  difficulty,  however,  will  be  in  the  inundation  of  the  railroad, 
preventing  any  co  operation  of  General  Sibley’s  forces  with  yours,  be- 
sides the  futting  off  this  section  of  country  for  foraging  purposes  from 

General  Sibley.  1 believe  1 ,000  men,  with  the not^ffe! 
mend  the  levee  in  a day  or  two  so  as  to  save  the  country.  I do  not  otter 

this  as  a suggestion,  but  only  state  it  as  a fact.  ... 

I will  of  course  do  the  best  I can  and  remain  as  long  as  possible. 
I will  soon  have  the  line  complete  to  Rosedale.  The  rise  in  the  liver 

will  be  the  only  difficulty  in  the  way.  , _ , 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  yo^YoUNGBloOD, 

Captain , Commanding  Signal  Corps. 


War  Department,  O.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va .,  January  28,  1863. 

Mai.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  Commanding,  &c.: 

General  : The  President  has  been  informed  that  in  a raid  made  by 
iLa  United  States  troops  from  Omega  to  Dallas  and  trom  thence  t 
Delhi  much  loss  has  been  suffered  by  the  inhabitants ; that  the  rai 
upon  Delhi  was  executed  by  a single 

42  persons.  This  body  ot  men  remained  m Delhi  toi  several  nou 
committing  many  outrages,  and  some  became  intoxicated,  but  thej 
all  returned  to  Dallas  and  the  whole  command  to  the  Mississippi  Rivei 
without1  suffering  the  loss  of  a man.  This  lamentable  history  is  accom 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  06‘3 

panied  by  a copy  of  the  following  order  by  Brigadier-General  Blanch- 
ard :* 

******* 

The  President  desires  an  investigation  to  be  made  into  the  circum- 
stances of  this  unfortunate  affair  of  the  management  on  the  part  of 
the  Confederate  officers  immediately  in  charge,  and  that  you  give  such 
orders  consequent  upon  the  investigation  as  the  case  may  require,  or 
report  the  facts,  with  your  recommendation  of  the  course  to  be  pursued.! 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

Vicksburg , January  28,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  Commanding , Ac. : 

Sir:  The  exigencies  of  the  service  on  the  Mississippi  River  make  it 
of  the  utmost  importance  that  the  steamboats  Falls  City  and  Louisville 
should  be  fitted  up  for  active  operations.  I hope  therefore  you  will 
turn  over  these  boats  to  Capt.  J.  M.  White  and  Capt.  H.  H.  Beard, 
practical  and  energetic  men,  and  aid  and  facilitate  them  in  fitting  them 
up.  They  are  instructed  and  expected  to  do  this  work  in  the  shortest 
possible  time.  They  are  of  the  opinion  that  all  the  material  they  need 
can  be  had  on  Red  River.  I would  suggest  that  the  powder  and  lead 
of  which  I wrote  you  yesterday  will  be  forwarded  on  these  boats.  It 
will  further  facilitate  movements  if  you  can  cause  our  subsistence  (for 
over  200  men  for  fifteen  days)  to  be  furnished  these  boats.  Our  supply 
of  meat  in  this  department  is  insufficient,  and  if  it  can  be  done  you  wiil 
serve  us  by  sending  a boat  load  of  beeves  and  hogs  to  Port  Hudson  as 
soon  as  possible. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant - General , Commanding. 


• Headquarters  Division  of  the  Gulf, 

Mobile , January  29,  1863. 

His  Excellency  J.  G.  Shorter, 

Governor  of  Alabama , Montgomery : 

Governor:  Qn  the  18th  instant  I wrote  to  Captain  Farrand  pro- 
posing to  take  charge  of  the  obstructions  at  Owen  Bluff,  but  asking  that 
the  materials  already  collected  for  a raft  might  be  turned  over  to  the 
Confederate  States  and  applied  in  the  construction  of  sawyers,  con- 
nected together  in  groups  of  eight  or  ten,  forming  when  anchored  three 
continuous  and  closely  adjacent  lines  across  the  river.  I also  asked 
that  the  laborers  furnished  by  the  State  might  be  continued  on  the 
work  and  that  the  State  should  continue  to  pay  them. 

The  only  objects  of  this  proposition  were  to  gain  time  in  completing 
the  obstructions  and  to  make  trial  of  the  system  of  sawyers:  a plan 
which  has  been  adopted  elsewhere  and  is  recommended  by  the  Confed- 
erate  States  Engineer  Bureau ; it  also  meets  the  approval  of  General 

* See  Inclosure  No.  1 to  Sparrow  to  Seddon,  January  19,  1863. 

tSee  Sparrow  to  Seddon,  January  19,  and  Taylor  to  Seddon,  February  19,  1863. 


964 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[CnAr.  XX YH. 


Buckner,  and  he  has  to-day  directed  me  to  have  the  sawyers  constructed 

tUThe  eTpense^will  therefore  be  borne  by  the  Confederacy,  and  I shall 
only  ask  of  Your  Excellency  the  use  of  the  timber,  tools,  and  labor  which 

for  there  is  nowhere  any  intention  to  trespass  on  his  domains.  It  is 

onlv  an  effort  to  help  in  the  common  cause.  . . 

Oapt.  George  E.  Walker,  0.  8.  Engineers,  will  be  placed  in  charge  of 
the  work.  Three  hundred  laborers  have  already  been  asked  f<»r,  to  be 
employed  in  changing  the  location  of  the  guns  in  reference  to  the  ob- 
structions at  Chocta#  Bluff.  It  is  believed  that  none  have  yet  reported 
there  and  it  is  important  that  they  be  sent  forward  as  soon  as  prac- 
ticable  The  commanding  general  now  proposes  to  construct  some  de- 
fensive wo4s  on  the  land  side  of  both  batteries,  and  an  increased  force 
of  1,500  laborers  will  be  required  for  that  object  and  piobably  for  t > 

^ Oantain  Walker  will  want  perhaps  300  workmen  Aor  the  obstructions 
at  Owen  Bluff,  and  thus  the  whole  number  wanted  at  those  two  points 
will  be  2 , 100,  in  addition  to  the  5,000  already  asked  for  by  General  Buck- 

n6I  respectfuffy  request  that  the  whole  may  be  sent  forward  promptly^ 
and  feel  confident  that  the  aid  thus  nobly  furnished  b>  the  btate  and 
its  Executive  will  soon  result  in  the  most  satisfactory  defensive  arrange- 
ments  for  the  city  and  the  interior  country. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  ser™\EADBETTER) 

Brigadier-General  and  Engineer. 

[Indorsement.] 

The  suggestions  of  General  Leadbetter  meet  with  my  entire  approval. 
The  difficulties  in  the  subsistence  department  will  be  removed. 

Respectfully,  g B bUOKNER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , January  30,  1863. 

Maj.  A.  G.  Dickinson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Houston,  lex. . 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  my  arrival  at  this  place,  in  accordance 
with  orders  dated  28th  December.  1 am  pleased  to  inform  you  that  I 
find  matters  quiet  and  with  the  best  prospect  of  a peaceable  arrange* 
meut  of  the  difficulties  lately  existing  on  this  line.  I havehadiiocon 
mu  ideation  officially  with  the  authorities  of  Mexico,  but  will  at  the 
earliest  moment  place  myself  in  communication  with  the  Governor  oj 
Tam  aul i pas'  an d eri dea v or  to  place  our  relations  on  a basis  which  will 

iU  IUfinc?that  heavy6 importations  of  goods  necessary  for  the  wants .of .the 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  965 

process  of  lightering.  I shall  communicate  with  regularity  all  matters 
of  interest  occurring  here. 

With  great  respect, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army. 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Beport  of  the  troops  in  the  Department  of  Mississippi  and  East  Lou- 
isiana, Lieut.  Gen.  John  G.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  A.,  commanding,  for  month  of  January,  1863.* 


Command. 

Present  for  duty 
equipped. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Remarks. 

0Q 

© 

© 

S0 

o 

q 

© 

s 

District  of  Louisiana : 

Beall’s  brigade 

337 

215 

305 

18 

144 

3,  598 
2,611 

3, 188 
342 
1,614 

4,  820 
3, 414 
4,  685 
462  j 
2,421 

6,  635 
4, 171 

5,  778 
580 

3,  569 

Maj.  Gen.  Frank. 
Gardner  com- 
manding, head- 
quarters Port 
Hudson. 

Gregg's  brigade 

Maxey’s  brigade 

Field  artillery 

Not  brigaded 

Total 

1,  019 

11,  353 

15,  802  j 

’ 20,  733 

Port  Hudson,  February  2,  1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

Nine  hundred  and  sixty-two  is  the  total  effective  of  cavalry  at  all 
stations,  not  including  Ponchatoula. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , February  3,  1863. 

Maj.  A.  G.  Dickinson, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz.,  Houston,  Tex.: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  a communica- 
tion, dated  Houston,  January  20, 1863,  informing  me  that  Colonel  Woods’ 
regiment  has  been  ordered  by  the  commanding  general  to  remain  at 
Lavaca. 

It  is  proper  that  I should  inform  the  general  commanding  that  in  my 
opinion  the  force  at  my  disposal  for  the  defense  of  this  point  and  the 
line  of  the  Rio  Grande  is  insufficient,  and  that  I will  be  forced  to  fall 
back  should  the  enemy  appear  in  force.  Not  less  than  ten  companies 
of  mounted  men  will  be  necessary  to  guard  the  line  of  frontier  from  the 
mouth  of  the  Rio  Grande  to  Laredo,  a distance  of  400  miles,  which  would 
not  be  available  to  me  in  case  of  a landing  of  the  enemy  from  the  sea, 
as  it  is  just  at  that  time  that  the  renegades,  with  their  Mexican  allies, 
will  seek  to  cross  the  river  into  Texas  for  the  purpose  of  co-operating 
with  the  invading  force  and  the  destruction  of  our  stock,  ranches,  &c. 


return  will  appear  in  chapter  covering  operations  against 
Vicksburg,  January  20-August  10,  1863,  Series  I,  Vol,  XXIV,  Part  II. 


966 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chai\  XXVII. 

I would  then  have  but  one  regiment  of  infantry,  with  hardly  a mini- 
mum number  of  men  to  a company,  to  defend  my  two  light  batteries  of 
artillery  and  repel  the  enemy. 

I am  more  than  ever  impressed  with  the  great  importance  ot  tbe 
trade  of  Matamoras  to  our  Army  and  people,  and  think  it  is  worth  de- 
fending : but  with  less  than  5,000  men  it  cannot,  in  my  judgment,  be  done. 
While  thus  communicating  my  views  I hope  the  commanding  general 
will  rest  satisfied  that,  be  my  force  large  or  small,  1 will  to  the  best  of 
my  ability  sustain  the  honor  of  my  country  and  the  unsullied  reputa- 
tion of  the  soldiers  of  Texas.  I confess,  however,  that  I do  not  covet 
the  distinction  of  leading  a retreat  from  a point  which  my  Government 
thought  of  sufficient  importance  to  be  placed  in  charge  of  an  officer  of 
my  rank,  and  with  great  respect  I ask  the  general  commanding  to  re- 
enforce me  to  the  above-mentioned  number  of  effective  troops. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army. 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , February  3,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Don  Albino  Lopez, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas,  Matamoras: 

Sir:  Specially  charged  by  my  Government  with  the  maintenance  of 
friendly  relations  with  the  Republic  of  Mexico  and  with  the  custody 
of  the  honor  and  dignity  of  the  Confederate  States  in  this  portion  of  their 
iurisdiction,  I feel  much  regret  that  my  first  communication  to  Your 
* Excellency  since  my  arrival  on  this  frontier  should  embrace  questions 
which,  involving  the  peace  and  dignity  of  my  Government,  present 
matters  of  the  gravest  consideration,  and  in  their  discussion  1 beg  to 
assure  you  that  in  the  terms  of  adjustment  which  I may  indicate  I am 
actuated  by  motives  of  the  highest  respect  and  appreciation  of  the 
mutual  advantages  accruing  from  the  most  friendly  and  cordial  rela- 
tions and  by  due  regard  to  the  peculiar  situation  ot  the  authorities  ot 

Mexico.  „ 

On  the  26th  of  December,  1862,  an  armed  party  of  Mexican  citizens 
crossed  into  Texas,  attacked  a train  of  Government  wagons,  murdered 
three  of  the  teamsters,  and  after  plundering  the  train  of  all  us  contents 
recrossed  the  Rio  Grande  and  found  shelter  and  protection  on  the  soil 
of  Mexico.  On  the  same  day  another  party  crossed  the  river  at  ko 
Olareno  and  murdered  an  estimable  patriot  and  citizen,  the  chief 
justice  of  Zapata  County,  Don  Isidro  Yela.  This  party  was  followed 
across  the  river  by  Capt.  Refugio  Benavides,  of  the  Confederate  Arin\ , 
and  punished  as  their  crimes  and  atrocities  meiited.  I have  thus 
noticed  two  distinct  instances  of  the  violation  of  the  neutrality  ot  Mex- 
ico committed  by  her  citizens.  If  these  outrages  had  been  committed 
by  the  disorderly  population  which  has  heretofore  notoriously  existed 
on  the  frontier  an  excuse  might  he  sought  in  the  unsettled  state  ot  tbe 
country  and  that  concomitant  lawlessness  which  is  incident  to  so  de- 
moralized a state  of  society,  and  might  have  been  classed  with  the 
many  other  instances  of  irregularity  which  have  occasionally  and  un- 
fortunately marked  the  history  of  our  respective  nationalities  ; but  these 
outrages  present  other  and  graver  characteristics.  They  were  com- 
mitted by  the  (so-called)  First  Regiment  of  Union  Troops,  commanded 


CHAP.  XX vrr.)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


967 


by  Antonio  Zapata,  composed  of  Mexicans,  carrying  with  them  the  flag 
of  the  United  States,  mid  claiming  to  be  the  representatives  of  that 
nation  ; hence  arises  the  gravity  of  the  question. 

The  Confederate  States  of  America  are  at  war  with  that  nationality, 
for  reasons  well  known  to  Your  Excellency  and  which  are  now  matters 
of  history ; that  flag  has  no  right  on  the  soil  of  Texas  j those  who  bear 
it  are  her  enemies,  and  we  are  prepared  to  meet  them  as  such  and  to 
test  by  the  gauge  of  battle  our  right  to  maintain  our  declaration.  In 
this  contest  Mexico,  as  well  as  the  other  nations  of  the  earth,  has  de- 
cided to  hold  itself  neutral,  and  in  consideration  of  that  neutrality  the 
military  authorities  of  the  Confederate  States  on  this  frontier  have, 
while  watching  closely  the  progress  of  events,  contented  themselves 
with  from  time  to  time  giving  such  notification  to  the  authorities  of 
Mexico  of  what  their  enemies  were  plotting  as  was  deemed  by  them 
necessary  to  avoid  the  grave  results  which  unfortunately  have  followed. 
Yet  these  warnings  have  been  without  effect,  and  the  soil  of  my  country 
has  been  desecrated  and  the  blood  of  her  people  has  been  shed  by 
those  who  sheltered  their  plans  and  movements  under  the  neutrality  of 
the  flag  of  Mexico,  and  so  far  from  being  restrained  from  future  evil  or 
punished  for  past  offenses  are  even  now  preparing  for  a repetition  of 
these  outrages. 

I have  the  proof  that  the  consul  of  the  United  States  at  Matamoras, 
whose  exit  from  Texas,  where  he  resided  for  many  years,  was  marked 
by  improprieties  of  conduct  which  render  him  a tit  representative  of 
the  nationality  of  the  United  States,  has  originated  and  with  specious 
promises  of  tiie  plunder  of  our  ranches  and  desolation  of  our  country 
has  organized  and  put  in  the  field  this  collection  of  outlaws  in  Mexico, 
appropriately  named  the  “First  Regiment  of  Union  Troops.” 

I deem  it  my  duty  respectfully  to  ask  if  it  is  the  intention  of  the  Gov- 
ernment of  Mexico  to  permit  a continuance  of  these  things,  or  whether, 
in  full  view  of  her  duties  as  a neutral,  she  will  at  once  take  such  meas- 
ures as,  while  indemnifying  us  for  the  past,  will  prevent  their  repeti- 
tion. 

I herewith  inclose  an  invoice  of  the  property  stolen  by  the  armed 
party  which  crossed  the  river  at  Las  Cuevas,  for  which  I feel  justified 
in  demanding  from  the  State  of  Tamaulipas  full  restoration  and  in- 
demnity.* I also  inclose  the  names  of  the  leaders  of  this  movement, 
with  their  residences,*  and  ask  that  you  will  cause  them,  such  as  are 
citizens  of  Texas,  to  be  arrested  and  delivered  to  me  for  trial  and  pun- 
ishment, and  such  as  are  citizens  of  Mexico  to  be  dealt  with  according 
to  her  laws.  I also  most  earnestly  urge  Your  Excellency  to  take  prompt 
steps  to  disperse  all  combinations  within  your  territory  hostile  to  the 
Confederate  States  and  to  restrain  all  future  movements  of  a similar 
nature,  so  fatal  to  the  peace  and  interests  of  both  people. 

With  great  respect,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex.,  February  5,  1863. 


Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : * 

Sir:  I inclose  you  copies  of  communications  from  Colonel  Reily, 


• Not  found. 


968 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA,,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.XXVIL 

commanding  Sibley’s  brigade,  and  myself,  in  respect  to  an  allegation 
made  by  Maj.  Gen.  R.  Taylor  of  the  detention  of  Sibley’s  brigade  in 
my  district.  I am  prompted  to  pursue  this  course,  as  it  is  very  difficult 
in  times  like  these  for  truth  to  overtake  error. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

' J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  Sibley’s  Brigade, 

Houston , Tex January  31,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley,  c&c.,  Washington , La. : 

General  : The  opportune  arrival  of  Captain  Harrison  has  for  the  1 
first  time  since  the  brigade  reached  Texas  enabled  the  quartermasters 
of  the  regiment  to  pay  off  the  troops  and  to  proceed  with  efficiency 
and  speed  to  furnish  the  transportation  and  quartermaster’s  supplies 
of  which  the  command  have  been  so  long  destitute. 

In  previous  communications  you  have  been  informed  of  the  bank- 
rupt condition  of  the  quartermaster’s  department,  the  unpaid,  almost 
unclad,  and  half-armed  condition  of  the  troops,  and  the  absence  ot 
those  means  so  essential  to  the  efficiency  of  the  brigade. 

When  I reached  San  Antonio  in  September  last,  bearing  to  you  from 
Richmond,  Va.,  the  order  from  the  Secretary  of  War  to  report  your 
command  to  Major-General  Taylor  at  Opelousas,  La.,  of  Septeniber  1 
ultimo,  I inquired  of  Captain  Harrison  as  to  his  ability  to  furnish  us 
with  transportation.  He  reported  his  utter  inability  for  the  want  of 
funds,  and  the  same  destitution  existed  when  I received  your  subse- 
quent orders  to  report  to  you  at  Richmond,  Va. 

I used  every  formal  and  official  influence  in  my  power  to  get  my  regi- 
ment en  route , but  without  success,  as  we  had  no  money  and  the  bri- 
gade had  no  credit  in  this  department.  Shortly  after  this  came  an  order 
countermanding  the  march  to  Virginia  and  directing  the  brigade  to 
report  to  Monroe,  La.  A short  time  previous  to  the  receipt  of  the  last 
order  I was  ordered  by  Special  Orders,  No.  28,  VI,  of  November  18, 
1862,  to  report  to  General  Hubert  at  San  Antonio. 

Major-General  Magruder  having  assumed  command  of  this  depart- 
ment I reported  to  him  at  Houston,  and  on  the  1st  December  last  was, 
by  order  of  General  Magruder,  during  your  absence,  as  senior  colonel 
assigned  to  the  command  of  the  brigade.  A few  days  after  this  Briga- 
dier-General Scurry  reported  himself  to  General  Magruder  and  as- 
sumed command.  Brigadier-General  Scurry  issued  an  order  also  put- 
ting me  in  command  of  the  brigade,  with  instructions  to  report  at 
Monroe,  La.  He,  however,  although  informed  of  the  destitution  of 
funds  and  unpaid  condition  of  the  men  and  officers,  furnished  no  means, 
and  I have  occasion  to  believe  made  no  effort  to  obtain  funds.  With 
these  orders  before  me  to  march  to  Monroe,  La.,  I applied  to  Major- 
General  Magruder.  He  gave  to  Captain  Loebnitz,  my  quartermaster, 
on  my  promise  that  the  loan  should  be  repaid  out  of  the  first  brigade 
funds  received,  a requisition  on  Major  Minter  at  San  Antonio  for 
$56,800,  which  was  to  pay  for  forage  lor  one  mouth  of  over  2,600 
horses  and  mules,  extra-service  men,  teamsters,  horseshoeing,  &c.,  and 
the  hire  of  teams,  at  a rate  not  to  exceed  $20  per  day  for  each  wagon 
and  team.  He  informed  me  that  he  did  not  feel  justified  on  account  of 
the  limited  funds  in  hands  of  the  quartermaster  to  let  us  have  money 
to  purchase  the  number  of  wagons  and  mules  and  other  quartermaster 


XXVII.  J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


969 


stores  for  a command  leaving  tliis  department,  but  would  do  all  he 
eould  to  facilitate  the  march  of  the  brigade.  Whilst  the  quartermaster 
was  doing  all  he  could  with  limited  means  and  no  credit  the  Federate 
invaded  Galveston.  General  Magruder  ordered  me  to  concentrate  all 
the  armed  men  at  Harrisburg,  a point  0 miles  below  this  city,  on  the 
route  to  Galveston,  at  the  same  time  instructing  me  that  the  piepara- 
tions  to  take  up  the  line  of  march  for  Monroe  in  obedience  to  the  orders 
of  Lieutenant-General  Holmes  must  not  be  discontinued.  Similar  in- 
structions were  given  to  the  commanding  officers  of  the  regiments. 

We  were  in  a short  time,  ordered  to  Galveston,  but  it  was  the  volun- 
teers on  the  cotton  gunboats  furnished  by  me  to  General  Magruder, 
seconded  bv  their  equally  gallant  commander  from  this  brigade  on 
tad”  who  contributed  so  materially  to  the  success  of  that  brilliant  ex- 

PeSome  time  since  I mailed  you  the  order  of  General  Magruder  issued 
to  the  “officers  and  men  of  Sibley’s  brigade”  when  he  gave  us  such 

P I believe  he  appreciated  the  valor,  courage,  and  patriotism  of  the 
briaade.  It  has  exhibited  to  the  world  its  ability  to  conquer  both  on 
land  and  sea  and  its  readiness  to  take  the  risk  of  reaching  the  foes  of 

our  land  wherever  they  may  be— on  sea  or  land.  ... 

The  brigade  has  been  under  orders  to  take  up  the  line  of  march  with 
all  possible  haste,  but  owing  to  the  scarcity  of  transportation,  the  bad 
condition  of  the  mules,  and  absence  until  two  days  since  ot  necessary 
funds  the  colonels  have  not  had  the  power  to  put  their  regiments  on 

^Five  of  my  companies  took  up  the  line  of  march  on  the  27th  ultimo, 
and  others  will  follow  so  soon  as  the  transportation  arrives. 

The  expedition  to  Galveston  has  not  occasioned  delay  in  the  march 

°fyou  are  well  advised  of  the  destitute  condition  of  the  brigade  when 
it  reached  El  Paso  and  how  much  more  destitute  it  became  in  all  the 
materials  necessary  for  military  operations  when  it  reached  San  Antonio. 

Nearly  two  months  since  I wrote  to  Lieutenant-General  Holmes  as  to 
the  condition  of  the  brigade.  I have  advised  in  letters  some  tune  since 
the  Adiutant-General,  Quartermaster-General,  and  yourself  of  the  tact 
that,  although  the  troops  had  been  in  service  nearly  eighteen  months, 
the  men  had  never  received  during  all  that  time  bounty,  mileage,  but 
little  clothing,  only  $170  each  pay,  and  that  the  First  Regiment  (Eeil.i  s 
Fourth  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers),  who  had  turned  over  tlieir  horses 
by  your  order  at  Socorro,  in  New  Mexico,  and  had,  to  remount  them- 
selves at  their  own  expense,  had  never  as  yet  been  paid  for  thur  horses. 

I must  again  call  your  attention  to  this  matter,  and  request  that  you 
adopt  such  steps  as  will  secure  these  brave  and  patriotic  men  the  com- 
pensation for  their  property  which  they  deserve.  , . 

After  we  received  the  last  order  to  march  to  New  Iberia  and  report  to 
yon,  and  having  heard  that  Captain  Harrison  had  gone  to  your  head- 
quarters and  would  not  likely  come  here,  and  being  pledged  to  see  that 
the  money  advanced  upon  my  pledge  by  General  Magruder,  and  find- 
ing that  the  transportation  could  not  be  hired,  I instructed  Captain 
Loebnitz  a few  days  since  to  turn  the  funds  over  to  Major  Bloomfield, 
chief  quartermaster  on  the.  staff  of  General  Magruder.  This  he  d d 1 be- 
fore  leaving  Galveston,  and  since  our  return  from  there  1 11s  I ( 

Texas  has  been  flooded  with  the  most  immoderate  rams,  flooding  the 
whole  country  and  rendering  the  roads  almost  impassable  and  every 
stream  swimming. 


970 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chap.  XXTII. 

As  an  illustration  of  the  troubles  that  overrun  us,  Captain  Loebnitz 
has  had  5 wagons  and  70  horses  for  my  regiment  on  the  road  from  Vic- 
toria for  about  twenty  days;  at  the  last  account  they  had  gone  into 
camp  until  the  waters  subsided. 

Until  the  arrival  of  Captain  Harrison  nothing  efficient  could  be  done, 
although  General  Magruder  has  been  urgent  we  should  report  to  you 
at  New  Iberia,  realizing  as  he  does  the  importance  of  our  being  there. 
Now  that  funds  are  in  hand  new  life  and  energy  are  imparted  to  all 
departments,  and  we  shall  march  with  all  practicable  speed.  Your 
brigade  comes  to  you  with  increased  renown,  determined  to  win  laurels 
as  fresh  and  brilliant  on  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi  as  they  gathered  j 
in  Galveston  and  Galveston  Harbor. 

With  great  respect,  yours, 

JAMES  EEILY, 

Commanding  Brigade.  j 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 


Headquarters  Sibley’s  Brigade, 

January  31,  1863.  *i 

General:  I regret  that  the  letter  did  not  reach  your  quarters  until 
after  your  departure  for  Galveston.  If  you  have  the  time  and  patience 
to  peruse  it  I think  you  will  find  it  contains  the  explanation  of  your1 
connection  with  Sibley’s  brigade  to  the  extent  you  desired  in  your  com- 
munication to  me  of  the  30th  ultimo.  It  is  to  be  a hard  and  difficult 
task  to  report  the  brigade  at  New  Iberia.  In  sueli  weather,  on  such 
roads,  and  with  our  transportation  we  are  doing  all  that  can  be  done. 

There  is  not  an  officer  or  man  in  the  brigade  that  does  not  feel  proud 
of  having  fought  under  your  immediate  command,  and  we  separate  with 
sorrow  from  a hero  who  has  learned  us  how  to  conquer  both  on  land 
and  water. 

With  sentiments  of  highest  respect, 

JAMES  EEILY, 
Colonel , Commanding. 


P.  S. — You  can  forward  the  inclosed,  if  you  see  fit,  to  Lieutenant- 
General  Holmes.  The  original  goes  to  Brigadier-General  Sibley. 

JAMES  EEILY. 


[Addenda.] 

Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , Tex.,  February  5,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  Eichard  Taylor,  Comdg.  Dist.  of  Louisiana: 

General:  Having  understood  that  you  attributed  to  me  the  deten- 
tion of  Sibley’s  brigade,  I inclose  you  copies  of  communications  from 
Colonel  Eeily,  commanding  brigade,  showing  that  this  was  not  the 
case,  and  that  you  did  me  injustice  in  holding  such  opinion.  The  use 
of  a portion  of  Sibley’s  brigade  in  the  attack  on  Galveston  caused  no 
delay  in  its  departure,  which  the  accompanying  papers  will  show  for 
themselves,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  every  facility  has  been  afforded 
them  to  hasten  their  march.  I would  respectfully  request,  as  you  are 
geographically  nearer  to  Lieutenant-General  Holmes  than  myself,  that 
you  forward  to  him  copies  of  these  documents. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGEUDEE, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 


A.p.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.  CONFEDERATE. 


971 


[Indorsement  ] 

Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 

Alexandria , February  22,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  to  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  Trans- 
ississippi  Department  by  request  of  Major-General  Magruder. 

Major-General. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La.,  February  6,  1863. 

ai.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Jackson,  Miss. : 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  troops  of  this  command 
been  consolidated  into  the  following  organizations: 

The  infantrv consists  of  three  brigades-— Maxey’s,  Beall  s,  and  Gregg  s, 
id  the  unattached  companies  of  Lewis’  infantry,  English  s hght  artil- 
rv  and  a battalion  of  dismounted  Partisan  Rangers,  recently  organ- 
'ed  The  heavy  artillery  consists  of  the  Twelfth  Louisiana  Battalion, 
frst  Tennessee*  Battalion,  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
>e  Gournav,  and  a portion  of  the  First  Alabama  Regiment. 

All  of  the  unattached  cavalry  companies,  Hughes  battalion,  and  Ninth 
ennessee  Battalion  of  Cavalry  have  been  temporan  y placed  undei  the 
immand  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gantt,  now  camped  at  Olive  Bianch. 
ear  Clinton,  La.,  and  doing  all  of  the  outpost  duty  and  scouting  tow  ard 

TJiorGarland,  with  his  cavalry  battalion  and  Rhodes’  company,  is 
tationed  in  front  of  Tangipahoa,  picketing  all  of  the  approaches  from 
>aton  Rouge  in  that  direction.  ..  .. 

Lieuteuant-Oolonel  Wingfield,  having  reorganized  his  battalion  of 
‘artisan  Rangers,  is  performing  all  of  the  essential  cavalry  duty  within 
lie  fortifications,  and  also  has  two  companies  upon  the  west  side  of  the 
fississippi  River  as  a protection  to  the  Signal  Corps.  The  infantry  and 
artillery  garrisons  that  were  at  Camps  Moore  and  Clinton  have  been 
withdrawn  to  this  jioint  and  cavalry  substituted  in  their  places. 

The  two  cavalry  companies  at  Ponchatoula  were  ordered  there  by  the 
ieutenant- general  commanding  and  reported  to  Lieutenant-Colonel 
shields,  from  whom  I have  been  unable  to  obtain  a report  thus  far. 

I inclose  herewith  a roster  of  this  command,  and  it  will  be  seen  that 
have  accounted  for  all  of  the  troops  except  the  two  cavalry  companies 
it  Ponchatoula. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  °^^tKser^’DNERj 

Manor -General. 


Shelbyville,  February  8,  1863. 

Ion.  J.  G.  Shorter,  Montgomery , Ala.  : 

The  mayor  of  Mobile  complains  that  General  Pemberton’s  orders  in 
•egard  to"  corn  in  Mississippi  produce  distress  in  Mobile.  I cannot 
lied  die  with  General  Pemberton’s  mode  of  supplying  his  troops  at  this 
listance.  Have  suggested  to  the  mayor  that  Southern  Alabama  can 
famish  abundance  of  corn.  Will  you  suggest  to  him  how  Mobile  may 

>e  supplied  1 j E>  JOHNSTON, 

General . 


972 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIf 


Poet  Hudson,  February  8,  1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

The  information  from  Baton  Rouge  is  reliable.  Force  estimated  a 
24,000  $ deserters  say  30,000. 


FRANK.  GARDNER, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Jaokson,  February  9, 1863. 

Major-General  Gardner,  Fort  Hudson : 

Your  last  letter  (telegram)  indicates  a diminution  of  enemy’s  force- 
that  of  day  previous  an  increase.  In  consequence  of  increase  I had 
ordered  another  brigade  to  you.  If  possible  give  me  definite  informa 
tion.  I shall  act  on  your  answer  at  once. 


J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 


Port  Hudson,  February  9,  1863. 


Enemy  first  increased,  then  diminished,  his  force.  I was  informed 
each  day.  Major  Bradford  has  last  letter.  Force  now  19,000. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Richmond,  February  9, 1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith, 

Care  of  General  Pemberton , Jackson , Miss. : 

Your  command  of  Southwestern  Army  has  been  enlarged  so  as  to  em- 
brace the  Trans-Mississippi  Department.  Lieutenant-General  Holme^1 
will  still  remain  in  that  department,  and  it  is  suggested  for  your  con- 
sideration to  visit  his  headquarters  before  proceeding  to  West  Louisiana. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  Department, 

February  10,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Maoruder, 

Commanding , Ac.,  Houston , Tex.: 


General:  Your  letter  of  December  29  in  reference  to  arms  and  in- 
closing a letter  from  the  Governor  of  Texas  on  the  same  subject  is  at 
hand.  The  lieutenant-general  commanding  directs  me  to  say  in  answer 
that  he  has  sent  to  you  all  the  arms  that  it  is  possible  for  him  to  send. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  S.  ANDERSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


ap.  XXVH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


973 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , February  10,  1863. 

ai.  A.  G.  Dickinson,  , 4 . _ . „7 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  Dist.  of  Tex.,  JV.  Mex .,  and  Anz .,  Houston , l&r. . 

Sir*  I have  the  honor  to  inclose,  for  the  information  of  the  general 
immanding,  an  extract  from  a private  letter  just  received  from  the  city 
• Mexico.  The  writer,  Mr.  Olivier,  is  a merchant  ol  Monterey,  and  has 
ien  doing  a large  business  with  Texas. 

I am  satisfied  that  Governor  Vidaurri,  of  Nuevo  Leo^_^llli^ot.re* 
>ect  such  a decree  as  the  one  intimated  in  the  letter  of  Mr.  Olivier, 
it  it  is  highly  probable  that  Governor  Albino  Lopez,  of  Tamaulipas, 
ill  do  so,  and  in  that  contingency  1 shall  feel  justified  in  tatmg  pos 
•ssion  of  the  city  of  Matamoras  if  my  force  is  sufficient,  and  holding  it 
itil  the  goods  which  are  now  there  destined  for  Texas  have  been  passed 
7er  the  Rio  Grande.  I do  not  pretend  that  I have  any  other  right  to 
i this  than  that  which  my  power  to  do  it  may  give  me,  nor  perhaps 
luld  it  be  justified  by  any  other  plea  than  that  of  necessity. 

The  occasion  is  appropriate  to  again  allude  to  the  value  to  our  Gov- 
mment  of  this  trade  through  Matamoras,  and  to  suggest  that  the  lull 
rength  of  the  Quartermaster’s  Department,  backed  by  all  the  authori  t y 
'the  commanding  general,  may  be  put  forth  to  avail  ourselves  of  its 
euefits.  Every  wagon  in  Texas  ought  to  be  loaded  with  cotton  by  the 
$t  of  April  for  Government  account  and  forwarded  to  this  place.  The 
iason  for  discharging  vessels  off  the  bar  with  facility  is  very  short- 
ly six  months  at  the  most;  it  requires  twd  months  for  ox  wagons  to 
take  the  trip,  and  it  will  necessarily  be  midsummer  before  much  cot- 
>n  can  be  got  here,  and  every  possible  energy  should  be  put  forth  at 

Iam  fully  impressed  with  the  fact  that  our  time  for  availing  our- 
3lves  of  this  trade  will  be  short.  In  view  of  the  heavy  stocks  of  army 
oods  now  in  store  and  the  number  of  vessels  off  the  bar  (over  sixty 
l number),  loaded  principally  for  Texas,  I cannot  but  think  that  oar 
nemy  will  very  soon  attempt  to  deprive  us  of  it.  It  is  notorious  that 
liis  port  did  not  require  more  than  a dozen  vessels  in  a year  to  do  its 
rade  before  the  war;  and  the  enemy  are  as  well  aware  of  the  fact  that 
bese  cargoes  are  intended  for  us  as  we  are  ourselves  and  hence  they 
fill  attempt  to  stop  it,  and  the  necessity  of  getting  all  or  as  much  as 

re  can  is  apparent.  . _ . . n 

The  force- under  my  command,  it  need  not  be  disguised,  is  too  small 
o impede  a determined  effort  to  take  Fort  Brown,  and  I presume  they 
rill  send  a large  force  if  they  send  any. 

I have  addressed  a communication  to  Governor  Lopez  concerning 
he  relations  of  this  frontier,  but  have  no  reply  as  yet.  I will  forward 

opies  when  received.  . „ 

I have  not  received  a letter  or  paper  from  Texas  since  the  loth  ot 
anuary,  notwithstanding  my  order  to  Major  Minter,  chief  quarter- 
aaster,  to  establish  a regular  express  every  four  days,  and  I would 
espectfully  call  the  attention  of  the  general  commanding  to  the  lm- 
lerative  necessity  of  a regular,  speedy,  and  certain  means  of  commu- 
lication  with  headquarters.  The  mails  are  wholly  unreliable. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

II.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier - General , Provisional  Army . 


974 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVI 
[In  closure.] 


Monterey,  February  1,  1863. , 

el.  A.  Quinton,  Esq.,  Matamoras : 

My  Esteemed  Friend  : I inclose  copy  of  extract  of  a letter  I ha\ 
received  from  Mexico.  You  can  use  of  the  same  confidentially. 

I shall  probably  leave  here  the  dav  after  to-morrow  and  hope  t 
meet  you  in  that  city. 

Truly,  your  friend, 


L.  OLIVIER. 


[Sub-in  closure.] 

The  principal  object  of  this  is  to  give  you  some  information  that  in r 
be  interesting.  The  American  legation  here  have  learned  that  la1 
quantities  of  cloth,  blankets,  &c.,  are  being  sent  to  Texas  across 
Rio  Grande.  They  have  applied  to  the  Government  in  order  tha'  • 
such  articles  may  be  confiscated. 


O U A.K,  1 JL 

I have  just  learned  that  an  order  addressed  to  the  American  cont, 
at  Matamoras  to  prevent  the  exportation  of  goods  across  the  Ri 
Grande  has  been  issued  and  will  be  sent  to-morrow. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Houston , February  11,  1863. 

His  Excellency  E.  R.  Lubbock, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  Texas : 


Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
the  instant.  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  able  to  announce  to  you 
as  I now  do,  that  the  coast  of  Texas  is  occupied  and  free  for  the  occupa 
tion  of  our  troops  from  babine  to  the  Rio  Grande ; that  the  enemy  has  iu 
longer  a foothold  on  the  soil  of  Texas,  and  that  his  blockading  squad  roil 
are  his  best  ships,  which  keep  at  a respectful  distance  from  our  shores 
that  the  Rio  Grande,  that  frontier  so  vital  to  us,  is  strongly  held  by  mei 
and  guns,  and  that  I now  entertain  great  hopes  that  I shall  be  able  t< 
fortify  it  so  as  to  render  it  very  difficult  if  not  impossible  for  the  enemy 
to  take  it  from  us.  1 hope  ere  long  to  have  a fleet  of  war  vessels  or 
that  river,  which  will  insure  great  security  in  That  direction.  To  tin 
heroic  Cupt.  Leon  Smith,  skillfully  and  bravely  supported  by  Captains 
Lubbock  and  Sangster,  of  the  Bayou  City  and  Neptune,  and  to  the  gal 
lant  Texans,  under  their  devoted  leaders  Colonels  Green  and  Bagby 
and  Captains  Wier,  Martin,  Snyder,  and  Harby,  we  are  indebted  for  tlu 
glorious  initiation  so  handsomely  followed  up  by  the  Sabine  expedition 
under  the  command  of  that  most  able  and  daring  officer  Maj.  O.  M. 
Watkins,  supported  gallantly  by  Captains  Fowler  and  Johnson,  of  the 

steamers  Belle  and  Uncle  Ben,  and  by  Captains , , of  the 

land  forces,  and  by  the  soldiers  and  crews,  each  of  whom  deserves  to  be 
gratefully  remembered  by  the  country  and  especially  by  the  State  ol 
Texas.  I communicate  to  you  officially  the  names  of  the  ranking  officers 
as  an  encouragement  to  them  and  others  to  still  greater  exertions. 

I am  glad  to  be  able  to  inform  you  that  order  and  a better  state  of 
feeling  are  reportedras  existing  in  the  disaffected  regions.  I have  con- 
fined the  declaration  of  martial  law  to  the  three  counties  of  Colorado, 


Chap.  XXVil.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


975 


Austin,  and  Fayette,  in  which  this  disaffection  showed  itself.  I hope 
soon  to  see  the  ordinary  tribunals  again  in  operation.  The  ringleaders, 
who  have  been  apprehended,  were  by  order  turned  over  to  the  civil  au- 
thorities, as  these  acts  were  committed  prior  to  my  declaration  of  mar- 
tial law.  , , . , . , „ 

Not  being  able  to  see  you,  as  I desired,  and  being  averse  to  interfer- 
ing with  the  industrial  pursuits  of  the  country,  unless  demanded  by 
necessity,  I have  ordered  the  militia  recently  called  out  at  my  request 
to  return  to  their  homes  after  depositing  their  nrms  with  the  ordnance 
officer  at  Houston.  The  expulsion  of  the  enemy  from  our  coast  made  it 
unnecessary  for  them  to  remain  longer  together.  Their  arms  will  be 
placed  in  the  hands  of  volunteers,  who  will  be  stationed  at  convenient 
places  for  the  enforcement  of  order  and  the  protection  of  loyal  citizens, 
whilst  they  will  be  ready  at  any  moment  to  repel  invasion.  In  the  mean 
Sme  the  militia  called  out  has  been  arranged  into  companies  and  can  be 
sembled  at  very  short  notice.  Would  it  not  be  a good  plan  to  pursue 
i same  course  in  other  parts  of  the  State? 

[ am  informed  that  there  are  a great  many  deserters  and  stragglers 
Texas  from  our  armies  in  the  field,  and  I respectfully  recommend  that 
ve  State  brigadier-generals  be  ordered  by  Your  Excellency  to  arrest  all 
«uch  and  send  them  to  the  nearest  military  post  or  camp,  whether  con 
script  or  not.  I have  ordered  the  provost-general  to  order  his  agents 
throughout  the  States  to  arrest  such  persons,  whether  officers  or  enlisted 
men,  but  think  the  aid  of  the  State  brigadier-generals  would  be  of  value. 

I write  in  great  haste  and  merely  glance  at  these  subjects,  knowing 
whatever  depends  upon  you  will  be  done.  I read  with  great  pleasure 
your  excellent  message  and  concur  most  heartily  in  your  views,  and  in 
concluding  cannot  but  express  to  you,  Governor,  the  sincere  gratification 
it  affords  me  to  feel  that  I am  supported  so  ably  and  so  cordially  by  the 
Executive  of  the  State  which  I am  here  to  defend,  and  in  whose  welfare 


I feel  so  deep  an  interest. 

Yery  respectfully,  your 


obedient  servant, 

[J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major- General.] 


Military  Commandancy  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas, 

February  11,  1863. 

General  H.  P.  Bee, 

Commanding  Line  of  the  Rio  Grande , Fort  Brown , Tex. : 

Sir  : I have  had  the  honor  of  receiving  your  note  dated  the  5th  in- 
stant. I acknowledge  the  satisfaction  with  which  I have  learned  that 
you  have  been  commissioned  by  your  Government  to  cultivate  relatious 
of  friendship  with  the  Mexican  Republic  and  to  watch  oyer  the  honor 
of  the  Confederate  States,  and  I do  not  hesitate  to  believe  that  the 
commission  will  result  to  the  advantage  of  both  frontiers,  which,  with 
their  inhabitants,  are  severed,  as  belonging  to  different  nations,  but 
united  in  their  interests.  The  latter  are  so  blended,  as  well  on  account 
of  their  proximity  as  the  exceptional  circumstances  which  have  gnen 
rise  to  their  commercial  intercourse,  that  any  disturbance  in  Texas 
would  react  on  the  Mexican  citizens,  who  would  be  the  first  in  leeling 
the  effects  of  a change  or  an  attack  on  the  public  tranquillity  of  this 
frontier. 

It  is  therefore  to  the  interest  of  the  Mexican  authorities  to  preserve 
the  most  friendly  relations  with  those  of  the  State  of  Texas  and  topre- 


976 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [CnAr.  xxvlt 


vent  the  fitting  out  of  expeditions  from  the  soil  of  Mexico  to  commit 
hostilities  against  the  former.  This  conduct  is  in  pursuance  of  the  prin- 
ciple of  strict  neutrality,  which  underlies  the  policy  of  Mexico  in  the 
contest  between  the  Confederate  and  Northern  States,  and  is  in  most 
conformity  with  international  law  and  the  interest  of  this  Republic  and, 
particularly  the  interests  of  this  frontier. 

These  considerations  cause  me  to  welcome  any  event  which  may  tend 
to  consolidate  the  harmony  and  good  relations  of  the  States,  and  in  this 
view  I have  confidently  relied  that  the  result  of  your  appointment  will 
be  the  security  of  peaceable  citizens  in  their  persons  and  property,  as 
well  as  the  punishment  of  all  those  who  under  the  guise  of  defending  a 
political  principle  intend  to  harass  and  depredate  on  this  frontier.  To 
that  end  the  Mexican  authorities  are  disposed  to  contribute  with  their 
efforts,  in  the  conviction  that  the  only  means  of  securing  the  tranquillity 
and  property  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  line  is  to  prosecute  the  criminals 
and  chastise  them  for  their  crimes.  There  is  a floating  population  on 
this  frontier,  consisting  of  individuals  who  alternately  claim  citizenship 
in  Mexico  or  in  Texas,  as  suits  their  purposes ; who  change  their  resi- 
dence whenever  obliged  to  do  so  by  the  prosecution  which  always  fol- 
lows them,  thus  evading  the  laws  and  securing  their  impunity.  The 
inhabitants  of  Mexico  have  suffered  from  these  men  every  species  of 
outrages,  which  went  unpunished  because  the  facility  of  crossing  the 
frontier  line  nullified  the  action  of  the  authorities,  who,  though  power- 
less, were  not  ignorant  of  the  names  of  the  perpetrators.  Availing 
themselves  of  the  domestic  convulsions  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas,  they 
raised  the  banner  of  a party  and  their  career  of  crime.  These  men, 
through  whom  so  many  grievances  have  been  borne  by  the  peaceful 
inhabitants  of  this  frontier,  are  precisely  the  same  who  call  themselves 
to-day  the  u First  Regiment  of  the  Union.”  You  are  not  unaware  that 
some  of  them  are  citizens  of  the  State  of  Texas  and  that  others  were 
lately  residents  of  the  same  State,  whence  they  crossed  to  Tamaulipas. 
All  of  them  took  part  in  the  last  disturbance  which  took  place  on  this 
liver,  and  when  the  force  of  arms  obliged  them  to  seek  a place  of  safety 
they  crossed  the  Rio  Bravo,  leaving  the  Mexican  authorities  without 
the  110 wer  of  chastising  them. 

The  organization  of  the  bands  which  have  foraged  in  Texas  being 
considered  in  its  origin,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  they  are  made  up  of 
those  whose  means  of  livelihood  is  the  commission  of  crime  ; that  what- 
ever may  be  their  denomination  the  essence  remains  the  same;  and 
that  though  raising  a standard  in  Texas  or  in  Tamaulipas,  they  in  truth 
seek  only  to  cover  their  intentions  of  pillaging  the  property  of  peace- 
ful owners.  If  you  should  desire  to  corroborate  the  statement  which  I 
have  the  honor  now  to  present  to  you  it  will  be  easy  to  acquire  the 
necessary  information,  which,  if  obtained  in  a spirit  of  impartiality,  will 
place  the  accusers  on  this  frontier  in  their  true  light. 

I regret  that  a misunderstanding  of  these  facts  should  have  given 
rise  to  reports  which,  presented  under  the  influenced  alarm  and  pas- 
sionate excitement,  have  stamped  with  a serious  character  these  events, 
which  of  themselves  were  not  uncommon,  but  increased  in  their  pro- 
portions in  the  ratio  of  their  distance  from  the  place  of  occurrence, 
while  the  first  impression  could  not  be  effaced  until,  the  passions  having 
cooled,  the  reality  could  be  ascertained.  This  moment  has  arrived.  The 
Mexican  authorities,  ever  willing  to  accede  to  just  demands,  do  not 
hesitate  to  seek  concord  with  those  of  Texas  in  securing  the  tranquillity 


Jhaf.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


977 


yf*  both  sides.  Orders  have  been  issued  leading  to  this,  and  the  capture 
)f  a ringleader  with  some  of  his  followers  three  months  ago  are  the 
wilt.  Others  of  the  same  band  have  been  brought  to  justice,  while 
i part  of  the  stolen  cattle  has  been  turned  over  to  the  military  authori- 
ses of  that  line,  or  the  value  thereof  paid  to  the  owners  whenever  they 
lave  presented  themselves  to  claim  the  stock,  which  had  been  sold  to 
ivoid  the  expenses  of  keeping  the  same. 

The  Mexican  authorities  have  put  into  play  every  means  to  destroy 
:he  organized  band  of  Zapata,  and  have  fulfilled  their  duty  to  the  State 
>f  Texas  as  part  of  a friendly  nation.  The  two  cases  to  which  you 
•efer  in  your  note  were  beyond  their  control,  and  therefore  the  neutral- 
ly of  the  Eepublic  in  the  struggle  between  the  Confederate  and  Northern 
States  has  not  been  violated  ; for  if  parties  of  men  crossed  the  river 
ind  committed  depredations  they  were  pursued  in  the  Mexican  Terri- 
tory by  Mexican  troops,  and  in  their  dispersion  some  of  them  were 
captured.  The  mere  fact  that  they  should  seek  a refuge  on  this  side  is 
not  a violation  of  the  principle  of  neutrality,  inasmuch  as  they  had 
withdrawn  from  the  obedience  of  all  law  ; they  acted  on  their  own  ac- 
count, and  were  subject,  like  all  criminals,  to  answer  before  the  courts 
for  their  acts.  When  raising  the  flag  of  the  United  States  and  crossing 
bo  the  left  bank  of  the  Bravo  they  committed  an  offense  which  affected 
the  Republic  of  Mexico,  and  in  proceeding  against  them  the  latter  ob- 
served the  position  of  neutrality,  which  has  been  its  policy.  There  are 
many  acts  similar  to  this  to  be  found  in  the  history  of  the  United  States. 
Expeditions  fitted  out  against  friendly  nations  have  been  prosecuted  by 
the  authorities,  and  when,  notwithstanding  their  efforts,  they  were  car- 
ded out  the  responsibility  of  the  nation  was  saved  ; and,  moreover,  if 
the  expedition  failed  the  participators  were  brought  to  trial  after  seek- 
ing an  asylum  and  protection  in  the  American  territory.  These  are 
the  requirements  of  the  law  of  nations,  and  only  when  they  are  not 
respected  can  nations  be  made  reponsible  for  their  toleration  of  the 
wrong  committed. 

The  Mexican  authorities  therefore  have  not  violated  the  principle 
of  neutrality ; they  have  not  contravened  the  law  of  nations,  but  have 
satisfied  the  demands  which  have  been  made  under  that  law,  and  they 
have  in  all  their  actions  demonstrated  their  fealty  and  good  faith,  as 
required  by  the  interests  of  the  Republic  and  of  the  Mexican  citizens 
residing  on  the  frontier. 

The  indemnification  for  stolen  property,  when  the  authorities  of 
Mexico  have  fulfilled  the  duties  imposed  on  them  by  the  law  of  nations, 
would  be  a precedent  established  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  Republic  ; 
for  you  are  informed  that  in  other  times  this  State,  as  well  as  New 
Leon,  has  been  the  victim  of  similar  forays  to  those  suffered  by  Texas, 
and  that  the  same  men  who  to-day.  under  the  name  of  Mexicans,  attack 
your  frontier  have  previously,  calling  themselves  Texans,  committed 
their  robberies  in  Mexico,  betaking  themselves  with  the  proceeds  of 
their  pillage  to  the  left  bank  of  the  Bravo.  Likewise  in  the  political 
contest  of  Tamaulipas,  and  especially  the  last  one,  the  citizens  of 
Texas,  either  of  Mexican  or  American  origin,  have  crossed  the  river 
and  attacked  all  the  Mexican  towns,  greatly  to  the  injury  of  the  Gov- 
ernment and  of  private  individuals,  after  which  they  sought  impunity 
by  fleeing  to  Texas,  where  they  even  now  remain.  The  obligations  to 
be  deduced  from  the  law  of  nations  are  founded  on  reciprocity,  and 
therefore  whatever  may  be  the  duty  of  the  Mexican  Government  it  is 
justified  in  identical  cases  to  require  the  same  conduct  from  the  author- 

R R— VOL  XY 


978 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH.  Hi 

ities  of  Texas ; otherwise  the  Republic  of  Mexico  would  be  made  tc  i 
bear  all  the  burden.  i 

In  the  foregoing  conclusions  are  to  be  embraced  the  complaints  madtn 
by  you,  and  the  demand  for  the  extradition  for  the  Texan  citizens  whc  i 
have  taken  part  in  the  above-mentioned  expedition.  I would  have  ncj  p 
objection  to  consent  to  the  latter  when  said  individuals  vjould  be  an  i 
rested ; but  as  in  so  doing  I should  be  fulfilling  a treaty  of  extraditioi  I 
which  is  not  binding  on  the  Confederate  States,  because  they  secedec,  i 
before  its  enactment,  there  would  be  no  reciprocity.  I shall  then  limit  C 
myself  to  punish  them  for  past  offenses  committed  on  this  line,  and  i 
also  for  those  which  they  are  now  guilty  of  under  the  law  of  nations  i 
the  same  being  punishable  according  to  our  statutes. 

There  has  not  been  hitherto  a certain  rule  which  would  direct  th( 
intercourse  between  both  sides,  of  that  vacillating  character  which  the^j 
have  had  for  many  years  past.  My  most  vehement  desire  is  that  th< 
confraternity  and  the  friendly  harmony  which  should  prevail  in  th< 
interests  of  neighboring  countries  should  rule,  in  order  to  avoid  in  Texa: 
the  organization  of  expeditions  against  Tamaulipas  and  in  Tamaulipa: 
the  assembling  of  men  to  depredate  in  Texas.  Joint  efforts  alone  wil 
result  in  the  complete  pacification  of  the  two  frontiers  and  the  efficient 
pursuit  of  offenders,-  who  under  the  pretext  of  political  principles  dis 
guise  their  intentions  to  injure  honest  and  peaceful  citizens.  I hav<j 
therefore  desired  to  place  on  a secure  basis  the  relations  of  Tamaulipa 
with  Texas,  and  being  notified  by  you  that  you  entertain  similar  senti 
ments  I hope  that  the  mutual  good  offices  rendered  by  both  States  wil 
effectively  put  an  end  to  the  crimes  they  have  alternately  suffered, 
request  that  you  communicate  your  ideas  to  me,  so  that,  having  estab 
lished  the  basis  of  an  understanding,  a result  may  be  obtained  favora 
ble  to  the  interest  of  the  frontier  of  both  countries. 

Accept,  sir,  the  assurances  of  my  consideration  and  esteem. 

Liberty  and  reform.  Heroic  Matamoras. 

A.  LOPEZ. 


Alleyton,  [Tex.],  February  11, 1863. 

Oapt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant • General: 

Sir  : I have  just  returned  from  visiting  ColoneT  Hardeman  at  Oc; 
lumbus.  He  has  been  very  sick,  but  is  now  recovering,  and  will  be  fi 
for  duty  in  a few  days.  He  desires  me  to  inform  the  general  commanc 
ing  that  there  is  one  small  company  and  a squad  of  from  15  to  20  me 
encamped  in  the  village  of  Columbus,  called  Coopwood’s  battalion.  1 
appears  Coopwood  had  authority  to  raise  a battalion,  but  failed  to  d 
so,  and  abandoned  the  attempt,  so  Colonel  Hardeman  informs  me,  an 
Colonel  Hardeman  also  requests  me  to  ask  the  commanding  general  t 
dismount  the  command  and  assign  them  to  some  command.  They  ar 
now  doing  no  service,  but  are  insubordinate  and  committing  depredif 
tions  on  the  citizens  of  the  village.  Complaints  were  made  to  me,  an 
I requested  the  officer  in  command,  during  the  illness  of  Colonel  Hard* 
man  (Colonel  Madison),  to  order  them  out  of  town  to  a new  campin 
ground.  This  he  informed  me  to-day  he  had  done.  I would  respec 
fully  recommend  they  should  be  dismounted  and  assigned  to  some  corp 
where  their  services  may  be  made  valuable.  I sent  the  prisoners  thi: 
we  had  in  confinement  at  Columbus  to  the  provost-marshals  of  tb 
counties  of  Fayette  and  Austin,  with  directions  for  them  to  turn  thei 
over  to  the  civil  authorities.  The  escorts  were  commanded  by  lieutei 


3hap.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  979 

ants  belonging  to  Captain  Rountree’s  company.  The  one  who  com- 
manded the  escort  to  La  Grange,  Fayette  County,  has  returned,  and 
informs  me  that  on  his  arrival  at  the  county  seat  the  prisoners  were 
burned  over  to  a magistrate,  who  immediately  discharged  them  all  and 
permitted  them  to  return  to  their  homes.  I sent  them  to  the  provost- 
marshal  under  the  impression  that  the  civil  authorities  would  confine 
the  prisoners  until  the  district  attorney  (Colonel  Delaney)  could  collect 
tiis  evidence  and  proof  and  then  go  into  trial.  The  escort  to  Austin 
County  has  not  returned.  I will  visit  La  Grange,  as  I know  (unless  I 
am  much  deceived)  that  evidence  sufficient  can  be  procured  to  convict 
a part  of  them.\ 

Colonel  Hardeman  has  ordered  Captain  Rountree,  with  his  company, 
into  Austin  County,  about  30  miles  from  here,  into  the  disaffected  dis- 
trict, where  there  is  an  abundance  of  subsistence  and  forage,  with  orders 
to  suppress  any  insurrectionary  movements  among  the  citizens  by  dis- 
arming and  arresting  them.  Captain  Rountree’s  company  is  composed 
of  good  men,  who  are  subordinate,  and  he  is  a prudent  man  himself,  who 
will  act  with  discretion,  and  his  men  will  not  trespass  bn  the  persons  or 
property  of  the  people. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfulLv,  your  obedient  servant, 

" HENRY  L.  WEBB, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  35.  ) Richmond , February  11,  1863. 

******* 

IX.  Brig.  Gen.  A.  G.  Blanchard,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confed- 
erate States,  is  relieved  from  further  service  in  the  Conscription  De- 
partment of  West  Louisiana,  and  will  report  to  Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby 
Smith  at  Alexandria,  La.,  for  assignment  to  duty. 

******* 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

No.  24.  ) Houston , Tex.,  February  13,  1863. 

I.  Col.  X.  B.  Debray  is  hereby  relieved  from  the  command  of  the 
Eastern  Sub-District  of  Texas  and  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  Gal- 
veston Island  and  Virginia  Point. 

II.  Brig.  Gen.  William  R.  Scurry,  having  reported  for  duty,  is  assigned 
to  the  command  of  the  Eastern  Sub-District  of  Texas. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  Bankhead  Magruder: 

E.  P.  TURNER, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


' Fort  Brown,  February  15,  1863. 

My  Dear  General  : I fear  you  will  be  tired  of  my  unofficial  com- 
munications, and  hope  you  will  write  me  if  you  prefer  my  addressing 
you  through  the  official  channels. 


980  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL  I 

I send  you  the  correspondence  with  Governor  Lopez,  which  is  by  no 
means  satisfactory,  but  from  the  last  clause  in  his  letter  I am  sanguine 
of  arranging  my  matters  satisfactorily.  The  further  negotiation  will 
be  conducted  verbally  and  only  the  results  put  in  writing. 

I inclose  the  contract  which  I have  made  for  6,000  muskets,  which  I 
hope  you  will  be  pleased  with.  I have  ascertained  that  a further  sup- 
ply of  arms  can  be  obtained  in  Havana,  and  am  negotiating  for  their 
purchase.  As  this  is  not  properly  within  the  scope  of  my  duties  I 
would  be  glad  to  receive  the  sanction  of  your  authority  (privately),  for1 
I consider  that  I render  most  important  service  when  I get  arms  for  our 
troops.  The  parties  wish  to  deliver  1,000,000  pounds  of  powder.  Does 
the  Confederacy  want  it,  and  what  shall  I give  for  it?  The  fact  is, 
general,  that  all  contracts  should  be  annulled  so  soon  as  we  can  get 
cotton  here  to  buy  what  is  needed,  for  nearly  everything  is  here  or  can: 
be  got  here  very  promptly. 

I am  pleased  to  say  that  my  position  here  is  daily  bringing  me  into 
connection  with  those  who  can  be  used  with  great  advantage  to  the 
Confederacy. 

The'  reason  why  I mark  this  private  is  for  what  follows,  and  which  is 
in  my  possession  through  influence  which  I could  hardly  have  hoped  to 
secure  so  soon  after  my  arrival.  1 

Mr.  Bustamente  arrived  here  from  New  York  en  route  to  the  city  of 
Mexi  :o.  He  was  sent  by  the  Government  to  purchase  arms  in  New 
York,  and  carried  letters  from  Mr.  Corwin ; he  has  purchased  65,000 
stand  of  arms,  and  they  are  expected  here  very  soon.  The  bills  of 
lading  are  here  (I  mean  of  course  Matamoras),  and  the  sum  of  $700,000 
is  to  be  paid  when  the  arms  are  delivered.  An  assessment  has  been 
made  on  each  State  in  Mexico  for  its  quota  of  the  amount,  and  I have 
it  from  good  authority  that  the  amount  will  not  be  forthcoming  and  that ! 
not  one-half  will  be  ready  for  the  payment.  On  understanding  this  I 
made  a proposition  to  the  authorities  to  let  me  in  as  a partner,  and  the, 
answer  was,  u If  we  can  pay  for  all,  we  require  all ; but  the  Confederate 
States  shall  have  all  we  cannot  pay  for,”  with  which  I was  of  course 
much  pleased. 

Now,  general,  what  shall  I do,  and  how  shall  I do  it?  The  matter  is  i 
of  great  importance  to  us  in  a political  view,  and  I shall  obtain  full 
documentary  information  of  the  whole  affair,  that  they  may,  through  the  j 
proper  authority,  be  laid  before  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  that  he  may  see 
what  kind  friends  he  has  in  the  Lincoln  Government,  as  I shall  prove 
the  connection  of  Corwin  with  it.*  I think  sometimes  that  I will,  by  a 
bold  dash,  seize  the  vessel  and  take  the  arms,  but  there  are  many  ob- 
jections to  it ; the  vessel  will  be  in  neutral  waters  and  not  liable  to  cap. < 
ture,  and  it  would  be  a most  violent  breach  of  faith  with  my  neighbors- 
The  best  way  is  to  be  prepared  to  take  advantage  of  the  poverty  of  the 
contracting  parties  and  get  our  share,  which  I am  satisfied  will  be  a 
large  one.  There  will  be  time  to  get  your  answer,  which  1 hope  will  be 
sent  by  swift  express,  and  I will  thank  you  to  inform  me,  if  we  need 
arms,  how  many  we  need.  What  resource,  other  than  cotton,  have  we 
to  pay  for  them  with  ? Shall  I press  every  bale  of  cotton  I can  find  on 
this  side  of  the  river  for  that  purpose  with  the  promise  of  it  being  re- 
turned ? And  when  will  it  be  returned  ? And  any  other  suggestions 
that  may  occur  to  you. 

The  Mexican  authorities  are  much  astonished  as  to  how  I got  my  in 
formation,  but  as  it  was  so  exact  they  had  no  resource  than  to  tell  me 

* See  Magruder  to  Cooper,  March  3,  p.  1004. 


'hap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


981 


ill  about  it.  I respectfully  suggest  that  you  keep  this  matter  as  quiet 
is  possible  for  many  reasons,  but  the  one  I offer  is  that  it  is  the  special 
request  of  the  Mexican  authorities.  I send  you  a New  York  paper  with 
he  “ intercepted  dispatches,”  and  suggest  that  you  inform  the  authori- 
ties that  if  they  will  send  their  mail  to  me  I will  forward  by  a perfectly 
secure  conveyance  on  the  2 th  of  each  mouth  from  Tampico.  The  Eng- 
ish  steamers  run  regularly,  and  the  correspondence  will  be  safe  from 
rapture,  and  although  slow,  is  more  desirable  than  to  read  them  in  our 
rnemy’s  papers. 

The  news  from  Mexico  is  that  Forey  is  advancing  on  Pueblo.  He 
ivill  find  two  hundred  pieces  of  cannon  to  meet  him.  The  news  from 
Sew  York  is  to  the  28th  ultimo.  No  battle  at  Fredericksburg,  but  the 
bray  of  the  Charleston  gunboat,  which  broke  the  blockade  and  caused 
Benjamin  to  declare  the  port  open.  I was  much  pleased  with  the  re- 
lection that  he  was  following  your  example. 

Yours,  truly, 

H.  P.  BEE. 

A letter  from  Europe  says  that  the  writer  was  on  board  of  the  294  ; 
hat  the  293  had  gone  on  a pleasure  trip  and  not  returned.  The  291 
md.  292  must  be  out.  Who  sunk  the  Hatteras  ¥ They  say  it  was  done 
iy  one  of  their  own  ships  by  mistake. 


Signal  Post  E, 

West  Baton  Rouge , February  18,  1863. 

General  Gardner: 

One  transport  loaded  with  troops  arrived  at  Baton  Kouge  yesterday ; 
Ive  more  at  Plaquemine,  also  with  troops,  on  their  way  up.  One  large 
:ransport  towed  by  two  steam-tugs  and  loaded  with  provisions  came  up 
ate  yesterday  evening.  General  Banks  has  siezed  all  the  steamboats 
n the  river  to  transport  troops  and  supplies  to  Baton  Bouge.  One 
ransport  went  up  Bayou  Plaquemine  and  the  Yankees  report  her  cap- 
:ured  by  our  men.  The  Yankees  say  they  will  attack  Port  Hudson  in 
i few  days  with  large  force;  also  they  will  have  a force  on  this  side 

5001). 

The  Laurel  Hill  brought  up  200  men  (cavalry  and  infantry).  She 
:ook  corn  and  molasses  from  John  Bird’s  plantation  ; scoured  the  coun- 
ry  to  capture  us,  but  failed;  took  all  our  clothes,  &c.  Threaten  to  re- 
urn  in  three  days.  Say  they  have  six  months’  supply  of  corn  and  pro- 
visions now  at  Baton  Bouge. 

W.  C.  MILLEB, 
Signal  Operator , Post  F. 


Alleyton,  [Tex.],  February  18,  1863. 

lapt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir  : I anticipated  the  commanding  general’s  order  on  the  petition 
)f  the  women  of  Austin  County,  which  I only  received  this  day.  It 
.vas  left  at  the  hotel  at  Columbus,  at  which  place  I received  it.  I vis- 
ted  the  town  of  New  Ulm  and  called  on  most  of  the  persons  who  made 
he  affidavits,  and  I find  their  statements  to  me  differ  materially  from 
heir  statements  to  the  general.  They  all  say  the  injuries  they  received 


982 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

were  inflicted  by  two  men  named  MacElroy,  two  named  Henderson, 
and  one  other,  a straggling  soldier  belonging,  it  is  believed,  to  General 
Sibley’s  brigade,  whose  name  I have  not  learned  ; but  Lieutenant  Stone, 
who  commanded  the  detachment,  says  he  thinks  he  can  get  it  and  will 
inform  me.  From  what  I have  already  learned  it  appears  Lieutenant 
Stone  called  on  the  MacElroys  and  Hendersons  to  lead  him  during  the 
night  to  the  houses  of  the  disaffected  Germans.  The  men  he  employed 
were  enemies  of  the  Germans  generally,  and  no  doubt  took  him  to  the 
houses  of  innocent  persons.  He  divided  his  command  into  two  squads, 
went  with  one  himself  and  sent  the  other  under  a non-commissioned 
officer,  so  as  to  make  all  the  arrests  at  about  the  same  time,  and  he 
says  he  knew  nothing  of  the  outrages  being  committed  until  some  time 
after  he  had  removed  the  prisoners  and  the  persons  who  committed 
the  crimes  had  left  him.  He  denies  having  struck  a woman  with  the 
hilt  of  his  sword.  He  is  apparently  a mild,  good  man,  but  unfit  to  com- 
mand, not  enforcing  subordination  and  discipline.  I have  no  doubt 
but  the  soldiers  behaved  badly  by  pushing  the  women  away  from  their 
husbands  and  some  bruises  were  inflicted,  but  they  all  say  the  serious 
injuries  were  inflicted  by  the  guides  employed  by  Lieutenant  Stone. 
The  lieutenant  says  he  would  have  arrested  these  men  and  brought 
them  prisoners  to  Columbus  if  he  had  known  in  time  that  they  had 
committed  these  outrages  on  the  women  and  children.  I told  him  the 
officer  in  command  was  answerable  for  the  conduct  of  his  men  and  for 
that  of  all  persons  he  employs. 

Colonel  Hardeman  intended  making  all  the  arrests  himself;  started 
out  for  that  purpose,  was  taken  sick,  and  was  compelled  to  return  with- 
out accomplishing  his  object,  and  then  sent  out  Lieutenant  Stone  (as 
he  assured  me  to-day),  having  the  greatest  confidence  in  his  discretion. 

I will  carry  out  the  order  of  the  general  fully.  I go  to  the  counties 
of  Austin  and  Fayette  in  the  morning,  and  will  see  all  the  parties  com- 
plaining and  look  into  the  matter  closely,  and  have  the  arrests  made  of 
all  I can  get  hold  of  who  were  concerned,  and  report  to  the  general 
through  you  on  Tuesday  next.  I assured  all  the  citizens  of  the  county 
whom  I saw  that  the  commanding  general  would  pursue  the  very 
course  he  has,  by  ordering  the  arrest  and  punishment  of  all  persons 
who  trespassed  on  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the  people,  and  that  he 
was  the  last  man  who  would  suffer  violence  to  be  used  toward  persons 
arrested  or  to  their  families. 

I inclose  one  communication  from  Captain  Garey,  quartermaster, 
and  one  from  Colonel  Delaney*  Please  lay  them  before  the  general  for 
his  decision  and  action. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  L.  WEBB, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

p.  s._i  will  have  the  affidavits  taken  anew  before  a disinterested 
justice,  and  get  a good  and  reliable  interpreter,  as  none  of  these  per- 
sons speak  English.  I will  endeavor  to  have  justice  done  all  parties. 


Headquarters  Sibley’s  Brigade, 

Houston , February  18,  1863. 

Lieut.  Stephen  D.  Yancey, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Houston : 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  in  obedience  to  instructions 


Not  found. 


Uhaf.  XXV3X]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


983 


by  r e of  the  17th  instant,  on  Monday,  the  9th  instant,  five  companies 
of  Colonel  Green’s  and  five  companies  of  Colonel  Bagby’s  regiments 
marched ; also  on  the  10th  instant  five  companies  of  Colonel  Beily’s  reg- 
iment took  up  their  line  of  march. 

There  are  other  companies  of  the  regiments  now  ready  to  march,  but 
their  progress  has  been  stopped  by  the  impassable  condition  of  the  roads 
and  streams;  and  although  the  line  of  march  is  under  water,  and  San 
Jacinto  and  Trinity  Kivers  are  so  high  as  to  overflow  for  a long  distance 
the  country,  yet  the  troops  will  press  forward  as  rapidly  as  possible. 
The  remaining  companies  of  Beily’s  and  Green’s  regiments  will  be  on  the 
road  before  Saturday  next.  When  the  remainder  of  Colonel  Bagby’s 
regiment  will  march  depends  upon  transportation;  he  is  using  every 
exertion  to  get  ready. 

Up  to  the  arrival  of  Capt.  W.  H.  Harrison,  brigade  quartermaster, 
there  were  no  funds  in  the  regimental  quartermaster’s  hands  to  pur- 
chase supplies  and  the  brigade  had  no  credit. 

Eespe«tftilly,  yours,  JAMES  KEILY, 

Commanding  Brigade . 


Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 
Alexandria , La .,  February  19,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  I have  just  returned  to  my  headquarters  at  this  post,  and  beg 
respectfully  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication  of  the 
28th  ultimo,  having  relation  to  the  late  raid  of  the  enemy  in  Northeast- 
ern Louisiana.*  The  facts  therein  cited  are  substantially  correct.  In 
the  latter  part  of  December,  1862,  while  in  the  southern  portion  of  the 
State,  near  Berwick  Bay,  I received  from  Brigadier-General  Blanchard 
various  dispatches  to  the  effect  that  the  enemy  were  advancing  into 
the  interior  and  that  Monroe  was  threatened.  At  the  earliest  possible 
moment  I went  to  Monroe,  where  I learned  the  true  state  of  affairs  to 
have  been  much  as  described  in  your  letter.  A body  of  the  enemy  had 
advanced  to  Dallas,  and  thence  a small  party  or  squadron  of  mounted 
men  had  penetrated  to  Delhi  by  a road  unknown  to  General  Blanchard 
or  at  least  unguarded,  destroyed  the  railroad,  the  bridges,  and  a small 
amount  of  Government  property.  I had  previously  given  to  General 
Blanchard  the  most  minute  instructions  in  regard  to  the  disposition  of 
his  forces  on  the  immediate  river  front  and  the  necessary  steps  to  be 
taken  in  the  event  of  an  attack  by  a superior  force  of  the  enemy.  These 
instructions  were  either  not  carried  out  at  all  or  so  badly  executed  as 
to  induce  me  to  relieve  Colonel  Pargoud,  the  officer  in  command  of  the 
forces  opposed  to  the  enemy,  from  command. 

This  officer  had  been  placed  in  command  of  a regiment  of  cavalry 
composed  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Chambliss’  battalion  of  Partisan  Bangers 
and  four  independent  companies,  and  application  for  his  appointment 
forwarded  to  the  War  Department.  He  had  been  highly  recommended 
to  me  as  an  officer  who  had  had  considerable  experience  in  the  French 
service.  The  application,  however,  was  never  acted  upon  by  the  De- 
partment, and  after  the  occurrence  of  the  above  facts  he  was  imme- 

|_ 

*See  also  Sparrow  to  Seddon,  January  19,  1863,  and  see  Series  I,  Vol.  XVII,  for  Bur- 

bridge’s  report  of  the  expedition  from  Milliken’s  Bend. 


984 


A 

W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII.  | 

diately  relieved  from  command,  and  Chambliss’  battalion  restored  to  its  i 
original  organization,  as  will  be  seen  by  my  letter  to  the  Adjutant  and 
Inspector  General  dated  January  10,  1863. 

The  whole  affair  was  disgraceful  to  the  service  in  the  extreme,  and 
was  so  characterized  by  me  in  a personal  interview  with  Brigadier- 
General  Blanchard,  and  in  my  report  to  Lieutenant-General  Holmes  I 
informed  him  that  General  Blanchard  would  be  relieved  as  soon  as  an 
officer  could  be  obtained  to  replace  him.  Having  none  at  my  disposal, 
however,  lhave  appointed  a post  commander  at  Monroe,  relieving  Gen- 
eral Blanchard  from  command  of  troops,  and  confining  him  to  the  duties 
of  commandant  of  camps  of  instructions  in  this  district,  as  originally 
assigned  by  order  of  the  War  Department.  This  was  done  previous  to 
the  receipt  of  your  letter. 

Under  these  circumstances  I would  respectfully  suggest  that  further 
investigation  is  unnecessary.  The  only  report  I am  able  to  render  is 
that  of  the  utter  incompetency  of  Brigadier-General  Blanchard  for  any 
command,  and  to  this  effect  I have  previously  expressed  myself  to  the 

Department.  ^ 

Injustice,  however,  to  Colonel  Pargoud  and  the  officers  and  men  un- 
der him  I would  state  that  since  this  affair  and  before  the  receipt  of 
the  order  disbanding  the  regiment  much  activity  lias  been  displayed 
and  good  service  performed  by  them  in  several  instances.  Colonel 
Pargoud  from  the  beginning  has  given  evidence  of  possessing  ability  ; 
and  soldierly  qualities,  and  had  succeeded  in  reducing  the  regiment  to 
a good  state  of  discipline.  I am  convinced  that  the  unfortunate  results 
above  alluded  to  are  attributable  chiefly  to  the  incompetency  of  Brig- 


adier-General Blanchard. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


B.  TAYLOR. 


[Indorsements.] 


Secretary  of  War: 

What  is  the  present  position  of  General  Blanchard  and  what  action 
is  recommended?  JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


April  1, 1863. 

Conscript  Bureau  : 

Is  General  Blanchard  still  in  command  of  conscript  camp  in  Lou- 
isiana or  otherwise  charged  with  the  execution  of  the  conscript  law  in 

Louisia,ia'  J.  A.  SEDDON. 


Bureau  or  Conscription, 

April  3,  1863. 

Respectfully  returned  to  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War,  with  the 
information  that  by  a special  order  from  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector 
General’s  Office,  No.  35,  February  11, 1863.  General  Blanchard  was  re- 
lieved from  conscript  duty  in  Louisiana  and  ordered  to  report  to  Lieut. 
Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith  for  assignment  to  duty.  Colonel  Waggaman  has 
been  ordered  to  duty  as  commandant  of  conscripts  in  the  place  ot  Gen- 
end  Blanchard,  relieved.  G_  j EAINS) 

Brigadier- General , Superintendent. 


Vuat.  ixm]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 


985 


Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 

Alexandria , February  19,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Maoruder, 

Commanding  District  of  Texas , <&c.  : 

General:  Yours  of  the  5th  ultimo  has  this  moment  reached  me. 
Although  I supposed  you  had  detained  Sibley’s  brigade,  I did  not  speak 
or  even  think  of  your  action  harshly.  Your  glorious  achievement  at 
Galveston  has  found  no  admirer  warmer  than  I. 

You  will  be  pleased  to  learn  that  we  have  captured  the  formidable 
ram  which  lately  ran  our  batteries  at  Vicksburg.  She  will  leave  this 
to-day  ready  for  action.  She  mounts  seven  guns,  some  heavy  Parrotts. 
She  was  taken  at  our  fortifications  60  miles  below  this  place. 

I will  take  great  pleasure  in  forwarding  the  documents. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  TAYLOR, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  La.  Army,*  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  9.  j Alexandria , February  19,  1863. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Pratt  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  that  por- 
tion of  the  State  of  Louisiana  composed  of  those  parishes  lying  south 
of  Rapides,  Avoyelles,  and  Concordia,  exclusive  of  these  and  inclusive 
of  those  parishes  east  of  the  Mississippi  River,  which  shall  be  known 
as  the  District  of  South  and  East  Louisiana. 

II.  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  E.  Vick  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  that 
portion  of  the  State  of  Louisiana  composed  of  those  parishes  lying  north 
of  Rapides,  Avoyelles,  and  Concordia,  inclusive  of  these  parishes,  which 
shall  be  known  as  the  District  of  North  Louisiana. 

####### 


By  command  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in- 
chief. 


C.  LE  D.  ELGEE, 
Adjutant- General  Louisiana. 


Jacicson,  February  22,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner,  Fort  Hudson , La. : 

I shall  send  General  Rust’s  brigade  to  re-enforce  you  as  rapidly  as 
possible.  Keep  me  advised.  Mortar-boats  can  do  you  no  possible  harm. 
Remember  to  reserve  your  ammunition,  for  I have  no  more  to  send. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant- General , Commanding . 


Port  Hudson,  February  22,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton: 

Rations  are  the  essentials  now.  Corn  and  wagons  at  Osyka.  The 
Indianola  is  above  Red  River. 

I shall  send  steamboats  up  to-morrow. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 

* This  caption  seems  to  have  been  substituted  for  “ Headquarters  Louisiana  Militia,” 
January  30,1803. 


986 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA., 


, IVllOO. 


General  orders  relative  to  the  exportation  of  cotton. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs 
N o.  28.  i 


Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

7 Houston , Tex.,  February  22, 1863. 

The  major-general  commanding  this  district  having  been  ordered  by 
Lieutenant-General  Holmes  to  give  such  orders  as  will  enable  the  Gov- 
ernment to  obtain  supplies  from  the  exportation  of  cotton  through  his 
lines  on  the  Bio  Grande,  and  finding  it  impossible,  through  the  scarcity 
of  supplies  both  in  Texas  and  Mexico,  to  support  the  army  on  that 
frontier  except  by  the  purchase  with  cotton  of  supplies  brought  from 
foreign  countries,  the  following  orders  are  issued,  which  it  is  hoped 
will  accomplish  the  object  of  the  law  concerning  the  exportation  ot  cot- 
ton, whilst  they  will  not  conflict  with  the  rights  and  reasonable  expec- 
tations of  the  people: 

I.  All  persons  are  allowed  to  transport  cotton  to  the  Mexican  frontier. 

II.  The  rules  now  established  by  Brigadier-General  Bee,  as  to  the 
quantity  and  value  of  cotton  to  be  allowed  to  pass  the  Bio  Grande 
frontier  for  goods  imported,  will  remain  as  at  present ; that  is,  im- 
porters of  supplies  or  goods  will  be  allowed  to  export  cotton  to  the 
custom-house  value  of  their  original  invoices  at  the  port  of  entry,  with 
100  per  cent,  added.  The  cotton  to  be  valued  at  $100  per  bale. 

III.  Government  agents  and  the  people  to  be  alike  subject  to  these 
rules  from  the  date  of  the  publication  of  these  orders. 

Supplies,  goods,  and  merchandise  imported  will  not  be  permitted  to 
be  exported,  provided  such  supplies,  goods,  and  merchandise  were  im- 
ported to  enable  the  importer  to  export  cotton. 

IV.  No  contract  will  be  made  by  any  staff  officer  on  duty  in  this  dis- 
trict after  the  publication  of  these  orders  for  supplies  based  upon  the 
exportation  of  cotton,  except  by  Major  Hart,  Quartermaster  Confed- 
erate States  Provisional  Army,  the  Government  having  confided  that 
duty  to  him,  to  whom  the  chiefs  of  disbursing  departments  in  this  dis- 
trict will  furnish  a list  of  what  they  require  for  their  respective  depart- 

mi 4-^.  rrATTAfi  /HoKni’cino*  nffi ppts  P.lftP.wllPTfi 


ments.  The  agents  in  Texas  of  the  chief  disbursing  officers  elsewhere 


will  likewise  furnish  similar  lists. 

Chiefs  of  disbursing  departments  of  this  district  are  authorized  to 
purchase  but  not  contract  for  such  limited  supplies  on  these  lists  as 
they  may  need  from  time  to  time  until  Major  Hart  shall  be  able  to 
obtain  the  necessary  supplies  from  the  Bio  Grande.  It  is  supposed 
this  period  will  be  brief,  as  Major  Hart  has  already  purchased  a large 
supply  of  stores  of  every  kind  at  very  low  rates.  . 

Y.  Maj.  A.  W.  McKee,  quartermaster,  Confederate  States  Provisional 
Army,  is  intrusted  by  the  Treasury  Department  with  the  duty  of  trans- 
porting cotton  to  various  points  on  the  coast  and  the  Bio  Grande,  to  be 
exported  for  supplies,  when  such  supplies  shall  have  arrived  in  the 

country.  . . 

VI.  Major  Hart  is  intrusted  with  the  performance  of  similar  duties 
by  the  War  Department.  All  officers  serving  in  this  district  will  afford 
them  such  facilities  as  they  may  require  and  they  can  properly  furnish. 

VII.  All  contracts  made  and  being  carried  out  in  good  faith  previous 
to  the  publication  of  this  order  will  be  respected  $ but  as  the  State  is 
filled  with  contractors,  Government  agents,  or  persons  calling  them- 
selves such,  and  as  all  such  persons  have  been  ordered  through  the 
newspapers  and  ample  time  has  been  given  to  exhibit  their  contracts 
or  instructions  to  these  headquarters  and  little  attention  has  been  paid 
to  such  orders ; and  as  there  is  reason  tobelieve  that  many  contractshave 
been  made  without  any  consideration,  that  many  others  are  not  being 


Chap,  xxvn.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


987 


carried  out  and  never  will  be;  that  many  of  these  so-called  agents  are 
not  Government  agents  and  that  there  are  others  appointed  by  those 
who  have  no  authority  to  make  such  appointments;  and  as  it  is  ascer- 
tained that  conscripts,  teamsters,  and  other  Government  facilities  are 
either  being  used  by  those  persons  or  are  being  kept  out  of  the  service 
of  the  country,  and  as  the  army  under  my  command  is  now  in  occupa- 
tion in  force  on  the  Rio  Grande  frontier,  it  is  hereby  ordered  that  all 
contracts  made  previously  to  the  publication  of  these  orders,  with  per- 
mits or  passes  to  enable  the  parties  to  cross  that  frontier  with  cotton, 
be,  with  the  permits  and  passes,  transmitted  without  delay  to  one  of 
the  following  officers,  viz:  Brigadier-General  Scurry  at  Houston,  Col. 
S.  Pyne  Bankhead  at  San  Antonio,  or  Lieutenant-Colonel  Buclicl  at 
Brownsville,  Tex.,  for  examination.  If  it  be  found  by  either  of  these 
officers,  after  careful  examination,  that  such  contract  is  made  in  good 
faith,  and  is  being  carried  out  in  good  faith,  he  will  indorse  the  same  on 
the  contract  over  his  name  and  official  signature,  and  will  countersign 
the  permit  or  pass  based  upon  such  contract.  Should  he  find  the  con- 
tract otherwise,  he  will  refuse  to  countersign  the  permit  or  pass;  and  no 
officer  will  allow  cotton  to  pass  the  Rio  Grande  unless  such  permits  or 
passes  are  thus  countersigned,  or  unless  on  a custom-house  certificate 
of  goods  already  introduced,  as  above  provided  for. 

VIII.  Permits  or  passes  not  based  upon  contracts  will  not  be  counter- 
signed by  either  of  the  officers  named,  and  therefore  cotton  will  not  be 
allowed  to  pass  the  lines  on  such  permits  or  passes  by  whomsoever 
signed. 

IX.  All  Government}  facilities,  such  as  conscript  teamsters,  if  prom- 
ised in  bona-fide  contracts  being  carried  out  (though  said  promises  are 
not  valid,  being  contrary  to  law),  will  nevertheless  be  continued  to  the 
parties,  unless  recalled  by  superior  authority  or  some  imperious  mili- 
tary necessity,  and  such  facilities  as  are  now  enjoyed  by  contractors — 
not  provided  for  by  these  contracts — will  also  be  continued  to  them 
under  the  same  conditions  whilst  carrying  out  their  contracts  in  good 
faith. 

X.  All  officers,  agents  of  the  Government,  contractors,  or  other  per- 
sons having  conscripts  or  persons  liable  to  conscription  in  their  employ 
will  forthwith  send  a copy  of  their  instructions  or  authority  to  either  of 
the  following  officers,  viz:  Brigadier-General  Scurry,  Colonel  Bankhead, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Buchel,  as  may  be  geographically  most  convenient, 
with  a list  of  the  names  and  residences  of  such  conscripts  and  persons 
liable  to  conscription,  and  will  make  a like  return  on  the  first  of  each 
month.  This  will  not  excuse  the  employers  from  compliance  with  any 
orders  they  may  have  received  from  the  commandant  of  conscripts  or 
other  conscript  officers  in  relation  to  the  returns  and  reports  of  con- 
scripts in  their  employment.  Persons  thus  notified  who  do  not  comply 
with  the  above  by  the  1st  of  April  next  will  be  deprived  of  their  em- 
ployes, and  such  em ployers  as  hold  permits  for  the  exportation  of  cotton 
will  have  the  same  revoked.  The  words  u conscript  service  ” will  be  in- 
dorsed on  the  envelope  inclosing  the  list. 

XI.  The  officers  receiving  these  copies  of  instructions  and  lists  of  con- 
scripts and  persons  liable  to  conscription  will  send  at  the  earliest 
practicable  moment  to  these  headquarters  a consolidated  return  or  list 
of  such  employes,  with  the  authority  or  reason  for  their  employment 
annexed,  and  will  continue  to  make  such  Returns  on  the  first  day  of 
each  month. 

XII.  Conscripts  in  the  service  of  any  officer  or  agent  of  the  Govern- 
ment or  bona-fide  contractor  who  shall  be  discharged  from  the  same  by 
the  expiration  of  the  contract  or  for  any  other  cause  will  be  returned 


988 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


by  such  officer  or  agent  to  the  nearest  camp  of  instruction,  or,  if  the 
distance  be  great,  to  the  nearest  military  post,  unless  otherwise  ordered 
from  these  headquarters. 

XIII.  Xo  contract  based  upon  the  exportation  of  cotton  and  made 
after  this  date  will  be  recognized,  unless  the  same  be  made  by  authority 
of  the  War  Department  or  by  superior  authority  to  that  of  the  com- 
manding general  of  this  district.  Xo  applications  for  the  service  of 
conscripts  to  carry  out  contracts  will  hereafter  be  granted  by  these 
headquarters. 

XIV.  Enrolling  officers,  besides  furnishing  a proper  return  to  the 
commandant  of  conscripts  of  all  conscripts  thus  employed,  will  forward 
direct  to  these  headquarters  a list  of  the  names  and  residences  of  such 
conscript  forthwith  and  a similar  return  on  the  first  of  each  month. 
The  commandant  of  conscripts  will  also  forward  forthwith  direct  to 
these  headquarters  a return  of  all  the  conscripts  now  in  this  State, 
showing  number  present,  employment,  and  stations,  as  far  as  practica- 
ble. He  will  forward  a similar  return  as  soon  after  the  first  of  each 
month  as  possible.  This  is  required  to  enable  the  commanding  general 
to  carry  out  the  instructions  of  Lieutenant-General  Holmes. 

XV.  All  foreigners  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty-five 
holding  any  office  or  employment  connected  with  the  army  in  Texas, 
but  not  in  the  army  or  enrolled  for  service,  will  be  immediately  de- 
prived by  their  employers  of  such  office  unless  they  take  the  oath  of 
allegiance  to  the  Confederate  States  and  enroll  themselves  as  subject 
to  military  duty  or  furnish  able-bodied  substitutes  not  liable  to  con- 
scription, unless  the  same  shall  have  been  appointed  by  authority 
superior  to  that  of  these  headquarters. 

XVI.  Brigadier-General  Scurry,  Colonel  Bankhead,  and  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Buchel,  having  been  directed  to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  this 
order  in  relation  to  contracts,  permits,  and  conscripts,  will  be  allowed 
^the  services  of  such  officers  and  detailed  clerks  as  may  be  necessary, 
and  their  decisions  will  be  final  on  all  these  subjects  confided  to  them 


by  these  orders. 

XVII.  Colonel  Bankhead  will  appoint  a commissioned  officer  to  per- 
form the  duty  of  granting  passes  for  cotton  at  Eagle  Pass  in  accordance 
with  the  provisions  of  these  orders.  Brigadier-General  Bee  will  cause 
proper  officers  to  be  stationed  at  Ringgold  Barracks  or  at  Roma  and 
at  Fort  McIntosh  and  such  other  points  on  the  Rio  Grande  as  he  may 
deem  necessary  to  carry  into  execution  the  provisions  herein  made. 

XVIII.  The  operations  of  the  niter  bureau  are  not  to  be  interfered 


with  by  this  order.  y 

XIX.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Buchel  and  the  officer  appointed  by  Colonel 
Bankhead  at  Eagle  Pass  and  such  other  officers  as  General  Bee  may 
appoint  at  intermediate  places  between  Brownsville  and  Eagle  Pass  are 
exclusively  charged  with  the  duty  of  granting  passes  under  the  pro- 
visions of  this  order.  Should  either  of  these  officers  become  incapaci- 
tated from  sickness  or  other  causes  General  Bee  will  make  temporary 
appointments  to  supply  the  vacancy  and  report  the  facts  to  these  head- 


quarters. . . _ 

Brigadier- General  Bee,  commanding  the  frontier  of  Mexico,  will  en- 
force a strict  compliance  of  these  orders. 

XX.  The  five  dollars  in  coin  demanded  in  exchange  tor  the  same 
amount  in  Confederate  Treasury  notes  upon  each  bale  of  cotton  exported 
is  hereby  discontinued. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  Bankhead  Magruder: 

J H.  M.  STAXARD,  Aide-de-Camp. 


Chap,  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


989 


Columbus,  February  23,  1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Houston: 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  lay  before  the  major-general  command- 
ing the  accompanying  report  of  Lieutenant  Wheeler,  who  was  detailed 
by  me  to  investigate  the  charges  made  by  certain  German  citizens 
against  Lieutenant  Stone. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  HARDEMAN, 

Lieutenant - Colonel , Commanding  Arizona  Brigade . 

[Inclosure.] 

Report  of  Lieut  William  J.  Wheeler  concerning  certain  charges  preferred 
against  Lieut.  R.  H.  Stone  by  certain  German  citizens  of  Few  Ulm  and 
its  vicinity. 


Columbus,  February  23,  1863. 

1 have  visited  the  following-named  citizens  and  investigated  the 
matter  of  Lieutenant  Stone’s  conduct  among  them  as  thoroughly  as  it 

lay  in  my  power  to  do : Messrs. Kouge, Mitauk, 

Honbold,  Z.  Darbro, Wagner,  justice  of  the  peace. 

I visited  the  above-named  citizens  and  conversed  with  them  through 
an  interpreter  relative  to  the  maltreatment  reported  to  have  been  im- 
posed upon  them  by  Lieut.  R.  H.  Stone  or  men  under  his  command. 
They  all  state  that  they  received  no  abuse  whatever  at  the  hands  of 
Lieutenant  Stone  or  any  of  his  men,  and  that  they  all  acted  gentlemanly 
and  with  utmost  propriety.  Mrs.  Rouge,  the  lady  who  is  reported  to 
have  been  so  badly  misused,  states  that  she  received  no  injury  at  the 
hands  of  Lieutenant  Stone,  and  she  does  not  think  from  any  of  the  men 
under  his  command ; that  Lieutenant  Stone  did  not  come  into  her  house, 
and  that  she  was  injured,  but  to  the  best  of  her  knowledge  the  injury 
she  received  was  at  the  hands  of  men  who  were  not  under  Lieutenant 
Stone’s  command,  but  were  citizens,  neighbors,  living  in  that  vicinity, 
and  not  from  any  of  Lieutenant  Stone’s  command ; that  she  was  knocked 
down,  not  by  any  of  Lieutenant  Stone’s  command,  and  that  she  received 
one  or  two  scratches  from  a bayonet,  whether  it  was  thrust  at  her  or 
whether  in  the  confusion  of  the  moment,  which  she  thinks  most  likely, 
she  ran  against  it,  she  cannot  tell ; that  she  received  a wound  in  the 
forehead  by  being  struck  with  the  butt  of  a.  gun,  but  says  the  blow  was 
not  aimed  at  her ; that  being  excited  and  alarmed  for  her  husband’s 
safety  she  accidentally  ran  against  it  5 and  that  she  is  confident,  from 
the  general  conduct  and  demeanor  of  the  lieutenant  and  the  men  of  his 
command,  that  they  intended  no  injury  or  insult  to  her  whatever. 

The  citizens  above  mentioned  also  stated  that  Lieutenant  Stone  acted 
in  no  way  unbecoming  an  officer  and  a gentleman — he  nor  any  one  of 
his  command ; that  they  wish  no  injustice  done  him,  and  if  the  above 
statement  of  facts  is  not  sufficient  to  clear  him  of  any  imputation  upon 
his  honor  as  an  officer  that  they  can  make  affidavit  to  abundant  testi- 
mony that  will. 

They  state,  however,  that  there  were  some  citizens  along  from  the 
neighborhood,  who  did  not  appear  to  be  under  command  of  any  one, 
who  acted  in  a very  un  gentlemanly  manner;  they  recognized  in  those 
parties  their  immediate  neighbors,  and  state  that,  if  any  blame  what- 
ever could  attach  to  Lieutenant  Stone,  it  might  be  that  he  did  not 


990  w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

exercise  sufficient  authority  over  those  citizens  as  he  did  over  his  own 
men. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

WM.  J.  WHEELER, 

Lieutenant , Company  A,  First  Regiment  Arizona  Brigade . 

Lieut.  Col.  P.  Hardeman, 

Commanding  First  Regiment , Columbus. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

No.  30.  f Houston , Tex.,  February  23,  1863. 

Paragraph  VII,  General  Orders,  No.  19,  dated  December  16, 1862,  is 
hereby  revoked. 

Mexicans  or  other  foreigners  will  be  allowed  the  same  privileges  and 
facilities  for  the  transportation  of  cotton  to  and  supplies  from  the  Rio 
Grande  as  allowed  the  citizens  of  Texas  by  General  Orders,  No.  28,  of 
February  22,  1863 ; and  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  every  officer  or  agent 
of  the  Government  to  afford  them,  as  strangers,  ample  protection. 

By  order  of  Mai.  Gen.  J.  Bankhead  Magruder: 

STEPHEN  D.  YANCEY, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Mississippi  River,  February  24, 1863. 

General  : After  thoroughly  investigating  all  the  circumstances  I 
find  that  the  report  of  General  Augur’s  arrival  at  Baton  Rouge  was  a 
mistake ; thatls,  the  word  “from”  was  substituted  for  “at”  before  “In- 
dian Village.”  This  was  done  just  below  Port  Hudson  by  a young  man 
named  Payne.  All  the  other  posts  have  the  message  written  in  their 
record  books : “ General  Augur  has  arrived  at  Indian  Village  from  be- 
low with  10,000  men.” 

Be  this  as  it  may,  from  information  perfectly  reliable  the  Yankees 
are  evidently  making  preparations  for  attack  on  Port  Hudson — they 
say  with  40,000  men;  but  other  sources  of  information  place  their 
number  at  30,000;  21,000  being  now  at  Baton  Rouge,  the  balance  below. 

They  are  mounting  siege  guns  around  Baton  Rouge,  having  received 
ten  32s  a few  days  since.  Three  thousand  will  cover  all  the  re-en- 
forcements that  arrived  in  the  number  at  first  reported  so  large.  They 
came  up  on  three  large  transports  that  seemed  loaded  down.  These 
were  reported  to  you,  however,  several  days  ago,  and  since  there  has 
but  one  company  of  cavalry  (Dutch)  arrived. 

The  Yankees  themselves  are  looking  for  heavy  re-enforcements  every 
day.  We  will  keep  strict  watch  and  report  promptly. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ J.  W.  YOUNGBLOOD, 

Captain , Commanding  Signal  Corps . 


Port  Hudson,  February  25,  1863. 
Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

The  brigade  of  the  enemy  from  Indian  Village  are  marching  toward 


— - 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  991 

Morganza.  I have  ordered  a force  in  two  steamboats  to  drive  back 
their  advance  and  cut  the  levees. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 
Major-  General , Commanding . 


General  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  La.  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  10.  I Alexandria , February  25, 1863. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Pratt,  commanding  District  of  South  and  East 
Louisiana,  and  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  E.  Yick,  commanding  District  of 
North  Louisiana,  will  immediately  take  such  measures  for  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  militia  in  their  respective  districts  as  the  most  ample  dis- 
cretion under  the  law  may  justify. 

II.  A portion  of  the  militia  of  each  parish,  not  to  exceed  one-half  of 
those  liable  to  military  duty  under  the  act  approved  January  3,  1863, 
shall  be  ordered  into  active  service  by  them  as  soon  as  practicable. 

III.  Proper  precautions  will  be  taken  that  a sufficient  number  of  men 
shall  be  left  at  home  for  domestic  security  and  to  insure  the  cultivation 
of  the  annual  crops. 

IV.  The  privilege  of  volunteering  is  extended  in  each  individual  case 
until  the  individual  is  placed  by  call  or  draft  in  service  as  a militia-man. 

By  command  of  Thomas  O.  Moore,  Governor  and  commander-in- 
chief : 

JOHN  H.  BERNOS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General  Louisiana . 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , February  25,  1863. 

|Maj.  A.  G.  Dickinson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Houston , Tex . : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  copies  of  my  correspondence  with 
Governor  Lopez  to  this  date : 

No.  1.  My  letter  to  Governor  Lopez  inclosing  basis  of  arrangement. 

No.  2.  Governer  Lopez’s  answer. 

No.  3.  Relates  to  a proposed  secret  article  for  mutual  rendition  of 
fugitives  from  justice. 

No.  4.  Governor  Lopez’s  letter  inclosing  final  arrangements. 

No.  5.  Articles  of  agreement. 

The  secret  article  (No.  6)  will  be  accepted,  but  a further  communica- 
tion will  be  sent  relieving  the  arrangement  of  any  doubt  as  to  my  ac- 
knowledging the  Corwin  treaty  of  extradition.  These  arrangements,  if 
properly  carried  out,  will  insure  the  peace  of  the  frontier,  and  I shall 
take  care  that  they  are  fulfilled  by  both  sides.  I shall  at  once  issue  the 
necessary  orders  to  comply  with  my  portion  of  the  agreement. 

I regret  to  say  that  there  still  remains  a cause  of  difficulty  that  I can- 
not settle  and  which  will  inevitably  tend  to  trouble.  I have  lost  15  men 
(conscripts)  by  desertion  in  the  last  three  days;  they  cross  the  river 
(which  is  very  low)  notwithstanding  all  my  vigilance,  and  when  in 
Mexico  are  protected  by  the  United  States  consul  and  made  to  take  an 
oath  of  allegiance  and  service,  upon  which  they  are  fed  and  clothed  until 
they  can  be  shipped  to  the  United  States.  I have  had  interviews  with 
the  Mexican  authorities  on  the  subject,  and  they  say  that  the  consul 


/ 


992 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVn. 


asserts  that  he  does  no  more  than  extend  that  aid  and  comfort  to  Ameri- 
can citizens  in  distress  which  they  have  a right  to  claim  from  him  and 
denies  that  he  enlists  them  for  the  army,  but  the  fact  is  that  his  house 
is  a recruiting  office  for  the  Lincoln  Government  and  will  continue  to 

The  authorities  of  Tamaulipas  are  in  dread  of  the  United  States  au- 
thorities and  would  rather  offend  us  than  them,  and  will  not  give  up 
our  deserters.  The  result  of  this  I very  much  fear  will  be  that  I shall 
lose  a large  proportion  of  my  men,  for  the  facility  of  escape  and  im- 
punity thereof  will  cause  many  a good  soldier  to  desert  his  colors  who 
otherwise  would  not.  I confess  that  my  position  is  annoying.  I know 
the  importance  of  this  trade  to  our  Government  and  people  and  the 
propriety  of  doing  nothing  to  attract  unnecessarily  the  attention  of  the 
Federal  Government  to  it,  but  I must  either  take  my  men  back  by  force 
or  submit  to  the  mortification  of  seeing  my  command  demoralized. 

I find  great  difficulty  in  deciding  this  point— the  important  benefits  we 
may  soon  derive  from  the  Mexican  authorities,  as  contained  in  my  late 
communication  to  you,  will  be  lost  to  us  perhaps  by  any  rupture  of 
friendly  relations,  and  it  is  more  important  than  the  miserable  creatures 
who  are  leaving  their  colors;  yet  my  officers  are  restive  and  look  to  me 
for  such  action  as  will  put  a stop  to  this  matter.  I inform  the  general 
of  this  that  he  may  be  advised  of  what  is  passing,  and  assure  him  that 
I will  be  as  forbearing  as  possible  in  view  of  all  the  consequences  at- 
tending a violent  attempt  to  settle  this  matter. 

I inclose  a letter  from  Captain  Benavides,  from  which  will  be  seen 
that  matters  are  quiet  on  the  upper  line.  I shall  proceed  in  a few  days 
to  visit  all  the  posts  on  the  line  to  Laredo  and  see  that  my  treaty  with 
Governor  Lopez  is  put  in  force. 

An  officer  of  General  Banks’  staff  has  arrived  from  the  United  States; 
he  has  had  interviews  with  the  Mexican  authorities,  but  I have  not  as- 


certained what  is  his  business. 

It  may  occur  to  the  general  that  a publication  of  the  agreement  be- 
tween the  respective  authorities  may  serve  to  quiet  the  fears  of  the 


people  of  the  frontier. 

With  great  respect, 


H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , February  18,  1863. 

His  Excellencv  Don  Albino  Lopez, 

Military  and  Civil  Commandant  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas , 

Matamoras,  Mexico : 

Your  Excellency  : I have  the  honor  of  inclosing  to  Your  Excellency 
the  basis  of  a convention,  which  I have  no  doubt  will  receive  your  fa- 
vorable attention,  as  they  have  been  suggested  by  the  deep  conviction 
I feel  concerning  the  benefits  which  would  ensue  to  the  frontiers  of 
both  nations  if  they  are  adopted,  and  if,  when  adopted,  they  are  carried 
out  in  a spirit  of  good  faith  and  fraternity. 

It  affords  me  pleasure  to  notice  that  your  perspicacity  has  penetrated 
the  fact  that  all  the  disagreements  hitherto  arising  between  the  author- 
ities of  both  lines  have  been  caused  by  a want  of  unity  in  the  pursuit 
of  malefactors  and  the  restitution  of  stolen  property,  from  which  it  has 
happened  that,  notwithstanding  the  prudence  which  might  be  observed, 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


993 


the  peaceful  citizens  suffered  irreparable  injuries,  the  authorities  them- 
selves descended  to  recriminations,  and  the  minds  of  all  were  embit- 
tered by  mutual  suspicions,  whilst  in  the  midst  of  all  this  trouble  the 
only  true  responsible  parties  took  advantage  of  the  impunity  ottered 

them  by  a contiguous  territory.  , 

But  the  propositions  which  I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  Your  bxcel- 
lency  are  intended  to  obviate  these  difficulties  by  at  once  establishing 
an  understanding  between  the  authorities,  strengthening  the  union  ol 
the  inhabitants,  and  striking  terror  in  the  minds  of  those  outlaws  who 
overrun  this  frontier,  as  if  it  were  a territory  set  aside  for  the  purposes 
of  the  first  man  who  should  see  fit  to  make  use  of  a pretext  as  a cause 
and  a crime  as  a motto. 

Prompted  by  these  feelings  I transmit  to  Your  Excellency  the  basis  to 
which  I allude,  relying  confidently  that  the  reciprocity  which  distin- 
tinguishes  them  will  receive  at  the  hands  of  Your  Excellency  the  adop- 
tion which  I sincerely  desire.  „ - 

With  these  motives  I protest  to  Your  Excellency  the  assurances  ol 
my  particular  esteem  and  distinguished  consideration^  ^ ^ ^ 

Brigadier- General. 


[Sub-inclosure.  ] 

1st.  The  Mexican  and  Confederate  forces  will  extend  mutual  aid  in 
pursuing  those  who  may  attempt  to  pass  from  this  bank  to  the  other 
of  the  Bio  Bravo  for  the  purpose  of  committing  depredations,  and 
to  that  effect  the  respective  commanders  will  give  each  other  such 
notice  as  they  may  deem  necessary,  and  when  the  force  of  either  nation 
prove  insufficient  to  carry  out  the  pursuit  to  the  full  result  expected 
from  it,  the  required  help  shall  be  immediately  furnished  by  the  other 
nation ; and  should  it  be  necessary  for  the  troops  of  either  Govern- 
ment to  cross  the  Rio  Grande,  that  without  loss  of  time  in  the  pursuit 
of  malefactors,  Indians,  &c.,  the  corresponding  notice  shall  be  given  to 
the  military  authorities  of  the  nearest  town. 

A sufficient  number  of  well-armed  troops  shall  be  stationed  at  Eey- 
nosa,  Camargo,  Mier,  and  Guerrero  by  the  State  of  Tamaulipas,  and 
at  Edinburg,  Bio  Grande  City,  and  Carrizo  by  the  Confederate  States. 
It  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  officers  to  guard  the  line,  especially  at  the 
ferries  on  the  river,  as  also  control  the  boats  used  in  crossing  persons 
from  one  side  to  the  other;  and  there  shall  be  adopted  such  a system 
of  vigilance  and  espionage  as  shall  keep  the  authorities  infoimed  o 
any  movements  intended  against  Texas  or  Tamaulipas,  so  that  the  said 
authorities  may  respectively  give  each  other  timely  notice  thereof. 

2d.  Persons"  crossing  from  the  Mexican  territory  to  the  fetate  ol 
Texas  or  from  the  State  of  Texas  to  the  Mexican  territory  shall  take 
with  them  a passport,  signed  by  the  military  authorities  of  the  re- 
spective frontiers,  to  be  given  free  of  charge.  Those  who  are  found 
without  that  document,  if  unknown,  shall  be  held  as  suspicious,  and 
consequently  detained  until  they  prove  who  and  wdiat  they  are,  and 
should  they  prove  to  be  political  refugees  from  either  side  they  shall 
be  considered  dangerous,  and  forced  to  take  up  their  residence  at  not 
less  than  30  leagues  distant  from  the  frontier,  with  no  privilege  ot 
returning  to  it  without  special  authority  from  the  Governor  ot  lamau- 
lipas  or  the  general  commanding  Confederate  troops. 

3d.  Any  stock  taken  from  either  side  of  the  river  to  the  other  shall 

63  R r— vol  XV 


994 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chat.  XXYII. 


be  accompanied  by  a permit  from  tbe  military  authorities,  which  shall 
state  tbe  name  of  the  conductor  or  owner,  the  mark  or  brand,  and  the 
number  of  head ; and  the  stock  which  shall  be  crossed  into  Texas  or 
Mexico  without  this  requisite  shall  be  detained  until  it  is  ascertained 
whence  it  proceeds,  and  if  it  should  prove  to  be  stolen  property  it 
shall  be  turned  over  to  the  military  authority  of  the  State  whence  the 
theft  was  committed  to  be  restored  to  the  owners,  and  proceedings 
shall  be  had  against  the  person  assuming  to  be  the  owner  or  conductor. 

4th.  The  authorities  of  Tamaulipas  will  issue  the  necessary  orders  to 
the  commanders  of  the  line  of  that  State  for  the  arrest  and  trial  of  the 
ringleader,  Octaviano  Zapata,  and  the  other  persons  composing  his 
band  of  robbers. 

5th.  The  authorities  of  Tamaulipas  shall  do  all  in  their  power  to 
recover  the  property  stolen  from  the  Confederate  States  train  by  the 
band  of  Zapata,  and  should  they  not  succeed  in  so  doing  they  shall 
make  the  persons  arrested  responsible  for  the  value  thereof: 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Mil.  Commandancy  State  of  Tamaulipas,  War  Dept., 

February  22,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee, 

Commanding  Line  of  the  Bravo  : 

Sir:  I have  had  the  honor  of  receiving  the  propositions  which  you 
inclosed  with  your  polite  note  dated  the  18tli  instant.  As  I agree  per- 
fectly with  your  sentiments,  I entertain  the  hope  that  the  respective 
inhabitants  and  authorities  of  the  two  frontiers,  founding  their  relations 
on  their  mutual  interest,  will  hereafter  extend  to  each  other  the  good 
offices  due  between  contiguous  countries.  In  this  view  I have  no  ob- 
jection to  accept  the  basis  I have  referred  to.  One  of  the  clauses  of  the 
Constitution  of  the  Republic  forbids  the  States  of  the  Confederation 
from  celebrating  treaties  with  foreign  nations,  so  that  the  acts  of  the 
authorities  of  both  sides,  directed  to  the  maintenance  of  confidence  and 
to  prevent  the  crossing  from  one  side  of  the  river  to  the  other  of  bands 
of  malefactors  with  the  object  of  committing  depredations  under  pretext 
of  a political  principle,  will  be  considered  by  the  Mexican  authorities 
only  as  acts  of  mutual  deference  under  the  character  of  good  offices, 
while  the  fact  of  official  notes  having  been  passed  between  the  authori- 
ties of  your  line  and  this  office  will  in  nowise  vary  the  nature  of  these 
acts. 

The  ideas  suggested  by  you  to  guard  the* two  frontiers  against  the 
attempts  of  evil-doers  and  Indians  are  admissible,  although  I think  it 
necessary  to  establish  the  meaning  of  the  wards  which  you  use,  and 
which  in  my  opinion  leave  openings  or  carry  some  confusion  owing  to 
their  extreme  latitude. 

I rejoice  to  see  that,  prompted  by  the  good  faith  and  fealty  which 
distinguish  your  acts  as  well  as  by  the  desire  to  insure  a durable  tran- 
quillity for  the  peaceful  inhabitants  and  to  punish  those  who  in  dis- 
obedience of  all  authority  commit  hostilities  on  the  property  of  others, 
you  have  endeavored,  understanding  that  the  good  offices  rendered  by 
the  authorities  should  be  mutual,  so  to  act  that  both  frontiers  would 
participate  in  the  advantages  which  will  doubtless  ensue  from  the  pur- 
suit and  punishment  of  the  criminals.  This  consideration  creates  the 
belief  ill  me  that  the  first  article  will  be  reciprocal,  though  from  its 
reading  it  appears  confined  to  those  who  may  pass  from  your  side  to 
Mexico. 


Chap.  XXYIL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  995 

The  same  principle  of  reciprocity  which  has  guided  you  requires  an 
addition  to  the  fifth  article.  You  are  informed  that  this  city  suffered  a 
siege  during  three  months,  in  which  many  fortunes  were  destroyed, 
merchandise  having  been  taken  out  which  were  partly  carried  into 
Texas,  and  as  the  proposition  contained  in  said  article  includes  past 
acts,  it  also  embraces  these  goods,  stolen  from  this  city  by  persons  who 
acted  under  the  pretext  of  a political  principle. 

The  second  article  is  of  such  latitude  in  its  application  as  to  give  rise 
to  objections  worthy  of  consideration.  I suppose  that  in  desiring  the 
absence  of  political  refugees  from  the  frontier  it  is  for  the  purpose  of 
preventing  their  influence  from  disturbing  tranquillity  or  hindering  in 
some  other  way  the  action  of  the  authorities  of  Texas  or  Tamaulipas. 
In  this  view  it  is  susceptible  of  a limitation  by  applying  only  to  those 
persons  who  in  fact  may  violate  the  neutrality  of  either  territory,  in 
which  case,  upon  the  proper  application  being  made  to  the  satisfaction 
of  the  State  in  which  the  refugees  may  reside,  steps  shall  be  taken  in 
conformity  to  that  article. 

The  fourth  article  refers  to  a duty  which  the  Mexican  authorities 
have  not  endeavored  to  evade.  On  the  contrary,  they  have  intended 
the  capture  of  Zapata’s  band  since  the  publication  of  this  man’s  pur- 
poses. Their  policy  is  founded  on  the  observance  of  the  principles  of 
the  strictest  neutrality  in  the  contest  between  the  Southern  and  North- 
ern States,  and  it  was  their  duty  to  arrest  those  who  should  arm  on  the 
Mexican  soil  with  a view  to  taking  part  in  that  struggle.  You  will 
therefore  perceive  that  the  acceptance  of  the  said  article  would  give 
countenance  to  the  calumnious  statements  made  against  the  Mexican 
authorities,  and  cause  the  belief  that  any  subsequent  prosecution  of 
Zapata  and  his  band  was  owing  to  your  demand  and  that  this  demand 
was  necessary  to  induce  the  issuance  of  the  corresponding  orders. 
Actuated  from  the  beginning  by  the  best  feelings  in  the  suppression  of 
the  nuclei  of  bands  to  depredate  on  Texas  I took  the  steps  that  were 
to  guard  against  the  threatened  danger,  among  which  is  that  referred 
to  in  the  fourth  article.  It  was  not  necessary  that  the  Texan  authori- 
ties should  make  a demand,  because  the  measures  taken  were  the  se- 
quence of  the  principles  which  regulated  the  action  of  the  Mexican 
Government.  They  were  required  of  me  by  a duty  of  neutrality,  and 
will  always  be  the  result  of  an  obligation  which  existed  previous  to  the 
exchange  of  communications  between  you  and  this  commandancy. 

These  reflections,  which  affect  the  decorum  and  good  name  of  the 
authorities  of  the  Eepublic,  make  me  hope  that  you  will  withdraw  the 
article,  as  the  Mexican  authorities  will  not  thereby  be  relieved  from  the 
observance  of  strict  neutrality  and  the  consequences  which  this  prin- 
ciple carries  with  it. 

With  these  light  modifications  1 have  no  objection  to  accept  your 
ideas,  which  are  the  more  acceptable  as  the  authorities  of  both  fron- 
tiers, by  extending  to  each  other  their  good  offices,  will  insure  tran- 
quillity, re-establish  confidence,  and  destroy  the  elements  of  anarchy 
and  desolation  which  have  blasted  the  towns  of  the  Mexican  line. 

Be  pleased  to  accept,  sir,  the  assurances  of  my  esteem  and  distin- 
guished consideration. 

Liberty  and  reform.  Heroic  Matamoras. 

J A.  LOPEZ. 


996  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Mil.  Commandancy  State  of  Tamaulipas,  War  Dept., 

February  23,  1863.  1 

General  H.  P.  Bee, 

Commanding  Western  District , State  of  Texas : 

Sir  : The  request  you  have  made  privately  to  me  that  persons  ac- 
cused of  theft  be  delivered  up  meets  with  no  objection  on  my  part  as 
long  as  the  principle  of  reciprocity  is  observed.  During  the  last  year 
the  Government  of  the  Eepublic  made  a treaty  of  extradition  with  the 
American  Union.  This  treaty  is  a law  to  the  State  of  Tamaulipas,  but 
not  being  recognized  by  the  State  of  Texas,  it  was  destined  to  remain 
unfilled  by  the  authorities  of  the  Mexican  frontier  line.  Therefore, 
when  establishing  reciprocity  in  the  delivery  of  criminals,  the  authori- 
ties of  Tamaulipas  proceed  in  compliance  with  a law  of  the  Eepublic. 
By  that  law  every  individual  accused  of  embezzlement,  theft,  cattle  or 
horse  stealing,  or  petty  larceny  of  goods  or  property  worth  $20  or 
more,  if  the  crime  is  committed  in  the  frontier  States  or  Territories, 
shall  be  delivered  to  the  authorities  of  the  place  in  which  the  offense 
was  committed  when  the  fact  of  the  commission  of  the  crime  shall  be 
proved  in  such  a manner  that  according  to  the  laws  of  the  country  where 
the  fugitive  or  accused  may  be  they  would  be  legally  arrested  and  tried 
if  they  had  committed  the  crime  in  the  latter  country.  These  consider- 
ations decide  my  course. 

Whenever  you  inform  me  that  you  will  proceed  against  those  who  in 
the  future  may  be  accused  of  the  offenses  contained  in  the  latter  portion 
of  the  foregoing  paragraph,  the  Mexican  authorities  will  act  in  accord- 
ance thereto,  it  being  well  understood  that  the  restriction  established 
in  the  fifteenth  article  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Eepublic  remains  in 
full  force  as  to  criminals  who  may  have  been  in  a state  of  slavery  in 
your  State. 

Be  pleased,  sir,  to  accept  therefore  the  assurances  of  my  esteem  and 
consideration. 

Liberty  and  reform.  Heroic  Matamoras. 

A.  LOPEZ. 


[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

Mil.  Commandancy  State  of  Tamaulipas,  War  Dept., 

February  23, 1863. 

General  H.  P.  Bee, 

Commanding  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas : 

Sir  : In  pursuance  of  the  ideas  expressed  by  me  in  my  note  dated 
yesterday  and  in  the  interview  I had  to-day  with  you  I have  the  honor 
of  inclosing  the  basis  according  to  which,  in  my  opinion,  the  authori- 
ties of  the  States  of  Tamaulipas  and  Texas  should  extend  their  good 
offices  to  each  other.  These  articles  insure  tranquillity  for  both  fron- 
tiers and  protect  them  from  any  attempt  to  depredate  on  the  honest 
inhabitants  and  their  property.  They  re-establish  confidence,  and 
leave  the  law  to  follow  its  course  without  hinderance  against  the  guilty. 
I do  not  doubt  that  these  considerations  will  induce  you  to  accept  the 
said  basis  as  the  rule  which  shall  govern  the  relations  of  the  two  fron- 
tiers. 

Please  accept  the  considerations  of  my  esteem. 

Liberty  and  reform.  Heroic  Matamoras. 


A.  LOPEZ. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


997 


[In closure  No.  5.J 

Articles  of  an  agreement  concluded  between  the  civil  and  military  com- 
mandant of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas , Don  Albino  Lopez , and  Hamilton 

P.  Bee , brigadier-general , Confederate  States  Army , commanding  the 

Western  Sub-District  of  Texas. 

Article  1.  The  Mexican  and  Confederate  forces  will  extend  mutual 
aid  in  pursuing  persons  who  may  attempt  to  pass  from  one  hank  of  the  Rio 
Bravo  to  the  other,  for  the  purpose  of  committing  depredations,  and  to 
that  effect  the  respective  commanders  will  give  each  other  such  notice 
as  they  may  deem  necessary,  and  when  the  forces  of  either  nation  prove 
insufficient  to  carry  out  the  pursuit  to  the  full  result  expected  from  it 
the  required  help  shall  be  immediately  furnished  by  those  of  the  other 
nation ; and  should  it  be  necessary  for  the  troops  of  either  Government 
to  cross  the  Rio  Grande  without  loss  of  time  in  the  pursuit  of  malefac- 
tors, Indians,  &c.,  the  corresponding  notice  shall  be  given  to  the  nearest 
military  authorities. 

A sufficient  number  of  well-armed  troops  shall  be  stationed  at  Reynosa, 
Camargo,  Mier,  and  Guerrero  by  the  State  of  Tamaulipas,  and  at  Edin- 
burg, Rio  Grande  City,  and  Carrizo  by  the  Confederate  States,  whose 
duty  it  shall  be  to  guard  the  line,  especially  at  the  ferries  on  the  river, 
as  also  to  control  the  boats  used  in  crossing  persons  from  one  side  to 
the  other;  and  there  shall  be  adopted  such  a system  of  vigilance  and 
observation  as  shall  keep  the  authorities  informed  of  any  movements 
intended  against  Texas  or  Tamaulipas,  so  that  the  said  authorities  may 
respectively  give  each  other  timely  notice  thereof. 

Art.  2.  Persons  crossing  from  the  Mexican  territory  to  the  State  of 
Texas  or  from  the  State  of  Texas  to  the  Mexican  territory  shall  take  with 
them  passports,  signed  by  the  civil  or  military  authorities  of  the  respective 
frontiers,  to  be  given  free  of  charge.  Those  who  are  found  without  such 
documents,  if  unknown,  shall  be  held  as  suspicious,  and  consequently 
detained  until  they  prove  who  and  what  they  are;  and  if  their  object 
should  prove  to  be  the  disturbance  of  the  tranquillity  of  either  State  or 
the  hinderance  of  the  action  of  their  authorities  they  shall  be  sent  to  a 
distance  into  the  interior  not  under  30  leagues,  with  no  privilege  of  re- 
turning to  it  without  special  authority  from  the  Governor  of  Tamaulipas 
or  the  general  commanding  Confederate  troops.  The  political  refugees 
now  in  either  frontier  or  hereafter  to  be  near  the  same,  who  may  en- 
deavor to  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  either  side  or  to  hinder  the  action 
of  the  authorities,  upon  proper  representations  being  made  to  the  satis- 
faction of  the  State  wherein  they  may  be  shall  be,  treated  in  like 
manner. 

Art.  3.  Any  stock  taken  from  either  side  of  the  river  to  the  other 
shall  be  accompanied  by  a permit  from  the  civil  or  military  authorities, 
which  shall  state  the  name  of  the  conductor  or  owner,  the  mark  or 
brand,  and  the  number  of  head  ; and  the  stock  which  shall  be  crossed 
into  Texas  or  Mexico  without  this  requisite  shall  be  detained  until  it 
is  ascertained  whence  obtained,  and  if  it  should  prove  to  be  stolen  prop- 
erty it  shall  be  turned  over  to  the  authorities  of  the  State  where  the 
theft  was  committed  to  be  restored  to  the  owners,  and  proceedings 
shall  be  had  against  the  persons  assuming  to  be  the  owners  or  con- 
ductors. 

Art.  4.  The  authorities  of  Tamaulipas  shall  do  all  in  their  power  to 
recover  the  property  stolen  from  the  Confederate  States  train  by  the 
band  of  Zapata,  and  should  they  not  succeed  in  so  doing  they  shall 


998  w.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL  * 

make  the  persons  arrested  responsible  for  the  value  thereof.  Likewise  i 
the  authorities  of  Texas  will  do  all  in  their  power  to  recover  any  property  j 
stolen  from  the  Government  of  the  Bepublic  by  the  forces  under  Jose  j 
Ma.  Carrazal  during  the  last  contest  maintained  by  him  at  the  end  ol  I 
year  before  last  and  the  beginning  of  last  year  in  the  territory  ot  the  j 

State  of  Tamaulipas.  . _ „ or,v  1 

Signed  by  the  contracting  parties  at  their  respective  offices  the  Zoth  1 

day  of  the  month  of  February,  18G3.  , 

[In closure  No.  6.] 

An  additional  and  secret  article  of  the  agreement  concluded  between  the 
civil  and  military  commandant  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas , Don  Albino  i 
Lopez,  and  Hamilton  P.  Bee,  brigadier-general,  Confederate  Army,  com-  j 
manding  the  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas. 

Any  person  who  may  commit  the  offense  of  murder,  arson,  embezzle- 
ment, robbery,  cattle  or  horse  stealing,  or  larceny  of  chattels  or  per- 
sonal property  of  the  value  of  $20  or  more  in  either  of  the  two  States,  ! 
and  who  shali  escape  to  the  other,  shall  be  delivered  over  to  the  author-  i 
ities  of  the  place  where  the  offense  was  committed  when  the  commis- 
sion of  the  same  shall  be  proved  in  such  a manner  that,  according  to  the 
laws  of  the  State  where  the  fugitive  and  accused  person  may  be  tound, 
he  would  be  lawfully  arrested  and  tried  if  he  had  committed  the  crime 

in  that  State.  , . , . „ ,, 

Signed  by  the  contracting  parties  at  their  respective  offices  the  2oth 

day  of  the  month  of  February,  1863. 


Headquarters  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , February  26,  1863. 

Don  Albino  Lopez, 

Civil  and  Military  Commandant  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas , 

Mat  am  or  as,  Mexico : 


Sir:  I 


have  the  honor  to  inclose  the  articles  of  agreement  for 


the 


pacification  of  the  frontier,  to  be  in  force  when  the  signatures  are  ex- 
changed, which  are  in  substance  the  same  as  those  received  from  jour 

office  with  your  last  communication.  . 

In  accordance  with  the  observations  submitted  to  me  in  your  polite 
note  alluded  to  concerning  the  extradition  of  criminals,  I offer  a prop- 
osition, herewith  inclosed,  wholly  conforming  to  the  ideas  suggestec  y 
you,  at  the  same  time  protesting  that  I cannot  recognize  the  existence 
of  an  extradition  treaty  between  the  United  States  and  the  Mexican 
Eepublic  as  binding  on  the  Confederate  States.  It  suffices  me  that  the 
obiect  of  our  agreement  be  honorable  and  beneficial  to  both  the  sections 
we  represent,  without  inquiring  into  any  motives  which  may  influence 
the  Mexican  authorities  founded  upon  the  relations  existing  between 
them  and  a nation  with  whom  we  are  at  war. 

I repeat,  sir,  the  assurance  of  my  esteem  and  distinguished  consider 

tion-  H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier-General , Provisional  Army. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


999 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La.,  February  27,  18G3. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Gantt, 

Commanding  Cavalry: 

Colonel:  The  major-general  commanding  directs  me  to  inform  you 
that  he  lias  information  that  the  enemy  will  try  and  cut  off  your  ad- 
vance pickets  around  Baton  Bouge.  This  information  is  reliable. 

He  also  has  information  that  the  enemy  are  sending  scouting  parties 
out  toward  Bayou  Manchac  in  the  night  of  100  men.  They  were  out  on 
last  Thursday  and  Friday. 

The  major  general  commanding  directs  that  you  make  a thorough  ex- 
amination of  the  capture  of  Captain  McLean  and  Sergeant  Moore,  which 
you  will  report  to  these  headquarters. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  District,  &c., 

February  27,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , C.  S.  A. : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  Sibley’s  brigade  has  been 
on  the  march  since  the  10th  February,  but  is  progressing  very  slowly, 
on  account  of  the  swollen  condition  of  the  streams  in  this  district  and 
the  impassable  condition  of  the  roads.  The  report  of  Col.  James  Beily, 
commanding  the  brigade,  explaining  the  cause  of  his  delay,  has  been 
sent  to  Lieutenant-General  Holmes  at  Little  Bock,  and  also  to  Lieut. 
Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith  at  Alexandria,  La.,  with  the  request  that  it  be 
transmitted  to  you. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGBUDEB, 

Major-General , Commanding . 

The  movement  of  Sibley’s  brigade  to  Louisiana  has  not  been  impeded 
by  any  order  from  these  headquarters,  but,  on  the  contrary,  every  effort 
has  been  made  to  facilitate  and  hasten  its  speedy  march  to  Opelousas. 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGBUDEB, 

Major- General , Commanding . 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , February  28,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  B.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Jaclcson , Miss. : 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  the  report  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Brand  of  the  gunboat  engagement  below  Vicksburg  on  the  night  of  the 
24th.* 

I have  also  to  report  that  I sent  an  expedition  under  Colonel  Miles 
to  meet  an  advance  of  the  enemy  from  Bosedale  toward  Morgauza. 

* Reference  is  to  Brand’s  report  of  the  capture  of  the  Indianola.  It  will  appear  in 
Series  I,  Vol.  XXIV. 


1000 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Colonel  Miles  landed  near  False  River  and  marched  inland  toward  tbe 
Fordoche.  The  enemy  immediately  retreated  to  Rosed  ale  and  thence 
toward  Indian  Village.  Colonel  Miles  has  returned. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major - General . 


Jackson,  Miss.,  February  28,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner,  Port  Hudson : 

It  is  reported,  but  I have  no  positive  information,  that  it  was  not  a 
gunboat  which  passed  Vicksburg  on  night  of  24th.  Should  you  learn 
certainly  that  it  was  not,  send  all  stores  for  Vicksburg  by  Big  Black. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  » Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

No.  88.  ] Houston , Tex.,  February  28,  1863. 

I.  Major-General  Magruder  being  about  to  leave  Houston  on  a tour 
of  observation  and  inspection  of  the  defenses  of  the  coast  and  the  west- 
ern part  of  the  State,  all  persons  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  State  having 
public  business  with  the  commanding  general  are  referred  to  Brig.  Gen. 
W.  R.  Scurry,  commanding  Eastern  Sub-District. 

# # # * * # # 

III.  The  whole  of  the  Arizona  Brigade  will  proceed  at  once  to  West 
Bernard,  and  on  arriving  at  that  place  the  commanding  officer  of  the 
brigade  will  report  the  same  to  these  headquarters. 

#####*# 

By  command  of  Major-General  Magruder : 

E.  P.  TURNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Third  Military  District , Department  of  Mississippi  and  East 
Louisiana,  Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding , for  month  of  February , 
1863. 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

2 

© 

o 

sa 

o 

. 

£3 

<£> 

and  aiaff  

13 

320 

197 

279 

166 

15 
4,  995 
3,  340 
3,548 
3,  674 

16 
6,  849 
4,  066 
4,  509 
5, 166 

Hftall ’s  hvi  cra.d  ft 

3, 728 
2,490 
2, 438 
2,  336 

Gregg’s  brigade 

Maxey’s  brigade. .................................................. 

Trnnpa  not,  VvHgadftfl 

Total 

975 

10,  992 

15,  572 

20,  606 

Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1001 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  District  of  the  Gulf,  Maj.  Gen.  Simon  B.  Buchner , C.  S.  Army, 
commanding,  for  month  of  February,  1863. 


Command. 


General  staff. 

Mackall’s  division : 

Infantry 

Artillery 

Cavalry 

District  East  Gulf : 

Infantry 

Artillery 

Cavalry 

Marianna  Dragoons 

Total 


Present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Effective  total. 

Total. 

i Aggregate. 

13 

13 

2, 564 

3,  052 

3,  228 

3,  611 

2,  692 

2,  868 

3,  009 

3, 372 

571 

610 

647 

978 

1,  208 

1,262 

1,  337 

1,499 

123 

133 

138 

149 

1,089 

1, 176 

1,224 

1,  461 

55 

58 

61 

72 

8,  302 

9,159 

9,  657 

11, 155 

Abstract  from  Return  of  the  District  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona,  commanded  by 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  Bankhead  Magruder,  for  February,  1863  ( headquarters  Houston,  Tex.). 


Commanding  officer. 

Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Pieces  of 
lery. 

artil- 

j Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

Officers. 

i 

Heavy. 

Eield. 

n 

j Mountain. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee 

Western  Sub-District  of 

151 

2, 406 

11 

23 

1 

3,014 

4,  244 

Texas. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  R.  Scurry. . 

Eastern  Sub-District  of 

258 

4,  024 

5, 196 

7.  311 

Texas. 

Grand  total 

409 

6,  430 

11 

23 

1 

8,210 

11,  555 

Xote  from  Return. — Tn  Western  Sub-District  no  returns  received  from  three  companies  cavalry, 
aggregate  about  240  ; and  none  from  two  small  companies  for  border  defense.  In  Eastern  Sub-District 
no  returns  from  five  regiments  cavalry ; aggregate  about  3,500. 


On  Board  Steamer  Alamo, 

From  Liberty  up  Trinity  ( near  Gosatchie  Village ),  March  2,  18G3. 
Major-General  Magruder, 

Commanding  District  of  Texas , &c. : 

General  : Tlie  defenses  of  our  coast  lines  form  the  absorbing  thought 
with  me  till  I think  and  dream  of  little  else.  Do  not  think  me  impor- 
tunate if  I repeat  to  you  the  same  thing  in  varied  forms.  I feel  great 
confidence  now  that  no  attempt  will  be  made  to  invade  Texas  until  the 
coast  region  shall  have  dried  up  to  admit  of  army  transportation — say 
the  1st  of  May.  Meantime  of  course  you  will  not  be  idle.  But  what 
shall  be  done  at  Pass  Cavallo  ? My  answer  would  be,  u Resume  the  Port 
Esparanza  and  prepare  for  the  defense  of  the  Pass.” 

Let  me  suggest  the  method,  and  this  will  appear  less  objectionable 
and  will  meet  the  difficulties  Major  Shea  presented.  For  a supply  of 


1002 


v.  . 

W.  FLA  , S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

lumber  take  the  inferior  and  vacant  buildings  in  Indianola  and  recon- 
struct tbc  bridges  down  the  Saluria  Bayou;  use  a barge  there  for  a 
ferry  as  before;  conscript  300  negroes  and  make  the  road  complete  (in 
two  weeks)  from  Indianola,  and  then  carry  the  guns  back  to  Fort  Espe- 
ranza,  repair  and  reoccupy  it.  Meantime  plant  the  additional  torpedoes  1 
in  the  channel  below  the  fort  and  especially  down  near  the  bar.  Then, 
general,  from  a point  on  the  bay  just  north  of  Shea’s,  or  Big  Bayou, 
construct  a military  road  back  through  the  prairie  toward  Green  Lake,  | 
that  in  retreat  the  guns  and  wagons  may  get  out  of  range  from  the  gun- 
boats that  might  pursue.  Bearing  in  mind  that  all  the  guns  we  have 
for  that  Pass  are  siege  guns,  I believe  they  could  be  saved  if  we  should 
be  overpowered ; but  I have  faith  that  torpedoes  and  pluck,  a daunt- 1 
less  front,  will  keep  off  the  enemy,  unless  he  has  a very  powerful  navy; 
and  resolves  to  risk  the  destruction  of  many  vessels  and  men  in  taking 
possession. 

I have  just  read  this  sentiment  from  Judge  Tucker’s  Partisan  Leader,  j 
and  it  expresses  my  own  in  respect  to  the  abandonment  of  all  our 
coast:  “Bread  without  salt  is  more  than  men  deserve  who  surrender 
or  retire  before  the  enemy  without  a fight.”  The  sentiment  is  forcibly 
to  the  point,  for  this  portion  of  the  coast  is  in  front  of  our  salt  flats. 
I hold  the  same  or  similar  views  in  regard  to  the  reoccupation  of  Shell 
Banks.  # j 

Place  torpedoes  in  the  Pass  Aransas  at  suitable  opportunities  and  re- 
occupy the  fort;  complete  the  dike  to  the  mainland  by  using  the  dredge, 
and  place  an  adequate  force  upon  the  island  to  man  the  guns  and  gar- 
rison the  fort,  and  devote  them,  if  necessary.  We  shall  then  reopen 
the  line  of  inland  trade,  and  bring  salt  and  other  freight  up  and  take 
cotton  down,  as  before. 

In  discussing  matters  on  that  portion  of  the  coast  I am  reminded  to 
refer  again  to  Major  Shea.  I learned  after  our  interview  respecting 
his  position  that  Colonel  Hobby  had  found  the  aversion  of  the  troops 
in  that  region  to  his  being  placed  over  them  was  so  intense  that  he  ex-' 
pressed  a perfect  willingness  to  waive  his  pretensions  and  take  a lieu- 
tenant-colonelcy under  Major  Shea.  Both  commands,  Corpus  and  La- 
vaca, desired  Shea  to  have  command — an  officer  of  experience  and  merit 
and  thoroughly  disciplined  soldier,  while  they  regarded  Hobby  as  hav- 
ing resorted  to  political  influence  to  supersede  or  forestall  him. 

It  would  appear  that  Hobby  regarded  the  aversion  as  insuperable, 
and  hence  his  willingness  to  take  a secondary  position.  Should  you 
upon  reflection  desire  anything  done  in  the  premises  a dispatch  would 
probably  reach  me  at  Kichmond  in  time  to  see  J udge  Gray  before  any 
action. 

The  aversion  of  a portion  of  the  planting  community  to  furnish  negroes 
or  corn  at  the  prices  fixed  for  Government  use  is  such  as  to  give  vent  to 
some  very  unpatriotic  sentiments.  The  cases  are  not  numerous,  but 
pretty  bitter.  A report  has  circulation  that  a quartermaster  bought 
axes  of  Houston  merchants,  giving  $15  each  to  men  who  had  monopo- 
lized them  at  $5  in  order  to  make  the  sale.  Objection  there  is  made  to 
pressing  from  farmers  and  supporting  extortion  in  Houston  merchants. 

I have  just  seen  Commodore  Hunter,  who  has  built  a good  flat,  and 
is  now  constructing  another  for  convenient  use  in  crossing  troops  or  the 
like.  He  appears  in  good  health  and  so  with  his  men,  though  their 
station  here,  at  a point  so  far  from  any  possible  utility,  is  a subject  of 
constant  derision  among  the  people. 

The  flood  in  this  spasmodic  river  is  subsiding  and  corn  is  being 
planted. 


1003 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


A careful  observation  of  the  river  from  its  mouth  up  lias  entirely  con- 
firmed me  in  the  opinion  I have  always  had  of  the  futility  of  any  de- 
fensive works  upon  it.  A battery  at  the  mouth  may  be  judicious,  as 
giving  to  the  people  a feeling  of  security;  but  it  is  everywhere  so  nar- 
row and  the  thickets  and  canebrakes  are  so  dense  upon  its  banks  that 
no  vessel  could  live  that  had  show  a pilot  [?].  I believe  that  all  such 
narrow  streams,  having  no  great  interests  upon  their  banks,  should  be 
kept  open  to  invite  attempts  to  navigate  them.  Sharpshooters  would 
defend  better  than  batteries.  This  river  has  no  farms  upon  its  banks 
below  Liberty,  with  two  or  three  exceptions,  and  very  few  above. 
Nothing  to  tempt  raids. 

General,  the  symptoms  are  now  promising  an  early  end  to  the  war. 
It  would  be  a subject  of  great  pride  in  our  future  history  if  we  could 
close  the  war  in  full  possession  of  all  our  coast.  Shall  we  not  attempt 
to  complete  what  you  have  so  well  inaugurated  and  carried  so  far  for- 
ward ? 


Yery  respectfully,  yours, 


0.  G.  FOBSHEY. 


At  Gamp,  March  2, 1863. 


Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General , etc.,  Houston,  Tex.: 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  inform  the  major-general  command- 
ing, &c.,  that  all  the  troops  of  this  brigade  are  now  and  have  been  on 
the  route  for  several  days,  pressing  forward  in  despite  of  high  waters 


and  the  most  atrocious  roads. 

The  first  detachment  of  Beily’s  regiment  is  in  Louisiana  before  this, 
having  been  within  50  miles  of  the  Sabine  more  than  one  week  past. 
One  company  of  Bagby7s  regiment  was  left  at  Hempstead  to  guard 
quartermaster  and  commissary  stores,  and  for  which  no  transportation 
has  been  obtained ; it  marches  to-morrow.  The  men,  in  despite  of  the 
elements,  were  in  good  health  and  spirits. 

Bespectfully,  yours, 

JAMES  BEILY, 

Commanding  Brigade. 


p.  s. — i shall  now  proceed  in  advance  of  the  troops  to  report  in  per- 
son to  Major-General  Taylor  either  at  Alexandria  or  Opelousas. 


Headquarters, 

Fort  Hudson , La .,  March  3,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Bichard  Taylor, 

Commanding  West.  District  of  Louisiana : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  the  information  of 
another  gunboat  having  passed  Vicksburg  is  erroneous.  The  river 
is  now  entirely  free  of  the  enemy  between  this  and  that  point.  The 
enemy  are  reported  to  be  again  at  Bosedale.  Information  is  not  posi- 
tive. The  enemy  at  Baton  Bouge  are  evidently  nearly  prepared  for  an 
advance  at  this  point,  and  any  day  may  bring  the  information  of  his 
putting  his  force  in  motion. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 


1004 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chat.  xxw| 


Headquarters  District  of  Texas,  &c., 

Houston , March  3,  1863.  : 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.  : 

. Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  following  extract  of  a lettel 
from  Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee,  dated  Fort  Brown,  February  15,  1863 : 


Mr.  Bustamente  arrived  herefrom  New  York  en  route  to  the  city  of  Mexico.  H 
was  sent  by  the  Government  to  purchase  arms  ill  New  York,  and  carried  letters  frod 
Mr.  Corwin.  He  lias  purchased  65,000  stand  of  arms,  and  they  are  expected  here  ver 
soon ; the  bills  of  lading  are  here  (I  mean  of  course  Matamoras),  and  the  sum  o 
$700,000  is  to  be  paid  when  the  arms  are  delivered.  An  assessment  has  been  made  oi 
each  State  in  Mexico  for  its  quota  of  the  amount,  and  I have  it  from  good  authority 
that  the  amount  will  not  be  forthcoming  and  that  not  one-half  will  be  ready  for  th* 
payment.  On  understanding  this  I made  a proposition  to  the  authorities  to  let  me  ill 
as  a partner,  and  the  answer  was,  “ If  he  can  pay  for  them  all,  we  require  all ; bu 
the  Confederate  States  shall  have  all  we  cannot  pay  for,”  with  which  I was  of  coursi^ 
much  pleased.  Now,  general,  what  shall  I do  and  how  shall  I do  it  ? The  matter  iJ 
of  great  importance  to  us  in  a political  view,  and  I shall  obtain  full  documentary  evi. 
deuce  of  the  whole  atfair,  that  they  may  through  the  proper  authority  be  laid  befon 
the  Emperor  Napoleon,  that  he  may  see  what  kind  of  a friend  he  has  in  the  Lincoln 
Government,  as  I shall  prove  the  connection  of  Corwin  with  it. 


I have  ordered  General  Bee  to  pay  for  these  arms  in  any  way  he  can 
in  coin  or  cotton.  I would  respectfully  suggest  that  sterling  be  seni 
from  Richmond,  if  to  be  had,  to  make  sure  of  the  purchase. 

I wrote  the  above  for  the  information  of  the  Secretary  of  State  as 
well  as  of  War. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

No.  91.  S Houston , March  3,  1863. 

####### 

VII.  The  command  of  the  Eastern  Sub-District  of  Texas  having  now 
devolved  upon  Brig.  Gen.  W.  R.  Scurry,  the  only  general  officer  in  that 
district,  and  Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee  being  engaged  in  matters  of  the 
greatest  importance  on  the  Rio  Grande  frontier,  where  the  presence 
ot  the  major-general  commanding  is  also  required,  Brigadier-General 
Scurry  will  hurry  on  the  preparations  for  the  defense  of  Galveston  and 
the  Sabine  River,  and  will  use  his  thorough  knowledge  of  the  resources 
of  the  country  and  all  his  energy  in  putting  the  troops  in  a state  of 
efficiency  and  the  works  in  good  condition.  At  the  same  time  it  is  en- 
joined on  Brigadier-General  Scurry  to  cause  three  regiments  of  cavalry 
to  march  at  once  to  the  northeastern  frontier,  with  orders  to  starch  the 
country  and  take  back  to  Lieutenant-General  Holmes  in  Arkansas  all 
men  who  may  be  found  either  singly  or  in  bodies  who  have  left  that 
army  without  a proper  permission.  This  service  is  considered  to  be  of 
the  last  importance  and  will  be  vigorously  executed.  The  Quarter- 
master’s Department  will  furnish  the  necessary  transportation  to  enable 
Brigadier-General  Scurry  to  accomplish  this  purpose,  and  is  authorized 
to  impress  transportation  if  it  cannot  be  had  at  once  and  in  any  other 
way. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Magruder : 

E.  P.  TURNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


hap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1005 


General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

No.  39.  f Houston , Tex.,  March  4,  1863. 

I.  For  all  purposes  of  defense  Brigadier-General  Scurry’s  command 
fill  extend  to  Lavaca  and  Victoria,  inclusive,  during  the  absence  of 
leneral  Bee  on  the  Bio  Grande  frontier. 

# # # * * ^ * 

Bv  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  Bankhead  Magruder: 

J E.  P.  TURNER, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Jackson,  March  5,  1863. 

dajor-General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson  : 

General  : Abe  Buford  is  assigned  to  duty  in  this  department.  He 
will  be  sent  to  Port  Hudson,  and  a brigade  must  be  organized  out  of 
he  troops  now  there  from  other  brigades.  I think  the  mounted  force 
tud  two  or  three  regiments  of  infantry  call  constitute  it.  Send  desig- 
nation of  mounted  force  and  what  regiments  of  infantry  can  consti- 

iUte  lt-  J.  O.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , March  7,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  R.  Waddy, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Jackson , Miss. : 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  General  Rust  arrived  here 
>n  the  3d  instant  with  an  aggregate  present  of  2,771.  The  Sixth  Mis- 
sissippi Regiment  and  his  batteries  have  not  yet  arrived. 

A telegraph  from  General  Pemberton,  dated  the  5th,  informs  me  that 
General  Buford  will  be  assigned  to  duty  in  this  district,  and  directs  a 
irigade  to  be  organized,  consisting  of  the  “ mounted  force  and  two  or 
Free  regiments  of  infantry.”  I respectfully  represent  that  the  cavalry 
ire  encamped  at  Olive  Branch,  18  miles  from  here,  except  a small  force 
?or  the  service  of  the  post.  I do  not  understand  how  I can  make  a 
irigade  of  infantry  and  cavalry. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ? J FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 


I General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

No.  i.  } Alexandria,  La.,  March  7,  1863. 

I.  In  conformity  with  instructions  from  the  War  Department  at 
Richmond,  Va.,  dated  February  9,  1863,  the  undersigned  hereby  as- 
sumes command  of  the  Confederate  forces  west  of  the  Mississippi. 

II.  Until  further  orders  the  department  headquarters  are  established 


at  Alexandria,  La. 


E.  KIRBY  SMITH, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


1006 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYII 

Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  By  own , March  7,  1863. 

Maj.  A.  G.  Dickinson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Houston , Tex.: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  communication  of  February  26 

The  decree  prohibiting  the  export  of  goods  into  Texas  from  Mexice 
is  not  enforced  on  this  line. 

The  question  of  the  deserters  from  this  command  into  Mexico  re 
mains  unsettled $ but,  as  expressed  in  my  previous  communications,  1 
prefer  to  bear  the  injury  than  disturb  the  commercial  relations  now  ex 
isting.  The  idea  suggested  by  me  that  it  might  become  necessary  tc 
take  possession  of  Matamoras  was  solely  in  view  of  the  closing  of  thai 
port  to  our  trade  and  there  being  no  other  mode  of  obtaining  the  sup 
plies  necessary  for  the  daily  support  of  the  troops.  The  orders  here 
with  inclosed,  which  were  issued  by  the  Mexican  authorities,  will  shov 
that  they  have  entered  on  the  fulfillment  of  my  agreement  with  then* 
in  good  faith  and  with  the  best  desire  to  quiet  hostile  movements  or 
this  line. 

I ask  in  this  connection  the  approval  of  the  commanding  general  o 
the  agreement  entered  into  with  Governor  Lopez,  as  there  are  matter* 
embraced  therein  which  might  be  construed  as  interfering  with  tin 
local  authority  of  the  State  of  Texas.  I would  also  ask  that  the  com 
manding  general  will  apply  to  the  proper  authority  at  Eichmond  for 
the  privilege  of  declaring  martial  law  on  the  Rio  Grande.  The  execu 
tion  of  the  civil  law  is  a nullity,  and  yet  my  efforts  to  place  affairs  or 
the  basis  of  responsibility  to  some  authority  is  liable  to  be  thwarted  bj ,« 
the  pettifoggers  who  revel  around  the  police  courts.  The  reasons  whj 
martial  law  should  be  declared  are  apparent  and  need  not  be  repeated 
There  is  nothing  of  importance  occurring  here. 

With  great  respect,  I remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier-  General , Provisional  Army. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Military  Command  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas,  j 

Matamoras , February  28,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee, 

Comdg.  Western  Bub-District  of  Texas , Fort  Brown  ; 

The  admission  of  the  separate  proposition  which  you  have  made  nu 
regarding  the  extradition  of  those  accused  of  certain  crimes  is  in  no 
wise  objectionable  to  me  as  long  as  the  principle  of  reciprocity  is  oh 
served.  The  laws  of  the  Republic  of  Mexico  allow  the  extradition  o: 
those  who  are  accused  of  murder,  arson,  theft,  or  embezzlement,  rob 
bery,  cattle  stealing,  or  stealing  of  movable  goods  and  chattels  (petty 
larceny)  of  the  value  of  $20  or  more,  if  they  take  refuge  on  this  frontie] 
after  having  committed  some  such  crime,  and  the  fact  of  its  perpetra 
tion  having  been  evidenced  in  such  manner  that,  in  accordance  witl 
the  laws  of  the  State  in  which  the  fugitive  and  accused  person  is  en 
countered,  he  could  be  legitimately  arrested  and  tried  in  case  he  had 
committed  the  crime  iu  that  State.  Up  to  this  time  said  laws  were  sus 
pended  on  account  of  the  Mexican  authorities  not  having  been  aware 
whether  the  delivery  was  reciprocal,  but  from  the  moment  you  declare 
your  conformity  with  the  mutual  extradition  ol  those  accused  of  any  oj 
the  crimes  before  mentioned  the  laws  of  the  Republic  will  be  carried 


jHAr.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1007 


3ut  by  bolding  the  accused  who  take  shelter  on  this  frontier  subject  to 
extradition. 

Please  to  accept  the  assurance  of  my  esteem  and  distinguished  con- 
sideration. 

Liberty  and  reform. 

A.  LOPEZ. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , March  1,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Albino  Lopez, 

Governor  of  Tamaulipas , Matamoras: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
February  28,  in  which  you  inform  me  that  the  laws  of  Mexico  allow  the 
extradition  of  those  who  are  accused  of  murder,  arson,  theft,  &c.,  and 
that  so  soon  as  I shall  inform  you  that  the  rendition  of  fugitives  shall 
be  reciprocal  you  will  carry  said  laws  into  effect,  by  holding  the  accused 
who  take  shelter  on  this  frontier  subject  to  extradition. 

In  reply  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  I accept  the  propositions, 
and  will  cause  to  be  delivered  to  the  authorities  of  Mexico  all  persons 
who  may  have  committed  the  crime  of  murder,  arson,  theft,  robbery, 
cattle  stealing,  or  petty  larceny  of  the  value  of  $25  or  more  in  the 
Republic  of  Alexico  and  escaped  therefrom  to  the  State  of  Texas  upon 
the  same  being  proved  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  this  State. 

With  great  respect,  I remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier -General,  Provisional  Army. 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Military  Command  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas. 

The  citizen  Albino  Lopez,  military  commander  of  the  State  of  Ta- 
maulipas, and  invested  by  her  inhabitants  with  the  political  authority : 

Paragraph  I.  No  individual  shall  pass  from  the  Mexican  frontier  who 
has  not  a passport  issued  by  the  respective  military  authority.  This 
passport  shall  only  serve  for  one  time,  for  a stated  number  of  days  or 
perpetually ; it  being  left  to  the  judgment  of  such  authorities  to  deter- 
mine in  each  case  the  period  for  which  the  passport  shall  be  given. 

II.  No  person  shall  be  jiermitted  to  pass  the  Mexican  frontier  who 
has  not  a passport  from  the  authorities  of  the  place  from  whence  he 
proceeded. 

III.  All  those  on  the  Mexican  lines  who  possess  canoes,  skiffs,  boats 
(chalanes),  or  any  other  kind  of  means  to  cross  the  river,  will  procure 
a declaration  from  the  respective  local  authorities,  in  which  the  number 
and  class  of  the  transports  must  be  expressed. 

IY.  The  local  authorities  will  designate  the  places  in  their  munici- 
palities where  the  passage  is  jiermitted,  and  they  will  have  control  of 
the  skiffs  and  other  means  of  transport.  All  those  who  shall  cross  at 
other  places  than  those  designated  by  such  authorities  will  lose  the 
transports  and  incur  a fine  of  from  $5  to  $20. 

Y.  The  individuals  who  pass  from  one  side  to  the  other  will  exhibit 
the  passports  referred  to  in  paragraphs  1 and  2 to  the  judicial  employe 
or  the  commanding  officers  of  the  guards  which  may  be  established. 
Said  commanders  and  judicial  employes  will  be  held  responsible  if 
they  should  neglect  to  carry  out  the  pro visions  of  this  paragraph. 


1008 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  M.  MEX.  IChap.  XXVII.! 


VI.  Each  individual  who  carries  stock  from  the  limits  of  the  State  j 
of  Tamaulipas  to  those  of  Texas  shall  procure  a protection,  issued  by  : 
the  civil  authorities,  in  which  the  number,  the  name  of  the  conductor  j 
or  owner,  the  brand,  ear-marks,  the  place  from  which  he  came,  and  his  j 
destination  are  designated.  In  the  same  manner  the  person  bringing  j 
stock  from  the  limits  of  the  State  of  Texas  to  Tamaulipas  shall  be  pro- 
vided with  a like  protection. 

VII.  The  local  authorities  will  designate  the  fords  of  the  river  at.  i 
which  the  crossing  of  the  stock  must  take  place,  and  if  it  is  passed  ] 
over  at  other  crossings  than  those  named  and  established  a fine  of  from 
$1  to  $5  will  be  incurred. 

VIII.  It  will  not  be  permitted  to  inclose  stock  on  any  ranch  except 
by  previous  permission  from  the  judicial  employe.  To  be  allowed  to 
do  so  the  protection  mentioned  in  paragraph  6 must  be  first  shown. < 
The  judicial  officer  who  fails  tp  enforce  this  provision  incurs  the  re- 
sponsibility. 

IX.  The  civil  and  military  authorities  of  Matamoras,  Keynosa,  Ca- 
margo,  Mier,  Guerrero,  and  Laredo,  the  judicial  employes,  the  rural 
police,  and  the  commanders  of  detachments  will  examine  the  before- 
mentioned  protection  of  the  drivers  of  stock  passing  through  his  re- 
spective jurisdiction,  and  in  case  it  should  not  be  exhibited  they  will 
gite  notice  to  the  nearest  civil  or  military  authorities,  who  will  investi- 
gate the  state  of  the  stock. 

X.  The  civil  and  military  authorities  shall  render  an  account  to  the 
military  command  of  the  State  in  conformity  with  the  provisions  pro- 
vided for  the  carrying  out  of  the  commands  of  the  foregoing  paragraph. 

XI.  The  fines  which  may  be  received  on  account  of  the  violation  ol 
the  command  given  by  this  order  will  be  destined  for  public  instruction. 

Therefore  I command  its  printing,  publishing,  and  circulating  for  the! 
fulfillment  thereof. 

A.  LOPEZ. 

Juan  Prado,  Secretary . j 


Signal  Corps, 

Fort  Hudson , March  9,  1863. 

General  : The  following  dispatch  is  just  received  from  our  lowest 
post : 

March  8,  1863.  I 

The  late  re-enforcements  reported  to  have  arrived  at  Baton  Rouge  are  from  Grosse 
Tete.  Four  thousand  troops  came  to  Baton  Rouge  last  night  and  this  morning. 
Eight  transports  were  chartered  to  bring  more. 

Post  F. 


Kespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

PAUL 


W.  COLLEXS, 
Operator , Post  A. 


Headquarters, 
Fort  Hudson , Za.,  March  10,  1863. 


Lieutenant-Colonel  Gantt, 

Commanding  Cavalry: 

Colonel  : The  major-general  commanding  directs  that  if  the  ene- 
my advance  toward  Clinton,  La.,  you  will  harass  his  flank  and  rear  as 
much  as  possible  and  keep  him  well  advised  of  the  enemy’s  movements 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1009 


by  keeping  a small  force  in  front  to  watch  their  movements  closely.  I 
have  directed  Major  Garland  in  that  event  to  be  prepared  to  act  in  con- 
cert with  you.  I also  send  a letter  to  Major  Garland  which  you  will 
send  to  him. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 


[Inclosure.] 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La .,  March  10,  1863. 
Major  Garland,  Commanding  Cavalry: 

Major:  The  major-general  commanding  directs  that  in  the  event  of 
the  enemy’s  forward  movement  you  will  be  prepared  to  act  in  concert 
with  Colonel  Gantt. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

No.  3.  1 Alexandria , La .,  March  10,  1863. 

The  following  officers  are  announced  upon  the  staff  of  the  lieutenant- 
general  commanding,  viz : 

Personal  staff. — Capt.  J.  G.  Meem,  jr.,  aide-de-camp  ; First  Lieut.  E. 
Cunningham,  aide-de-camp  ; First  Lieut.  E.  Walworth,  volunteer  aide- 
de-camp. 

Department  staff. — Brig.  Gen.  W.  B.  Boggs,  chief  of  staff ; Capt.  J.  F. 
Belton,  assistant  adjutant-general ; Capt.  H.  P.  Pratt,  assistant  adju- 
tant-general; Col.  B.  Allston,  inspector-general;  Maj.  J.  F.  Minter, 
chief  quartermaster ; Maj.  W.  H.  Thomas,  chief  of  subsistence;  Lieut. 
Col.  John  A.  Brown,  chief  of  ordnance  and  artillery ; Surg.  S.  A.  Smith, 
medical  director. 

By  command  of  Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith : 

J.  F.  BELTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Jackson , March  11,  1863. 
General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  Chattanooga: 

General  Gardner  estimates  enemy  at  Baton  Bouge  at  least  30,000, 
preparing  to  advance  at  once.  Small  force  advanced  to  the  Comite. 
Essex  left  New  Orleans  Sunday.  Farragut,  with  Hartford,  Bichmond, 
Monongahela,  on  Monday.  All  transports  and  all  gunboats,  except 
Pensacola  and  Genesee,  gone  up  from  New  Orleans.  One  hundred  and 
tenth  New  York  Begiment  when  ordered  to  Berwick  Bay  mutinied. 

I think  there  is  no  doubt  of  an  immediate  attack.  Two  dredging 
machines  half  way  through  canal  at  Vicksburg.  I fear  it  will  succeed 
in  establishing  a battery  at  Grand  Gulf.  Biver  within  5 feet  of  high- 
water  mark  last  year ; rising  slowly.  Enemy’s  gunboats  and  trans- 
ports in  Tallahatchie  will  probably  attack  our  fort  on  Tallahatchie,  6 

64  R R — VOL  xv 


1010 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 


miles  above  Greenwood,  in 
steamboats  in  river. 


a day  or  two.  W e bave  also  cotton-clad 

J.  O.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant - General , Commanding. 


(Substance  of  this  telegraphed  from  Chattanooga  to  General  Cooper, 
March  13,  1863). 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La.,  March  11,  1863.-  I 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Gantt, 

Commanding  Cavalry : 

Colonel  : The  major-general  commanding  directs  me  to  suggest  that 
you  had  better  move  your  whole  force  toward  the  outposts,  so  as  td 
harass  the  enemy  as  much  as  possible.  This,  however,  is  merely  a sug- 
gestion, which  you  will  act  upon  according  to  your  own  judgment. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

, 

Major-General . | 


Report  of  operations  for  the  defense  of  Mobile,  Ala.,  for  the  month  of  Janl 

uary , 1863. 

Engineer  Bureau, 
Mobile,  Ala.,  March  11,  1863. 

1 

[Extracts.*] 

Fort  Morgan. — Laborers  raising  and  resodding  parapet;  taking  uj. 
railroad  to  Navy  Cove  and  substituting  wooden  rails,  the  iron  being  re 
quired  for  floating  battery  under  construction  by  Navy  Department,  j 

Lower  obstructions.— Two  steamers,  each  with  a steam  fire  engine 
have  been  engaged  in  planting  four  rows  of  heavy  piles  from  the  wes 
bank  toward  Dauphin  Island  Spit.  These  piles  are  about  10  feet  apan 
in  all  directions,  are  from  18  to  30  inches  in  diameter,  and  planted  Iron 
10  to  15  feet  deep  in  the  sand.  They  will  be  cut  oft  a foot  below  lo^ 

waiter# 

Probable  operations  of  the  month  of  February:  Continuing  the  pih 

rows  to  Dauphin  Island  Spit.  . 

Obstructions  of  main  channel  at  Fort  Morgan. — Owing  to  the  depth  o 
water  at  this  point,  the  difficulty  of  procuring  chains  and  anchors,  the 
great  specific  gravity  of  the  timber  available,  and  the  heavy  swell  anci 
strong  tide  prevalent  at  the  place  it  has  been  thought  inexpedient  t< 
attempt  the  obstruction  of  the  main  ship  channel. 

Battery  at  Grant’s  Pass.— This  battery  mounts  two  8-inch  guns  ant 
one  32-pourider  rifled.  Magazine : Some  repairs  of  magazine  have  beeii 
made  during  the  month  and  a bomb-proof  store-house  completed. 

Battery  at  Choctaw  Point  Spit.— Under  the  orders  of  the  commandi 
ing  general  a battery  to  mount  four  10-inch  guns  in  barbette  ha:j 
been  begun  in  6 feet  of  water  at  Choctaw  Point  Spit.  In  conjunctioi 
with  floating  batteries  it  will  cover  the  outer  obstructions  at  Dog  Bivei 


* Minor  details  omitted. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  1011 

Bar  and  also  the  main  channel  at  that  point.  The  obstructions  just 
mentioned  are  too  far  from  the  other  fixed  batteries  to  be  effectually 
protected  by  them. 

Battery  at  Choctaw  Point. — This  battery  is  completed  and  in  good 
order  ; it  mounts  four  guns. 

Battery  at  Pinto  Island  Spit. — This  battery  now  mounts  six  guns. 
During  the  month  the  two  flanks  have  been  extended,  and  a 10-inch 
gun  has  been  mounted  in  each,  one  bearing  directly  on  the  Spanish 
Biver  channel,  the  other  on  Choctaw  Pass. 

Probable  operations  of  the  month  of  February : Inclosing  the  rear  of 
the  work  with  12  by  12  timber,  for  the  purpose  of  covering  it  in  that 
direction  from  boat  attack. 

Spanish  Biver  Battery. — This  battery  is  a casern ated  battery,  covered 
in  front  and  above  with  railroad  iron;  it  mounts  six  guns  in  casemate 
and  two  in  barbette  outside.  During  the  month  improvements  have 
been  made  in  the  interior  of  this  battery.  For  the  ports  and  braces 
which  supported  the  roof  and  limited  the  traverse  of  the  guns  paral- 
lel walls  of  solid  timber  have  been  substituted.  The  guns  have  been 
interchanged,  to  bring  the  heaviest  to  bear  on  the  Spanish  Biver  channel ; 
several  of  which  were  mounted  on  middle  transom  pintles  have  been 
changed  to  front  transom.  The  embrasures  can  thus  be  diminished, 
while  the  field  of  fire  is  actually  enlarged. 

Probable  operations  of  the  month  of ‘February:  Driving  piles  to  sus- 
tain enbankment  for  suitable  parapet  of  two  exterior  guns,  now  wholly 
insufficient. 

Inner  line  of  obstructions  at  Choctaw  Pass  and  Spanish  Biver. — This 
line  will  consist  of  eight  rows  of  piles,  placed  from  5 to  10  feet  apart. 
Five  rows  have  already  been  driven  from  the  spit  east  of  Spanish  Biver 
to  the  spit  at  Choctaw  Point,  leaving  openings  at  the  Spanish  Biver  and 
Choctaw  Pass  Channels  to  be  closed  by  a raft  at  each.  The  piles  are 
cut  off  below  low  water.  The  line  is  about  400  yards  outside  of  Choc- 
taw Point,  Pinto,  and  Spanish  Biver  Batteries. 

Probable  operations  of  the  month  of  February:  Continuing  the  piling 
of  this  line  to  eight  rows  and  cutting  off  the  piles. 

Apalachee  Battery , at  the  fork  of  the  Apalachee  and  Blakely  Bivers 
(west  side). — This  battery  is  completed  and  mounts  six  guns.  Neither 
its  plan  nor  location  is  thought  to  be  judicious.  A strong  battery  on  the 
head  of  the  island  between  the  two  rivers  would  have  commanded  both 
in  the  most  effective  manner. 

Battery  at  the  head  of  Apalachee  Island , the  site  mentioned  in  the  last 
paragraph  under  the  orders  of  commanding  general. — A battery  for  four 
guns  has  been  begun  at  the  head  of  this  island,  to  be  armed  with  the 
guns  from  the  ship  Danube,  if  others  cannot  be  had.  It  is  placed  in  a 
straight  line  along  the  axis  of  the  island;  has  a parapet  on  each  side,  and 
the  guns  will  be  mounted  on  middle  transom  pintles  so  that  all  of  them 
can  fire  on  either  channel.  Between  the  guns  are  merlons  3 feet  higher 
than  the  parapet.  The  rampart  is  bomb-proofed  for  men,  stores,  and 
magazine,  while  the  whole  is  surrounded  by  a ditch  flanked  by  a stock- 
ade under  cover  of  a glacis. 

Ship  Danube. — This  ship  being  liable  to  be  destroyed  by  shells  thrown 
low  or  high,  it  has  been  thought  best  to  place  her  four  guns  (42-pound- 
ers) in  the  battery  last  named,  unless  additional  guns  can  be  procured. 
She  is  anchored  at  the  Apalachee  Battery  and  is  available  for  service. 

Obstructions  at  the  head  of  Apalachee  Island. — Several  rows  of  piles  • 
have  been  driven  here  in  both  channels  immediately  opposite  the  bat- 
tery at  the  head  of  the  island.  The  barges  bringing  earth  for  the  bat- 


1012 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII.  i 


tery  requiring  several  openings  in  the  line,  for  the  present  not  much  | 
progress  will  be  made  in  these  obstructions  during  February. 

Floating  Battery.— On  arriving  here  I found  this  battery  so  far  ad- 
vanced under  contract  that  its  completion  was  thought  necessary.  It  will 
probably  be  wholly  finished  in  the  month  of  February.  Though  in  my  j 
opinion  far  inferior  to  a battery  with  inclined  bulwarks,  this  is  yet  Mkely  | 
to  prove  formidable,  with  its  armament  of  two  10-inch  guns.  Its  iron  ! 
covering  is  better  than  that  of  the  Spanish  Fiver  Battery,  and  some  j 
firing  at  this  last  with  9-inch  shot  lately  thrown  by  one  of  the  gunboats  j 
from  a distance  of  300  yards  proved  the  endurance  of  the  iron,  while  , 
some  of  the  shots  were  broken.  The  surface  struck  was  very  steep,  not  I 
more  than  20°  from  the  vertical. 

City  intrenchments. — The  outer  line  of  city  intrenchments  is  not  com- 
plete, and  no  work  has  been  done  there  during  the  month.  The  line  is 
about  9 miles  long  and  everywhere  from  2 to  3 miles  from  the  center  of 
the  city.  The  commanding  general,  fearing  that  troops  adequate  to  the  j 
defense  of  so  long  a line  will  not  be  available,  has  ordered  the  construc- 
tion of  an  inner  line,  defensible  by  the  force  under  his  command.  This 
line  begins  at  Choctaw  Point;  on  the  left  it  crosses  Government  street,  j 
If  miles  from  the  river,  and  terminates  on  the  right  at  the  mouth  of 1 
One  Mile  Creek.  The  swamp  in  front  of  this  creek  would  prove  a serious 
obstacle  to  an  advancing  enemy,  and  as  works  will  be  thrown  up  there  j 
that  portion  of  the  line  may  be  regarded  as  unassailable. 

The  remainder  of  the  line  will  be  but  3 miles  long.  j 

The  works  consist  of  square  redoubts  at  about  690  yards  apart,  150 
feet  of  interior  crest,  relief  of  9 or  10  feet,  and  to  be  flanked  by  mus- 


ketry from  retired  fleches.  , 

The  line  is  too  near  the  city  to  save  it  from  bombardment,  but  such 
an  attack  would  prove  a lesser  evil  than  the  capture  of  the  place.  It 
is  hoped  that  the  lines  can  be  held  until  the  place  shall  be  relieved. 

Choctaw  Bluff. — The  guns  found  in  the  batteries  here,  though  badly 
located,  have  not  been  changed,  because  it  was  not  known  exactly  where  t 
the  obstructions  were  to  be  placed  by  the  State  authorities.  As  soon ! 
as  this  is  known  several  of  the  guns  will  be  moved  to  the  proper 

points.  . „ . A , 

Owen  Bluff. — All  the  guns  at  this  place  excepting  one  are  well  located. 
The  State  has  turned  over  to  this  department  the  material  collected  for  j 
obstructing  the  river  at  this  point,  and  it  is  proposed  to  make  trial  of 
sawyers,  a plan  of  which  was  received  from  the  Engineer  Bureau.  The 
work  will  be  begun  immediately. 

V cry  respectfully ^ 

J 1 D.  LEADBETTEF, 


Brigadier- General  and  Engineer. 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , March  11,  1863. 

Mai.  A.  G.  Dickinson, 

A.  A.  G .,  Bist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz.,  Houston,  Tex.: 

Sir  : A matter  in  my  opinion  of  grave  import  has  occurred  here,  and 
I seek  to  bring  it  officially  to  the  notice  of  the  general  commanding. 

The  Federal  brig  Young  Harry  was  wrecked  on  the  Texas  shore, 
some  6 miles  north  of  the  mouth  of  the  Fio  Grande.  I caused  the 
crew,  who  were  saved,  to  be  arrested  and  brought  to  my  headquar- 


Chap.  XXVII. ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  1013 

ters,  where  they  were  paroled.  The  cargo,  which  floated  ashore,  was 
saved  and  guarded  by  ray  troops,  and  by  my  orders  was  brought  here 
in  Government  wragons,  and  proved  to  be  of  considerable  value,  con- 
sisting of  some  400  barrels  of  flour,  clothing,  &c.  NTo  owner  appeared. 
The  consignee  in  Matamoras  abandoned  all  claim  upon  the  vessel  and 
cargo,  and  all  shippers  loyal  to  the  Confederate  States  were  insured 
through  their  friends. 

After  a considerable  portion  of  the  cargo  had  arrived  the  Confeder- 
ate States  receiver  procured  an  injunction  from  the  Confederate  States 
court  now  in  session  at  Brownsville,  and  claimed  possession  of  all  the 
property.  I immediately  consulted  with  the  Hon.  Thomas  J.  Divine, 
judge  of  said  court,  and  in  deference  to  his  position  as  a lawyer  and  a 
true  and  loyal  citizen  I yielded  to  the  mandate,  and  the  property  was 
turned  over  to  the  receiver.  In  yielding  my  own  opinion  to  that  of  the 
honorable  judge  I did  not  yield  my  convictions.  I contend  that,  the 
vessel  being  an  enemy’s  under  the  enemy’s  flag,  her  cargo  was  a prize 
to  my  soldiers,  who  saved  it  of  course  for  the  benefit  of  the  Govern- 
ment. There  was  no  receiver,  no  marshal  on  the  beach  to  claim  or 
save  the  property,  and  if  my  troops  had  not  saved  it  none  of  it  would 
have  been  saved.  The  property  saved  was  in  the  possession  of  a Con- 
federate States  quartermaster  duly  bonded,  and  was  surely  as  safe  as 
if  in  the  hands  of  the  Confederate  States  receiver;  yet  the  question  of 
fees  controlled  the  matter  and  was  the  cause  of  the  loss  of  a consider- 
able amount. 

I have  ordered  that  the  proceedings  be  transmitted  to  you,  that  the 
general  commanding  may  decide  the  case  for  my  future  action  and 
guidance  or  refer  the  matter  to  Richmond.  The  case  in  point  is  set- 
tled, because  the  honorable  judge  of  the  Confederate  States  district 
court  is  present ; but  wrecks  may  occur  at  any  time.  I do  not  regard 
his  decision  in  this  case  a sufficient  precedent,  and  in  the  absence  of 
that  functionary  I may  not  appreciate  the  propriety  of  my  actions  being 
controlled  by  those  officers  of  the  civil  branch  of  the  Government 
whose  sole  object,  in  my  opinion,  is  the  collection  of  certain  fees  of 
office. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier - General , Provisional  Army . 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Port  Brown , March  11,  1863. 

Maj.  A.  G.  Dickinson, 

A.  A.  G.  I)ist.  of  Tex.,  A.  Mex.,  and  Ariz .,  Houston , Tex. : 

Sir  : The  Federal  steamer  Honduras  arrived  oil'  the  mouth  of  the 
Rio  Grande  on  the  6th  instant,  but  was  unable  to  communicate  with 
the  shore  until  yesterday,  when  Col.  E.  J.  Davis  and  five  others  landed 
on  the  Mexican  side  and  proceeded  to  Matamoras.  The  objects  of  this 
arrival  have  not  transpired,  but  rumor  says  (on  the  authority  of  Colonel 
Davis)  that  other  vessels  will  soon  follow.  The  Honduras  is  a trans- 
port, armed  with  two  rifled  guns,  24  pounders,  and  has  aboard  180  men 
and  eight  field  pieces,  with  their  caissons,  but  no  horses.  The  men  are 
well  armed.  She  is  provided  with  four  surf-boats  capable  of  transport- 
ing 40  men  each.  She  is  evidently  uneasy,  and  anchors  for  the  night 
amongst  the  fleet  in  Mexican  waters.  I have  detachments  of  efficient 
men  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  and  at  Point  Isabel.  I do  not  anticipate 


1014 


. 

W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N,  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL  ; 

a landing,  but  am  prepared  for  it.  I shall  go  down  myself  this  morn- 
ing. My  opinion  is  that  Colonel  Davis  came  for  his  family,  who  have 
been  in  Matamoras  for  some  time,  and  to  take  off  the  deserters  and  j 
renegades,  who  number  full  100  men. 

A gentleman  who  left  New  York  on  the  12th  ultimo  reports  to  me  j 
that  the  feeling  at  the  North  is  for  peace,  on  the  basis  of  reunion  or  sub-  I 
jugation,  and  that  powerful  fleets  and  armies  were  afloat  for  Charles-  j 
ton  and  Vicksburg.  A report  reached  Havana  on  the  3d  instant  from  j 
Key  West  that  the  enemy  had  been  repulsed  at  Charleston.  I send  ! 
you  New  York  dates  to  the  17th  ultimo. 

I am  assured  that  carbines  and  pistols  can  be  purchased  in  New  York  ; 
and  shipped  for. Brownsville  without  trouble.  I am  offered  (to  arrive)  ! 
5,000  Colt’s  pistols  at  $25,  navy  size,  and  $30  army  size.  Shall  I pur- 
chase them? 

There  is  a fair  supply  of  corn  and  flour  in  Matamoras,  and  if  I had 
cotton,  supplies  for  my  troops  could  now  be  procured  for  six  months. 
The  specie  fund  I have  keeps  my  command  supplied;  but  with  the  pro- 
posed and  necessary  re-enforcements  of  Duff’s  battalion  and  the  two 
regiments  of  cavalry  cotton  will  be  required. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier- General , Provisional  Army . 


[March  11,  1863. — Eor  William  Steele  to  E.  Kirby  Smith  in  refer- 
ence to  protection  of  northeastern  frontier  of  Texas,  see  Series  I, 
Vol.  XXII.] 


Report  of  operations  for  the  defense  of  Mobile  for  the  month  of  February , 

1863. 

Engineer  Office, 

Mobile , Ala.,  March  15,  1863. 

Col.  J.  F.  Gilmer, 

Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau , Richmond , Va. : 

Fort  Morgan. — Laborers  and  teamsters  have  been  employed  in  taking 
up  railroad  to  Navy  Cove  (the  rails  being  wanted  by  Navy  Department 
for  a floating  battery)  and  laying  wooden  ones  instead,  driving  piles 
for  repairs  of  wharf,  all  of  which  has  been  completed.  It  is  not  ex- 
pected that  further  operations  will  be  required  here  in  the  month  of 
March. 

Fort  Gaines. — Laborers  and  carts  have  been  employed  in  embanking 
glacis  of  the  north  and  west  fronts,  and  this  will  be  continued  during 
the  month  of  March.  No  other  work  of  importance  is  required  at  this 
place. 

Lower  obstructions. — The  planting  of  piles  "has  been  continued  here 
and  is  essentially  completed.  They  are  yet  to  be  cut  off  below  low 
water,  and  this  work  will  be  begun  in  the  month  of  March. 

Battery  at  GranVs  Pass. — Carpenters  and  laborers  have  been  engaged 
in  building  a wharf  600  feet  long  for  receipt  of  supplies,  &c.,  at  this 
place.  It  is  now  available,  but  not  yet  finished.  This  work  will  be 
completed  in  the  month  of  March. 

Battery  at  Choctaw  Point  Spit. — Three-fourths  of  the  crib- work  in- 


CnAP.  XXVII.  ] COEEESPONDENCE,  ETC- CONFEDEEATE. 


1015 


closing  tlie  arm  of  this  battery  has  been  sunk  and  filled  above  high 
tide  with  earth.  I shall  recommend  the  suspension  of  this  work,  as  it 
is  doubtful  whether  guns  can  be  had  for  it,  and  it  is  desirable  to  con- 
centrate all  the_  transportation  available  on  the  battery  at  the  head  of 
Apalachee  Island. 

Battery  at  Choctaw  Point . — This  battery  is  in  good  order. 

Pinto  Island  Battery. — This  battery  is  essentially  completed. 

Spanish  River  Battery. — Laborers  have  been  employed  in  driving 
sheeting  piles  to  sustain  parapet  for  two  exterior  guns,  transporting 
earth,  and  embanking  parapet.  This  work  will  probably  be  finished  in 
the  month  of  March. 

Inner  line  of  obstructions  at  Choctaw  Pass  and  Spanish  River. — Labor- 
ers and  pile-drivers  have  been  employed  during  the  month  in  adding 
to  the  obstructions  at  this  place  and  will  be  continued  during  the  month 
of  March. 

The  weather  has  been  extremely  unfavorable  for  all  operations  on 
the  bay  and  harbor. 

Apalachee  Battery , at  the  fork  of  the  Apalachee  and  Blakely  Rivers , west 
side. — This  battery  is  finished. 

Battery  at  the  head  of  Apalachee  Island,  between  Apalachee  and  Blakely 
Rivers. — The  ditch  of  this  work  has  been  excavated,  the  bomb-proof 
timbers  erected,  and  a considerable  part  of  the  earthen  embankments 
has  been  transported  to  and  placed  in  the  work.  The  site,  being  low 
and  swampy,  supplies  very  little.  The  work  cannot  be  finished  in  the 
month  of  March,  but  it  is  hoped  that  the  guns  can  be  mounted. 

Obstructions  opposite  the  head  of  Apalachee  Island. — Nothing  has  been 
done  to  this  line  during  the  month. 

Obstructions  of  the  Alabama  River  at  Choctaw  Bluff. — As  already  re- 
ported to  the  Engineer  Bureau,  a considerable  part  of  the  raft  intended 
for  the  obstruction  at  this  point  has  been  carried  away.  I learn  unoffi- 
cially that  the  work  has  been  suspended  by  the  State  authorities  and  is 
not  likely  to  be  resumed.  The  Governor  of  the  State  expresses  a desire 
to  turn  it  over  to  the  Confederate  States.  The  river  is  now  very  high 
md  probably  60  feet  deep  at  Choctaw  Bluff.  With  this  depth  and  a 
rapid  current  it  is  not  easy  to  find  any  solution  of  the  problem  in  ques- 
tion. 

Battery  at  Choctaw  Bluff. — During  the  month  a small  force  under 
Major  Sheliha  has  been  engaged  in  changing  the  position  of  some  of 
;he  guns  of  this  battery.  The  commanding  general  has  also  ordered 
some  redoubts  to  be  thrown  up  in  rear  for  the  protection  of  the  place 
igainst  land  attack.  These  works  are  under  construction  and  will  be 
prosecuted  during  the  month  of  March. 

Owen  Bluff \ Tombigbee  River. — Capt.  G.  E.  Walker,  Provisional  En- 
gineers, is  charged  with  the  obstructions  at  this  place.  His  prepara- 
tions are  known  to  be  well  advanced,  but  no  report  of  actual  trial  of 
he  sawyers  has  yet  been  received. 

The  commanding  general  has  ordered  the  construction  of  land  de- 
fuses at  this  point  also.  For  want  of  an  adequate  number  of  laborers 
he  works  have  not  yet  been  begun.  The  whole  number  of  negroes  now 
Employed  in  the  engineer  service  from  the  forts  below  to  Choctaw  and 
)wen  Bluff,  inclusive,  is  about  3,000. 

| General  view  of  the  defenses  of  Mobile. — It  is  obvious  that  the  enemy 
nay  pass  the  lower  forts  and  occupy  the  bay.  Grant’s  Pass  might  then 
>e  attacked  on  both  sides,  east  and  west,  or  be  blockaded  to  extremity, 
t is  not  likely  that  Forts  Morgan  and  Gaines  could  endure  a blockade 
j >f  many  months. 


1016 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIljf 


If  the  enemy  in  this  way  get  possession  of  the  lower  bay  he  will  bell 
in  position  to  attack  the  city  at  pleasure  by  land  or  water.  But  in  the! I 
mean  time  his  own  fleet  will  be  exposeel  to  surprise  and  attack  by  oun[ 
naval  force  at  Mobile,  a force  capable  of  acting  in  favorable  weatheil 
and  in  smooth  water.  If  the  city  be  attacked  by  land  it  is  believed  that | 
the  defenses  on  that  side  will  prove  sufficient. 

If  the  attack  be  made  by  water  the  enemy  cannot  with  safety  avaiil 
himself  of  any  vessel  drawing  over  8 or  9 feet.  For  the  defense  of  thal 
channel,  less  than  half  a mile  wide  at  Dog  Fiver  Bar,  we  have  the  loweij 
line  of  obstructions  at  that  place,  consisting  of  sunken  hulks,  piles,  &c.I 
and  this  can  be  covered  by  four  iron-clad  batteries,  two  of  them  withjl 
small  steam-power.  An  earthen  battery,  mounting  four  heavy  gunsij 
might  also  be  made  available  if  there  were  any  prospect  of  obtaining 
guns  for  it. 

If  this  outer  line  be  passed  the  enemy  will  come  immediately  upon! 
the  second,  consisting  of  eight  rows  of  piles,  covered  at  the  distance  oil 
400  or  500  yards  by  the  batteries  at  Choctaw  Point,  Pinto  Island,  ancjilf 
Spanish  River,  together  with  four  wooden  gunboats,  which  may  bel 
placed  in  rear  of  the  line. 

The  number  of  guns  for  the  defense  of  the  first  line  will  probably  be 
seventeen  ; among  them  two  of  10-inch  caliber,  and  at  the  second  line! 
thirty  or  more  guns,  including  six  of  10-inch  in  the  fixed  batteries.  Irl 
a channel  so  narrow  as  this,  and  where  the  enemy  is  in  danger  of  run  i 
ning  aground,  there  will  be  little  room  to  maneuver  or  to  present  8 
formidable  front.  It  is  not  likely  that  any  heavy  iron-clad  vessel  can  beu 
brought  to  the  attack. 

If  the  enemy  attempt  to  approach  by  the  Apalachee  or  Blakely? 
Fiver  6 feet  is  the ’greatest  depth  to  be  carried  in  at  high  tide.  If  at  I 
tacked  there,  the  batteries  at  the  fork  of  the  two  rivers  could  readily  btl 
re  enforced  by  gunboats  from  the  city.  An  additional  floating  battery  I 
is  understood  to  be  well  advanced  toward  completion.  It  is  very  im- 
portant that  eight  or  ten  guns,  10-inch,  should  be  added  to  the  arrna 
ment  of  the  batteries.  With  this  addition  it  is  believed  that  the  city) 
could  not  be  taken  by  any  maritime  force  which  can  be  brought  against  it; 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  LEADBETTEF, 
Brigadier- General  and  Engineer . 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Tex^s, 

Fort  Brown , March  15,  1863.  ] 

Maj.  A.  Gr.  Dickinson,  I 

Assistant  Adjutant- General , Houston , Tex.  : 

Sir  : The  palpaple  violation  of  the  neutrality  of  Mexico  by  the  author- 
ities of  Matamoras  in  permitting  soldiers  to  lie  enlisted  openly  in  theitj 
streets  for  the  service  of  the  United  States  has  at  last  culminated  in  an 
attack  on  the  enemies  of  our  country  on  the  soil  of  Mexico. 

I have  previously  informed  you  of  the  many  desertions  from  my  cornj 
mand  here,  and  that  they  were  openly  enlisted,  fed,  and  clothed  by  the; 
American  consul  at  Matamoras ; also  of  the  arrival  of  E.  J . Davis,  a 
Texas  renegade,  who  was  the  proved  originator  of  all  the  troubles  on 
this  frontier.  It  soon  became  apparent  that  Davis  had  come  for  his 
family  and  to  carry  the  deserters  and  renegades  to  New  Orleans.  Hav- 
ing also  learned  that  the  transport  was  armed,  and  with  a considerable 


1017 


)hap.  XXYII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

number  of  troops  on  board,  I strengthened  the  picket  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Bio  Grande,  and  for  fear  of  a collision  went  myself,  accompanied 
by  Colonel  Luckett  and  Major  Lea,  to  that  post  on  the  12th,  where  I 
remained  about  twenty  hours,  and  although1  there  was  but  a narrow 
river  dividing  us  from  those  who  had  brought  so  much  disgrace  on 
Texas,  I positively  forbid  all  communication,  and  explained  to  my  men 
that  any  violation  of  the  Mexican  soil  would  not  be  permitted  and 
would  bring  trouble  on  our  country.  The  weather  unfortunately  was 
stormy  and  no  communication  was  had  with  the  steamer,  so  that  the 
renegades  could  embark.  Other  matters  of  importance  called  me  to 
Point  Isabel,  and  I proceeded  thence.  Soon  after  I returned  to  this 
place.  At  12  o’clock  this  morning  I was  informed  unofficially  (for  I 
have  not  yet  received  any  official  report  and  perhaps  never  will)  that 
at  3 o’clock  this  morning  a party,  composed  of  citizens  and  soldiers  off 
duty,  crossed  the  river  at  its  mouth  and  captured  Davis,  Montgomery, 
and  4 other  renegades,  killing  perhaps  some  others,  and  returned  to 
this  side  with  2 men  wounded,  1 seriously. 

This  affair  has  created  great  excitement  in  Matamoras,  but  I have 
not  yet  any  communication  from  the  authorities.  I shall  promptly  dis- 
own the  act  as  authorized  or  connived  at  in  any  way  by  me,  and  make 
such  reparation  as  is  in  my  power.  I don’t  know  where  the  prisoners 
(Davis  and  Montgomery)  are  ; they  will  probably  be  up  to-night.  The 
full  particulars  will  be  forwarded  as  soon  as  obtained  by  special  express. 

I trust  that  the  general  commanding  will  appreciate  the  extraordi- 
nary forbearance  I have  shown  on  this  question  of  the  enlistment  of 
soldiers  for  the  service  of  the  United  States  on  Mexican  territory.  I 
had  determined  to  do  nothing  that  would  serve  to  compromise  our  rela- 
tions with  Mexico.  What  has  been  done  was  done  without  my  consent 
or  knowledge  and  in  positive  violation  of  my  orders,  and,  however 
much  I may  regret  the  violation  of  the  neutrality  of  Mexico,  and  what- 
ever may  be  the  consequences,  it  will  be  a consolation  that  the  indignity 
cast  upon  us  by  the  authorities  of  the  United  States  has  been  avenged 
by  the  gallant  sons  of  Texas. 

8 o’clock  p.  m. — Since  writing  the  above  a demand  has  been  made.* 

[H.  P.  BEE.] 


Alleyton,  March  18,  1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Sir  : I have  received  reliable  information  that  the  Mexicans  driving 
the  Mexican  wagons  and  carts  engaged  in  bringing  supplies  into  the 
country  are  abused  and  ill-treated  in  the  countiesof  DeWitt  and  Lavaca. 
As  it  is  the  interest  of  the  Government  to  cultivate  friendly  relations 
with  Mexicans  and  their  Government,  and  as  our  general  commanding 
has  issued  his  orders  to  that  effect,  I would  respectfully  advise  that  mar- 
tial law  be  extended  over  those  two  counties.  There  is  evidently  a dis- 
position manifested  among  shirkers  from  the  army,  the  conscription,  and 
draft  to  drive  all  Mexican  transportation  out  of  the  country,  so  that 
these  stragglers  and  cowards  may  be  assigned  and  employed  to  screen 
them  from  service  in  the  field. 

The  Mexican  trains  now  bringiug  in  supplies  are  very  large — a num- 
ber of  hundreds — and  are  owned  by  men  of  wealth  and  influence,  who 
reside  near  the  frontier.  All  the  efforts  of  General  Magruder  and  Gen- 


Incomplete  ; but  see  Appendix,  p.  1128. 


1018 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII.  ; 

eral  Bee  will  be  of  no  avail  if  the  most  ample  protection  is  not  afforded 
to  these  Mexicans  (owners  of  the  teams)  and  their  servants  or  peons,  j 
I am  not  an  advocate  for  martial  law  only  in  extreme  cases  and  when  j 
the  good  of  our  whole  Confederacy  will  be  benefited  by  it.  Should  the  i 
commanding  general  of  the  District  of  Texas,  Arizona,  and  New  Mexico  f 
see  fit  to  establish  martial  law  in  these  counties  I will  visit  them,  and, i 
if  necessary,  place  a small  force  on  the  roads  through  those  counties  to 
protect  the  trains.  I know  none  but  the  general-in-chief  of  the  district 
can  establish  martial  law. 

I reported  in  person  to  General  Scurry  on  Saturday  last.  He  in-  , 
formed  me  he  had  ordered  Colonel  Brown’s  battalion  to  the  district 
under  martial  law. 

I have  just  heard  that  the  Germans  in  the  upper  part  of  this  county  i 
and  lower  part  of  Austin  have  had  a meeting  and  passed  some  revolu-  , 
tionary  resolutions.  I will  visit  the  neighborhood  of  the  meeting  in  a 
few  days,  and  if  true  will  see  the  leaders  are  arrested  and  punished,  and 
on  my  return  to  this  place  will  advise  you  of  the  state  of  things.  I am, 
however,  in  hopes  it  may  prove  to  have  been  only  an  innocent  political 
meeting  to  nominate  candidates. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  L.  WEBB, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La .,  March  19,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor, 

Comdg.  District  of  West  Louisiana , Alexandria , La. : 

General  : I have  just  received  your  letter  of  yesterday’s  date,*  and 
I sincerely  regret  that  I have  innocently  interfered  with  important  plans 
of  yours.  My  mill  here  not  being  sufficient  to  keep  up  the  supply  of 
meal,  even  when  we  have  corn  enough,  I deemed  it  essential  to  send  the 
Nina  Simms  to  Natchez  after  meal  already  collected.  She  returned 
here,  but  not  in  time  to  unload.  I have  another  engine  now,  and,  with 
the  assistance  I have  received  from  you  in  corn,  will  keep  me  well  going. 

I sincerely  hope  the  delay  will  not  materially  interfere  with  your 
plans  and  I wish  you  success. 

Rumor  from  New  Orleans,  apparently  reliable,  states  that  the  enemy 
has  drawn  off  all  his  possible  force  for  the  attack  on  this  place  from  the 
La  Fourche  as  well  as  New  Orleans.  He  has  a strong  force  opposite 
me,  but  he  cannot  move  westward  or  northwestward  beyond  this  point 
on  account  of  the  water. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond , March  20,  1863. 


General  D.  Leadbetter, 

In  Charge  of  Defenses  at  Mobile  : 

General  : I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  two  letters  of  Col. 


Not  found. 


jap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1019 


. W.  Robertson,  addressed  to  you  on  the  subject  of  the  Alabama  River 
bstruction  and  forwarded  to  me  by  you  for  my  information.  The  col- 
neFs  system  of  triangular  rafts  is  explained 'in  so  little  detail  that  I 
liould  scarcely  feel  justified  in  expressing  my  opinion  in  regard  to  it. 
am  not  surprised  at  the  unfortunate  result  of  the  experiment  on  Cap- 
ain  Farrand’s  plan.  The  construction  and  maneuvering  of  his  huge 
afts  was  evidently  an  undertaking  of  excessive  difficulty,  if  not  entirely 
tnpracticable.  Would  it  not  be  well  to  inform  Governor  Shorter  that, 
f he  is  willing  to  turn  over  the  whole  question  of  river  obstructions  to 
he  Engineer  Corps  of  the  Army,  every  exertion  will  be  made  to  produce 
atisfactory  results  ? * 

The  anomalous  arrangement  of  Captain  Farrand  for  chief  engineer, 
pith  engineer  officers  under  him,  to  carry  out  plans  which  they  do  not 
pprove  can  never  accomplish  the  desired  work. 

Understanding  that  1,800  feet  of  very  heavy  chain  cable  has  been 
iirnished  to  Governor  Shorter  by  the  C.  S.  Ravy,  may  it  not  be  used 
udiciously  for  obstruction  in  the  following  way  ? 

Construct  first  two  large  cribs,  with  a passage-way  for  steamboats 
»f  about  60  feet  between  them,  and  then  stretch  from  them  on  either 
land  to  the  shore  a slack  chain,  supported  at  intervals  on  small  floating 
•afts,  as  shown  in  the  accompanying  sketches.  Any  attempt  to  injure 
he  cribs  or  break  the  chain  by  ramming  would  probably  fail  if  a proper 
ystem  of  construction  were  adopted.  The  cribs  should  be  built  up  to 
ow- water  mark,  with  salient  up  and  down  stream.  The  buoyancy  of 
he  rafts  at  intermediate  landing  points,  if  any  are  selected,  should  be 
considerable.  The  supporting  logs  might  be  of  round  timber,  30  or  40 
eet  in  length  and  not  less  than  12  inches  mean  diameter. 

The  portion  of  chain  between  fixed  points,  or  rather  points  of  attach- 
nent,  might  be  supported,  or  buoyant  masses  placed  at  intervals  ot  10 
eet  and  formed  on  three  logs  each,  fastened  together  with  two  or  three 
sets  of  bolts.  By  keeping  a few  row-boats  well  manned  and  a steam- 
;ug  constantly  ready  in  freshets  to  guide  the  larger  drift  and  heavy 
floating  bodies  of  every  description  through  the  pass-way  it  is  thought 
hat  the  above  obstructions  may  be  kept  free.  Lighter  material,  such 
is  ordinary  logs,  would  jirobably  pass  clear  of  the  obstructions,  as  the 
chain  will  be  sustained  at  a depth  below  the  surface  varying  from  1 to 
10  feet. 

j It  has  been  suggested  that  a guide,  composed  of  floating  timbers, 
astened  end  to  end,  as  shown  in  the  sketch,  might  obviate  the  necessity 
‘ )f  keeping  in  readiness  the  row-boats  and  steam-tug. 
i Should  the  season  of  high  water  prevent  the  prompt  execution  of 
:his  plan  or  one  of  a similar  character,  yet  if  the  suggestions  herein 
contained  meet  with  your  approval  material  might  be  collected  and 
Tamed  for  rapid  construction  when  the  river  subsides.  The  timber 
| collected  for  Captain  Farrand’s  raft  and  still  remaining  may  furnish  a 
’sufficient  supply.  If  stone  cannot  be  had  for  filling  the  cribs,  if  they 
ire  large  enough  and  built  with  close  joints  earth  would  answer. 

I The  foregoing  views  and  also  the  appended  sketches  are  respectfully 
submitted  for  your  consideration  to  give  them  such  trial  as  in  your 
judgment  they  may  merit. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  F.  GILMER, 

Colonel , Engineer,  and  Chief  of  Bureau . 


1020 


I 

W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XX  vl 

[Inclosuie.] 


Proposed  obstructions  for  River  about  500  feet  wide. 


Flcuvs 


w 

SCALE 

100 a a a o £9  zcofb. 

Remarks. — g g,  cribs,  x x , piles,  a a,  b c,  c b,  similar  rafts ; I 

c d,  c d,  to  remain  floating  at  will  until  hauled  | 

into  place  by  ropes  e d,  and  united  at  d,  to  close 
the  pas^vvay.  n m,  n m,  proposed  log  floating 
guides  for  drift,  if  deemed  necessary. 

Engineer  Bureau,  Richmond , March  20, 1863. 


Alleyton,  March  20,  1863.  ! 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Sir:  The  general  order,  March  16,  issued  at  La  Grange,  T have  re 
ceived,  and  as  soon  as  possible  will  be  carried  out  and  obeyed. 

I wrote  you,  to  the  care  of  Major  Madia  at  San  Antonio,  in  regard  tc 
the  outrages  committed  on  the  drivers  of  Mexican  trains  coming  to  this 


1021 


Dhap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

place  from  Brownsville  and  other  places  on  the  frontier  with  supplies 
for  the  Government  and  people  in  the  counties  of  Lavaca  and  De  Witt. 
I also  recommended  they  be  put  under  martial  law  and  gave  my  reasons. 
As  General  Scurry  informed  me  on  Sunday  last  that  he  had  ordered 
Brown’s  battalion  into  the  four  counties  under  martial  law  for  mjr  use 
and  the  use  of  the  provost-marshals,  I would  respectfully  suggest  that 
if  the  general  would  rather  not  include  those  counties  with  the  four 
now  under  martial  law  it  would  be  well  to  order  small  detachments  of 
men,  under  a prudent  and  discreet  officer,  to  act  as  escort  to  Mexican 
trains  passing  through  those  counties,  and  also  to  protect  the  citizens 
against  depredations  by  the  Mexicans.  I authorized  Captain  Garey  to 
take  two  men  from  Captain  Weyman’s  company  as  drivers.  I inclose 
Captain  Wey man’s  letter  and  orders.  Please  lay  them  before  the  com- 
manding general. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* HENRY  L.  WEBB, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La .,  March  21,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor, 

Comdg.  District  of  West  Louisiana , Alexandria , La. : 

General:  The  enemy  have  gone  back  to  Baton  Rouge  on  this  side 
if  the  river,  although  they  have  a considerable  force  just  below  here  on 
the  west  side.  This  latter  force  is  entirely  water-bound,  and  will  not  be 
able  to  effect  anything.  I think  they  have  given  up  an  attack  by  land 
forces  on  this  point,  at  least  for  the  present.  It  is  probable  they  may 
make  another  expedition  up  Grosse  T4te,  and  also  down  the  La  Fourche. 
[ will  keep  you  informed  of  all  movements  I can  ascertain. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major- General. 


Alexandria,  March  21,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  S.  Lovell, 

Assistant  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
nunication  of  March  16.  The  major-general  commanding  objects  to 
urnishing  corn  from  the  river  parishes  alluded  to  by  you,  for  the  reason 
hat  all  the  forage  in  that  district  of  country  is  or  will  be  needed  by  our 
>wn  cavalry  operating  in  those  parishes.  It  is  at  the  present  time  im- 
i >ossible  to  obtain  forage  for  these  troops  elsewhere  than  immediately 
>n  the  river.  Large  quantites  of  corn  have  been  and  ape  continuing  to 
)e  forwarded  to  Port  Hudson.  Our  own  depots  have  been  drained  to 
hrow  supplies  into  Mississippi  as  long  as  the  river  remains  clear  or 
vhenever  an  opportunity  offers. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  SURGET, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


1022  W.  FLA, 


, S.  ALA. 


Engineer  Office, 
Galveston , March  21,  1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  San  Antonio: 


Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  prevailing  unfavorab] 
'winds  retarded  the  placing  of  the  obstructions  across  the  main  chanm 
to  such  extent  that  to  last  night  only  three  rafts  have  been  anchoret 
When  during  the  night  of  the  21st  one  of  the  fastened  rafts  was  foun! 
blown  up,  after  examination  I came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  doh 
by  one  of  the  torpedoes  placed  by  Colonel  Forshey,  and  not  anchore 
sufficiently  well  to  prevent  its  drifting  with  the  tide  under  the  raft  an 
exploding.  If  all  the  rafts  had  been  fastened  across  the  damage  woul 
have  been  almost  immaterial.  But  as  it  is,  it  caused  the  chains  of  th 
different  anchors  to  be  entangled  and  some  moved  out  of  position,  s 
that  it  doubles  the  original  amount  of  labor  of  placing  them,  bein 
obliged  to  disentangle,  loosen,  raise  anchors,  repair  raft,  and  then  cod 
mence  placing  them  again.  It  will  require  probably  fifteen  workin 
days  to  complete  the  work.  The  balance  of  the  works  are  progressing  a 
well  as  could  possibly  be  expected  from  the  amount  of  labor  and  m£ 
terial  at  my  disposition. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

V.  SULAKOWSKI, 

Chief  Engineer. 


Quantity  and  rations  of  subsistence  stores  on  band  March  23,  1863,  at  the  post  of  Port  Hue 

son,  La. 


Articles. 

Quantity. 

Rations. 

Molasses Gallons.. 

Salt  beef do 

Potatoes Bushels. . 

91, 100 
311,  700 
17, 690 
3,  000 
357, 400 
334,  000 
2,412 
13.  619 
42, 558 
29, 000 
22,  720 
390 
31, 715 
1,  674 

182,  2( 
623, 4( 

15. 72 
15,  Of 

794, 25 

2,  783,  3c 
60,  3C 
14,  526,  9c 

2, 127, 9C 
58,  Of 

22.72 

9,  3( 

JOSEPH  P.  CARR, 

Major  and  A.  O.  S. 


Special  Orders,  > Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

Ho.  71.  j Richmond , March  23,  1863. 

# # * # # # # 

XIX.  Brig.  Gen.  L.  M.  Walker  will  proceed  without  delay  to  Alexan 
dria,  La.,  and  report  to  Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith,  commanding,  &c. 
for  assignment  to  duty.  i 

* * * # # # # 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHERS,  • 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


il 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1023 


Jackson,  March  24,  18G3. 

General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson : 

Ponchatoula  has  been  attacked  and  I fear  taken  by  the  enemy.  If 
practicable  send  a regiment  of  infantry,  battery  of  artillery,  and  squad- 
ron of  cavalry  to  Tangipahoa  to  act  in  concert  with  Colonel  Miller. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant - General , Commanding . 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  72.  / Richmond , Pa.,  March  24,  1863. 

#*#*#*# 
XXIV.  Brig.  Gen.  C.  J.  Polignac  and  staff  will  proceed  without  delay 
to  Alexandria,  La.,  and  report  to  Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith,  com- 
manding, &c.,  for  assignment  to  duty. 

# # * * # # * 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant - General . 


Jackson,  March  25,  1863. 

General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson , La. : 

Have  heard  nothing  from  you  for  two  days.  Let  me  know  the  state 
of  affairs. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant - General , Commanding . 


Jackson,  March  25,  1863. 

Uol.  H.  H.  Miller, 

Caters  Factory , North  of  Ponchatoula : 

Unless  you  feel  entirely  able  to  drive  the  enemy  from  his  position  you. 
should  not  attack.  An  attack  and  repulse  would  be  disastrous. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General , Commanding. 


Jackson,  March  25,  1863. 

Ool.  H.  H.  Miller: 

A bridge  is  broken  below  Brookhaven,  and  the  re-enforcements  will 
probably  be  delayed  until  to-morrow. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General , Commanding , 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La.,  March  26,  1863. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Gantt, 

Commanding  Cavalry: 

Colonel:  The  major-general  commanding  directs  me  to  inform  you 
hat  ’there  has  been  an  attack  on  Ponchatoula.  Major  Garland  has 
)een  ordered  to  report  to  Colonel  Miller.  You  will  have  to  look  out  on 


1024 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXV: 


your  left.  The  general  thinks  that  you  had  better  move  your  cam 
nearer  that  direction. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  FRIEND  WILLSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


Jackson,  March  26, 1863.  (l 

General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson : 

I have  no  cavalry  to  send  you.  Two  cavalry  companies  stationed  ifl 
Brookhaven  have  been  sent  to  re-enforce  Colonel  Miller  against  tb 
enemy  at  Ponchatoula.  When  this  raid  is  over  you  can  order  them  t 
Port  Hudson,  if  necessary. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

Jackson , Miss.,  March  26,  1863.  I 

Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor, 

Commanding,  <&c.,  Alexandria,  La. : 

General:  I am  directed  by  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  ti 
acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  note  of  the  14th  instant  per  Mr.  Eldei 
and  to  say  in  reply  that  the  guns  to  which  you  refer  (a  32  rilled  gu; 
and  a 30-pounder  Parrott)  are  now  mounted  and  in  position,  one  on  thj 
Upper  Yazoo  River.  At  this  moment,  while  the  enemy  are  assaultin. 
us  in  great  force  in  front  and  on  both  flanks,  he  regrets  that  he  car 
not  feel  justified  in  acceding  to  your  demands,  but  will  do  so  at  thj 
first  moment  it  can  be  safely  complied  with.  He  has  the  authority  a 
Lieutenant-General  Smith  for  retaining  them  until  the  present  threat 
ening  emergency  shall  have  passed  away. 

I am  instructed  to  say  also  that  the  lieutenant-general  has  sent  som 
light  breech -loading  pieces  to  Port  Hudson,  which  Major-Genera 
Gardner  has  instructions  to  turn  over  to  you.  Thinking  that  you  ma, 
need  projectiles  for  the  9 to  11  inch  columbiads  taken  from  the  Indianohjj 
Mr.  Elder  has  been  sent  to  Yicksburg,  where  Major-General  Steven  sot 
has  ordered  to  turn  over  to  him  a large  lot  of  9 to  11  inch  shot  an| 
shell,  which  will  render  your  guns  much  more  effective  than  those  de 
tained  here.  , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedien 
servant, 

W.  H.  McOARDLE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown,  March  26,  1863. 

Maj.  A.  G.  Dickinson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  San  Antonio,  Tex. : 

Sir  : I inclose  the  last  communication  received  from  Governor  Lopez 
in  which  the  general  commanding  will  see  that  matters  have  quietec 
down  and  triendly  relations  are  again  established.  I have  ordered  th< 


Chap.  XXVII.  1 CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1025 


purchase  of  all  sorts  of  supplies  that  could  be  bought  on  the  faith  of 
the  Government,  as  I feared  a decree  of  non-intercourse  from  the  city 
of  Mexico.  It  is  probable  now  that  the  local  authorities  will  not  en- 
force it. 

I trust  that  you  have  received  the  many  dispatches  that  I have  sent, 
for  I have  promptly  kept  you  informed  of  passing  events. 

New  Orleans  dates  to  the  17th.  The  destruction  of  the  Mississippi 
by  the  Port  Hudson  batteries  is  confirmed.  The  fight  was  said  to  have 
commenced  at  Port  Hudson.  Gold  had  declined  to  152  in  New  York. 
The  French  had  bombarded  Pueblo  on  the  13th  and  cut  off  communica- 
tion with  the  city  of  Mexico. 

With  great  respect,  1 have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army. 


It  is  reported  that  Stonewall  Jackson  is  at  Camp  Moore  with  20,000 
men  to  attack  New  Orleans.  (Doubtful.) 


BEE. 


[Inclosure.] 

Mil.  Commandancy  State  of  Tamaulipas,  War  Dept., 

March  23,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee, 

Gomdg.  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas : 

I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication 
of  the  22d  instant,  informing  me  that  you  referred  the  matter  of  the 
schooner  Pinckney  and  cargo  to  the  civil  tribunal  for  adjudication. 
For  the  present  I refrain  from  expressing  my  opinion  whether  the  ques- 
tion in  controversy  is  a judicial  one  or  not,  as  I am  not  yet  advised  of 
the  result  of  an  investigation  ordered  in  the  matter,  which,  when  ob- 
tained, I shall  have  the  honor  to  communicate  to  you. 

The  statement  made  to  you  concerning  the  fears  which  are  enter- 
tained of  disturbances  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  was  the  natural  conse- 
quence of  the  vacillating  character  of  the  relations  of  both  frontiers. 

In  justice  to  you  allow  me  to  state  that  I have  never  doubted  the 
lealty  and  good  faith  of  all  your  actions.  I regret  that  you  ever  be- 
lieved for  a moment  that  I did  not  appreciate  your  motives  in  releasing 
Colonel  Davis  and  the  other  persons  captured  with  him  at  the  mouth 
of  the  river.  I understand  perfectly  well  the  delicacy  of  the  duty  you 
had  to  perform,  the  situation  you  were  placed  in,  and  the  national  feel- 
iug,  which  was  naturally  in  favor  of  your  supporting  the  transaction.  It 
has  made  your  conduct  in  the  matter  the  more  eminent.  I judge  then 
the  renditions  of  said  individuals  from  your  point  of  view,  and  consider 
this  step  as  a proof  of  the  most  sincere  desire  to  maintain  the  good  un- 
derstanding between  the  two  frontiers.  The  same  desires  impelled  me 
to  make  the  communication  of  the  21st  instant.  I am  not  ignorant  of 
| the  sentiments  which  animate  you ; but  I am  certainly  also  aware  that 
you  are  in  the  midst  of  delicate  circumstances,  which  may  render  the 
information  the  authorities  of  Tamaulipas  can  give  you  not  useless.  The 
dangers  which  the  unstable  condition  prevailing  on  the  frontier  might 
; originate  could  not  be  avoided  without  acting  very  prudently ; and 
only  the  combined  strength  of  the  authorities  of  both  nations  could  ac- 
i complish  the  desired  result.  Viewing  it  from  this  point,  I have  believed 
it  to  be  my  duty  to  make  you  acquainted  with  the  existing  fears,  but 

65  r r — VOL  xv 


1026 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap,  xxmi 

since  you  inform  me  that  they  are  unfounded  apprehensions  I trust  com- 
pletely in  your  statement. 

The  demonstration  made  by  a few  individuals  in  the  streets  of  this 
city,  about  which  you  naturally  complain,  are  explained  by  the  incidents 
which  occurred  on  the  15th,  in  consequence  of  which  the  passions  and 
the  national  pride  were  excited,  which  could  not  be  stopped  until  the 
excitement  subsided. 

The  transgression  committed  by  Zapata  is  of  a different  nature  from 
the  one  which  happened  at  the  mouth  of  the  river.  Zapata  and  a part 
of  his  followers  were  citizens  of  Texas,  who  fled  from  Texas  on  account 
of  political  questions,  and  the  rest  of  his  gang  consisted  of  outlaws,  who- 
were  not  only  not  protected  by  the  Mexican  authorities,  but  were  even 
condemned  and  their  arrest  sought.  There  existed  no  tie  between 
them  and  the  Mexican  Eepublic,  neither  on  account  of  their  nativity 
nor  any  other  claims,  and  consequently  the  attack  upon  the  State  of 
Texas  could  not  be  considered  as  emanating  from  the  authorities  of 
Mexico  5 but  in  the  transgressions  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  occurred 
a circumstance  which  has  produced  much  alarm  and  roused  up  great 
fear.  The  troops  which  crossed  the  river  were  in  the  service  of  Texas, 
and  it  was  naturally  considered  as  a hostile  act  against  the  Mexican 
frontier.  It  is  easy  to  suppose  that  the  consequences  of  such  a belief 
could  not  be  of  a pacific  character.  The  alarm  which  was  caused  pro-, 
duced  a deep  excitement,  which  did  not  cease  until  the  alarm  abated. 
But  something  occurred  which  prevented  the  renewal  of  confidence.  It 
was  the  hostile  declarations  made  by  the  troops  of  the  detachment  on 
the  Texas  line  of  the  mouth  of  the  river.  The  soldiers  discharged  their 
arms  several  times,  hitting  once  one  of  the  Mexican  laborers.  Incidents 
of  this  nature  keep  up  the  agitation  and  give  room  for  the  statements 
of  which  you  complain — statements  which  I condemn,  being  convinced 
that  the  chief  authorities  of  Texas  have  already  repudiated  them. 

Let  us  look  at  a similar  case  under  inverted  circumstances.  If  Mexi- 
can forces  should  have  crossed  the  river  you  would,  in  accordance  with 
your  clear  judgment  and  knowledge  of  both  frontiers,  make  them  un- 
derstand the  grave  consequences  of  their  proceedings.  If  you  consider 
the  past  events  you  will  admit  that  Mexico  has  assumed  no  hostile 
attitude,  nor  have  the  Mexican  authorities  caused  any  distrust  by  inde- 
pendent transgressions,  which  I hope  will  terminate  through  the  efforts, 
of  their  authorities  agreeable  to  the  interests  of  both  lines. 

Accept  the  assurances  of  my  esteem  and  consideration. 

Liberty  and  reform.  Heroic  Matamoras. 

A.  LOPEZ. 


Jackson,  March  27, 1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  Prank.  Gardner,  Port  Hudson : 

Am  informed  Point  Couple  is  invaded  to  rob  and  plant  batteries  to 
cut  off  supplies.  If  you  have  transportation  and  can  throw  over  a force 
sufficient  to  defeat  enemy’s  movements  you  will  be  authorized  to  do  so, 
but  unless  you  feel  able  to  drive  him  back  the  movement  should  not 
be  made. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTOK, 
Lieutenant - General , Commanding . 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1027 


Port  Hudson,  March,  27, 1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

Enemy  has  gone  back  to  Baton  Bouge,  including  also  troops  from  west 
bank  of  river;  has  sent  back  all  his  mortar-boats  and  sloops  of  war. 
Two  gunboats  and  Essex  are  all  that  remain.  Bust’s  wagons  ought  ta 
be  sent;  they  are  much  needed. 

FBANK.  GABDNEB, 

Major-General*. 


Heavy  ordnance  at  Port  Hudson , La.,  March  27,  1863. 


Commanders. 

Batteries. 

Caliber. 

Kind. 

Number. 

I 

l 

Date. 

Foundery. 

Captain  Whitfield 

Lieutenant  Harman 

Captain  Riley 

Captain  Seawell 

Captain  Ramsey 

Captain  Kean 

Captain  Sparkman,  ? 

hot  shot.  5 

Captain  Coflin 

Captain  Le  Bisque 

No.  1. 
No.  2.  | 

No.  3.  $ 
No.  4.  \ 

No.  5.  | 

No.  6.  5 
No.  7.  j 
No.  8.  \ 
No.  9.  < 

Four  62s 

42-pounder. . 
24-pounder. . 
24-pounder.. 
32-pounder.. 
42-pounder.. 

8-inch 

10-inch 

10-inch 

42-pounder.. 
32-pounder. . 
24-pounder.. 
24-pounder.. 
24-pounder.. 
24-pounder.. 
24-pounder. . 
24-pounder.. 

8-inch 

32-pounder.. 

Parrott 

Smooth-bore . . 

Rifle 

...do  

do 

Smooth-bore . . 

Columbiad 

....do 

— do 

Smooth-bore . . 

do 

Rifle 

Smooth-bore . . 

Rifle 

....do 

Shell  gun ..... 
Smooth-bore . . 

(*) 

239 

1 

*2 

123 

183 

63 

5 

(*) 

163 

4 

58 

73 
11 

74 
11 

6 

264 

229 

70.10.00 
70. 2.  05 
55. 73 

56. 41 

71. 41 
(*) 

10.  5.  00 
13.  800 
13.  380 
(*) 

61. 1.  21 
5550 
5550 
5515 
5550 
6562 
5562 
62. 2. 12 
42. 2. 05 

<*) 

1822 

1836 

1826 

1834 
(*) 

1862 

1862 

1862 

(*) 

*182 

1828 

1828 

1835 
1828 
1826 

1836 
1842 
1845 

(*) 

(*) 

(*) 

(*) 

M.  C.  W.  & Co. 

J.C.&Co.,B.  F.,  Va. 

T.  J.  W.,Va. 

J.  R.  & Co.,  T.  F. 

J.  C.  & Co.,  B.  F.,  Va. 
<*) 

(*) 

(*) 

(*) 

(*> 

M.  C.  W.  & Co. 

A.  S.  W. 

A.  S.  W. 

* Either  not  marked  or  so  defaced  by  time,  paint,  &c.,  as  not  to  be  distinguishable. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

San  Antonio , March  28,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  B.  Scurry, 

Commanding , &c. : 

Sir  : I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Magruder  to  state  that  the 
Frontier  Begiment  of  Texas  State  Troops  has  been  received  by  him 
into  the  Confederate  States  service,  subject  to  the  sanction  of  the  Pres- 
ident, as  you  have  been  informed  by  letter  from  these  headquarters. 

The  major-general  commanding  directs  that  you  stretch  a line  of 
troops  across  the  Indian  frontier  from  Montague  County  to  Fort  Clark, 
using  the  Frontier  Begiment  for  the  southern  portion  of  the  line  and; 
either  Gould’s  or  Stone’s  regiment  for  the  northern  portion  of  the  line. 
The  posts  now  occupied  must  be  preserved,  as  far  as  practicable,  for 
the  obvious  reason  that  supplies  and  depots  are  in  existence  at  these 
stations.  In  the  event  of  any  two  stations,  such  for  instance  as  Camp 
Verde  and  Fort  Mason,  being  so  far  apart  as  to  allow  an  invasion  by 
the  Indians,  you  will  establish  an  intermediate  post.  In  all  cases  the 
general  wishes  you  to  give  orders  to  the  commanding  officers  of  these 
regiments  to  spread  out  their  companies  as  much  as  possible,  so  as  to 
°rm  a secure  protection  for  persons  and  property. 

| The  general  directs  that  you  cause  this  to  be  carried  out  without  the 


1028 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVn.jj 

slightest  delay,  and  inform  him  of  your  arrangements  by  express  to? 
Brownsville.  The  general  wishes  you  to  use  such  points  as  stations 
on  this  line  as  you  regard  best  to  protect  the  frontier,  and  also  wishes 
you  to  give  the  necessary  orders  to  secure  vigilance  on  the  part  of  offi- 
cers and  men. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  P.  TURNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Port  Hudson,  March  29,  1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

It  is  reported  that  the  enemy  moved  out  about  5,000  men  toward 
Ponchatoula  on  27th,  but  went  back  to  Baton  Rouge  on  account  of  the 
roads.  It  will  be  difficult  for  me  to  make  a move  for  want  of  wagon 
transportation.  The  enemv’s  whole  force  is  still  at  Baton  Rouge. 

PRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 


San  Antonio,  Tex.,  March  30,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith, 

Commanding  Trans-Mississippi  Dist .,  Alexandria , La. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I am  now  on  duty  at  this| 
place,  engaged  in  erecting  an  extensive  Government  tannery  and  woolen 
factory,  and  making  contracts  relative  to  the  accumulation  of  the  largest 
possible  amount  of  shoes  and  army  clothing  for  general  distribution ; 
also  for  the  making  up  of  all  raw  material  obtained  either  by  purchase 
or  manufacture.  1 am  acting  under  orders  from  the  Secretary  of  War, 
directing  me  to  report  for  special  service  under  instructions  from  the 
Quartermaster-General.  A copy  of  this  order  I herewith  inclose.  I 
will  not  trouble  you  with  a copy  of  my  instructions,  which  are  lengthy 
and  in  detail,  but  are  specific,  and  fully  embrace  all  of  my  operations. 

The  factory  and  tannery  are  progressing  rapidly,  and  the  latter 
should  be  in  operation  in  two  or  three  months  from  this  time,  and 
under  the  new  system  ought  to  turn  out  sufficient  leather  for  at  least 
30,000  pairs  of  shoes  every  two  months.  The  completion  of  the  factory 
will  of  course  be  contingent  upon  the  arrival  of  the  requisite  ma- 
chinery from  abroad,  preparatory  steps  for  which  have  been  taken. 

I have  also  contracted  with  most  reliable  and  energetic  parties  for 
the  delivery  here  from  abroad  of  a very  heavy  invoice  of  army  clothing, 
among  which  are  the  following,  viz : 30,000  black  army  hats,  150,000 
yards  gray  army  cloth,  60,000  pairs  of  woolen  socks,  30,000  flannel 
shirts,  50,000  pairs  flannel  drawers,  50,000  pairs  of  army  shoes,  60,000 
heavy  blankets,  and  a complete  supply  of  tailor’s  and  shoemaker’s 
findings. 

To  meet  all  these  undertakings  and  to  carry  them  out  successfully  I 
have  been  fully  authorized  to  buy  and  export  cotton,  and  to  that  end 
have  purchased  and  will  have  purchased  nearly  8,000  bales,  a great 
portion  of  which  is  awaiting  transportation. 

There  are  and  have  been  such  an  army  of  contractors  and  agents  all 
over  this  State,  bidding  against  each  other,  to  the  detriment  ot  the 
country,  by  a sacrifice  of  time  and  moue}7,  that  no  transportation  can 
be  had  except  by  mere  chance.  Besides  this,  the  process  of  exporting 


1029 


Chat.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  *ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

cotton  has  become  so  complicated,  on  account  of  numerous  orders  and 
changes,  that  I do  not  know  whether  I will  be  interfered  with  or  not. 
In  view  of  all  this  I respectfully  submit  to  you  the  necessity  of  grant- 
ing me  special  assistance,  as  follows,  viz:  Authority  to  use  unassigned 
conscripts  as  teamsters  or  privates  from  the  ranks  when  these  cannot 
be  obtained ; secondly,  to  take  from  the  ranks  or  elsewhere  such  shoe- 
makers, tanners,  and  tailors  as  I may  need  from  time  to  time ; and, 
thirdly,  that  I may  be  authorized  to  give  the  necessary  certificates  for 
the  exportation  of  all  cotton  purchased  by  me  on  Government  account, 
without  referring  to  any  local  commander. 

These  suggestions,  general,  I am  honestly  convinced  are  for  the  best 
interests  of  the  service,  and  I respectfully  request  your  assistance,  as 
without  it  I can  accomplish  but  little,  but  with  it  a great  deal. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 

Major  and  Quartermaster , C.  S.  Army , 


Jackson,  March  31,  1863> 
Major-General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson , La. : 

The  Hartford,  Albatross,  and  injured  boat  have  gone  down  the  river. 

J.  G.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant - General , Commanding . 


Engineer’s  Office, 

Mobile , Ala .,  March  31,  1863. 

Col.  J.  E.  Gilmer, 

Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau , Richmond  : 

Colonel  : Your  letter  of  the  20th  instant,  inclosing  sketch  of  ob- 
structions for  the  Alabama  River  at  Choctaw  Bluff,  has  been  received. 

The  plan  seems  to  be  an  excellent  one  under  certain  circumstances 
and  conditions,  but  I do  not  see  how  in  the  great  depth  and  strong  cur- 
rent at  Choctaw  Bluff  the  piers  are  to  be  held  while  sinking.  The  water 
is  70  feet  deep  and  the  bottom  a quicksand,  as  reported  by  Colonel 
Robertson.  At  Owen  Bluff,  where  the  water  is  but  40  feet  deep  at  the 
present  high  stage  (and  rock  bottom),  great  difficulty  has  been  met 
with  in  sinking  the  sawyers  intended  for  the  obstruction.  It  is  be- 
lieved that  this  will  be  overcome  and  that  the  experiment  will  prove 
successful.  This  is  a small  difficulty  compared  with  that  which  would 
be  presented  by  the  sinking  of  crib-work  in  a depth  of  70  feet  at  Choc- 
taw. 

I doubt  whether  it  would  be  judicious  to  attempt  the  obstruction  of 
the  river  at  that  point,  though  the  place  ought  to  be  held  by  strong 
batteries.  At  no  point  above  could  the  planting  interests  be  so  effectu- 
ally protected.  Batteries  too,  even  in  the  much  wider  Mississippi,  are 
recovering  their  former  reputation,  and  it  is  presumed  that  no  very 
formidable  iron-clads  can  be  brought  into  the  Alabama.  Another  point 
higher  up  the  river  should  be  selected  for  occupation  also,  and  should 
be  armed  as  soon  as  guns  can  be  had.  Perhaps  both  conditions,  that 
of  defense  and  obstruction,  may  be  satisfied  in  such  a site.  The  river 
at  Choctaw  and  Owen  Bluffs  are  now  20  feet  above  ordinary  low  water. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I).  LEADBETTER. 

Brigadier - General  and  Engineer. 


1030 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chap.  XXVIL 


Navy  Department, 
Richmond , March  31,  1863. 


Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  all  the  naval  officers  have 
this  day  been  detached  from  the  Harriet  Lane,  and  Lieut.  Commander 
,J.  N.  Barney  has  been  directed  to  turn  over  that  vessel  to  General  J. 
Bankhead  Magruder.  You  will  please  instruct  General  Magruder  to  i 
receive  the  vessel. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  R.  MALLORY, 
Secretary  of  the  Navy . * 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

San  Antonio , March  31,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  G.  S.  Army: 

Sir  : I am  here  ein  route  to  the  Rio  Grande,  where  affairs  have  as-  I 
sumed  a threatening  aspect,  as  you  will  perceive  from  the  inclosed  cor-  ! 
respondence  between  Brigadier-General  Bee  at  Brownsville  and  Gov-  ; 
•ernor  Lopez  at  Matamoras.* 

I have  this  moment  received  a copy  of  a letter  from  the  Secretary  of  ; 
War,  dated  January  20  [or  10],  1863,  to  Lieutenant-General  Holmes, 
countermanding  the  orders  of  the  latter  in  relation  to  the  restrictions  j 
on  the  cotton  trade,  and  of  course  repealing  my  orders  on  the  same  i 
subject,  printed  copies  of  which  were  sent  by  me  about  a month  since 
to  Richmond.  These  instructions  from  the  War  Department  may  make  ‘ 
it  necessary  for  me  to  fall  back  from  the  Rio  Grande  and  give  up  that 
frontier  to* the  enemy  from  the  difficulty  of  supplying  the  troops  there 
except  through  the  means  of  cotton.  I feel  assured  that  this  result 
could  not  have  been  contemplated  by  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War, 
and  I therefore  hasten  to  Brownsville  to  examine  into  the  state  of  affairs 
personally  before  taking  steps  which  may  lead  to  such  disastrous  re- 
-suits.  The  loss  of  the  entire  trade  would  be  the  immediate  consequence 
of  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops  from  the  Rio  Grande. 

Col.  E.  J.  Davis,  of  the  Federal  Army,  a Texan  renegade,  arrived  at 
the  mouth  of  the  Rio  Grande  with  300  or  400  men  and  landed  on  the 
Mexican  side.  I have  reason  to  believe  that  he  brought  with  him 
some  2,500  saddles  and  bridles,  and  intended  raising  the  border 
people  and  occupying  the  frontier.  I was  enabled  to  anticipate  this 
movement  and  to  defeat  it  only  by  the  excellent  arrangements  for  sup- 
plies made  by  Major  Hart,  quartermaster  and  Government  agent  for 
the  purchase  of  supplies  by  means  of  cotton.  He  has  pledged  the  faith 
of  the  Government  tor  the  payment  of  these  supplies,  and  if  this  pledge 
is  not  redeemed  these  supplies  will  not  be  forthcoming.  I could  not 
have  maintained  my  position  there  but  for  him.  The  price  of  cotton  at 
Houston  has  gone  up  10  cents,  as  1 am  informed,  since  the  rumor  has 
gone  abroad  of  these  instructions,  and  the  Confederate  notes  will  be 
so  far  depreciated  that  I fear  I cannot  depend  upon  cotton  bought  with 
our  money  to  bring  me  supplies  for  my  troops  on  the  Rio  Grande.  I 
will  of  course  seize  cotton  of  individuals  on  the  Rio  Grande  and  use  it 


* The  Letters-Received  Book,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  indicates  that 
there  were  twenty  inclosures,  hut  they  cannot  he  identified. 


Chap,  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1031 


rather  than  fall  back  ; but  its  impressment  would  create  great  dissat- 
isfaction, and  this  I desire  particularly  to  avoid,  not  dn  iny  own  ac- 
count, but  because  of  the  advantage  which  will  be  sure  to  be  taken  of 
it  by  demagogues  and  disloyal  people. 

If  it  be  possible  to  maintain  our  troops  on  the  Rio  Grande  and  act  in 
accordance  with  these  instructions  without  impressment  I will  do  so. 
If  that  be  impossible  I will  act  in  accordance  with  the  instructions,  and 
resort  to  impressments  should  all  other  means  fail,  taking  care  to  im- 
press the  cotton  of  the  largest  speculators.  Our  money  is  valueless  on 
the  Rio  Grande,  and  as  the  exchange  of  $5  in  notes  for  $5  [sic]  in  spe- 
cie was  the  only  means  of  paying  and  supplying  the  troops  there,  I 
have  to  request  earnestly  that  I may  be  supplied  with  $100,000  in  for- 
eign exchange  every  alternate  month  to  enable  me  to  meet  this  neces- 
sity, the  means  heretofore  resorted  to  having  been  disapproved  by 
the  War  Department. 

Since  my  arrival  here  I have  not  meddled  with  these  matters,  except 
under  orders  of  my  superiors  in  rank.  I found,  however,  these  things 
in  existence,  and  I do  not  see  how  they  could*  be  remedied,  except  by 
an  adequate  supply  of  coin  or  foreign  exchange.  I cannot  but  still  en- 
tertain the  hope  that  my  printed  order  in  relation  to  cotton,  &c.,  may 
be  permitted  to  be  carried  into  effect,  as  its  promulgation  has  given 
general  satisfaction.  I know  that  the  law  allows  an  unrestricted  ex- 
portation of  cotton  on  the  Rio  Grande  frontier,  but  I have  ascertained 
that  not  more  than  5 per  cent,  of  supplies  of  all  kinds  had  before  my 
arrival  here  been  introduced  into  the  country  for  cotton  taken  out,  and 
as  the  object  of  the  law  allowing  the  exportation  of  cotton  by  the  Mex- 
ican frontier  seems  to  have  been  to  cause  the  importation  of  supplies, 
I presume  that  any  means  made  necessary  to  support  my  army  and 
tending  at  the  same  time  toward  the  accomplishment  of  the  purpose  of 
the  law  without  injuring  any  class,  except  speculators,  would,  if  not 
approved  of  by  the  War  Department,  be  permitted. 

As  soon  as  I shall  have  arrived  on  the  Rio  Grande  and  learned  the 
exact  state  of  affairs  there  I will  countermand  my  order,  in  compliance 
with  the  instructions  from  the  War  Department,  and  substitute  such 
other  as  the  nature  of  the  case  demands,  unless  in  the  mean  time  I 
shall  have  received  authority  from  the  War  Department  to  carry  out 
the  order  28,  printed  and  forwarded  to  Richmond,  as  above  stated. 

I have  approved  of  the  course  of  General  Bee  in  giving  up  Davis, 
have  assured  the  Mexican  authorities  of  our  friendly  sentiments  and 
determination  to  respect  their  rights  as  neutrals,  while  I have  energeti- 
cally brought  to  their  notice  the  flagrant  violations  of  our  rights  by  the 
enlisting  and  organizing  of  men  on  their  territory  openly  under  the 
Federal  flag  to  fight  against  us,  and  by  their  permitting  the  landing 
on  their  soil  of  the  troops  of  our  enemy  with  the  avowed  intention 
of  making  war  upon  us.  At  the  same  time  I have  ordered  two  more 
regiments  to  their  frontier,  to  be  prepared  for  whatever  may  occur. 

Desiring  to  know  the  views  of  the  Secretary  of  War  on  the  subjects 
alluded  to  here,  and  requesting  particularly  to  be  honored  with  his  in- 
structions in  regard  to  the  policy  to  be  pursued  with  Mexico,  I have 
I the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 

P.  S. — My  own  views  of  the  policy  to  be  pursued  with  Mexico  is 
| simply  this:  That  as  it  is  greatly  to  the  interest  of  our  enemy  that  we 
should  be  embroiled  with  Mexico,  we  should  not  permit  ourselves  to 


1032  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

be  provoked  by  any  act  of  hers  or  ber  citizens  to  any  course,  however 
justifiable,  which  would  afford  the  enemy  a pretext  for  blockading  then 
Rio  Grande  against  foreign  vessels  or  Mexico  an  excuse  for  co-operat- 
ing with  the  Federals  in  the  war  against  us.  I shall  do  all  in  my 
power  to  conciliate  our  neighbors  without  giving  the  slightest  cause  of 
offense  to  the  French.  Should  the  Federal  army  ever  occupy  Mata- 
moras  it  would  be  greatly  to  our  interest. 




Abstract  from  Monthly  Report  of  the  troops  in  the  Department  of  Mississippi  and  East\ 
Louisiana , Lieut.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton.  C.  S.  Army,  commanding,  for  month  of 
March,  1863.* 


Command. 


Third  Military  District,  Maj.  Gen.  Prank  Gardner  commanding, 
headquarters  Port  Hudson : 

General  and  staff 

Beall’s  brigade 

Buford’s  brigade 

Gregg’s  brigade 

Maxey’s  brigade 

Rust’s  brigade 

Troops  not  brigaded  . . 

Total 


Present  for  duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absont. 

Officers. 

Men. 

10 

12 

IT 

277 

2,917 

3, 782 

5,  oea 

230 

2,  505 

3, 458 

4,  396; 

226 

2,  519 

3,  323 

4, 130' 

297 

2,470 

3,  608 

4,  536 

187 

2,  750 

3, 401 

4,  686 

139 

1,  760 

2,  804 

3, 901 

1,  366 

14,  921 

20, 388 

26,728 

I 


* Embraces  only  so  much  of  original  return  as  relates  to  the  Third  Military  District. 


Organization  of  troops  in  the  Third  Military  District,  Department  of 
Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana , Maj.  Gen.  Franklin  Gardner , C.  8. 
Army , commanding , March  31,  1863. 


MAXEY’S  BRIGADE. 

Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  B.  Maxey. 

4th  Louisiana,  Col.  S.  E.  Hunter. 

30th  Louisiana,  Maj.  C.  J.  Bell. 

42d  Tennessee,  Lieut.  Col.  Isaac  N.  Hulme. 
46th  Tennessee,  Col.  A.  J.  Brown. 

55th  Tennessee,  Col.  A.  J.  Brown. 

48th  Tennessee,  Col.  W.  M.  Yoorhies. 

49th  Tenuessee,  Col.  J.  E.  Bailey. 

53d  Tennessee,  Capt.  H.  H.  Aymett. 
Texas  Battalion  Sharpshooters,  Maj.  James 
Burnet. 

Louisiana  Battery,  Capt.  C.  E.  Fenner. 
Mississippi  Battery,  Capt.  Calvit  Roberts. 


BEALL’S  BRIGADE. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  N.  R.  Beall. 

11th  Arkansas,  Col.  John  L.  Logan. 

17th  Arkansas,  Col.  John  L.  Logan. 

12th  Arkansas,  Col.  T.  J.  Reid. 

14th  Arkansas,  Col.  O.  P.  Lyles. 

18th  Arkansas,  Col.  O.  P.  Lyles. 

23d  Arkansas,  Col.  O.  P.  Lyles. 

15th  Arkansas,  Col.  B.  W.  Johnson. 

16th  Arkansas,  Col.  B.  W.  Johnson. 

8th  Arkansas  Battalion,  Col.  B.  W.  John- 
son. 

1st  Mississippi,  Col.  J.  M.  Simonton. 

39th  Mississippi,  Col.  W.  B.  Shelby. 

1st  Mississippi  Light  Artillery,  Battery 
B,  Capt.  A.  J.  Herod. 

1st  Mississippi  Light  Artillery,  Battery 
F,  Capt.  J.  L.  Bradford. 

1st  Mississippi  Light  Artillery,  Battery 
Iv,  Capt.  George  F.  Abbay. 


i03a 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

Organization  of  troops  in  the  Third  Military  District , Department  of 
Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana , May.  Gen.  Franklin  Gardner , C.  S. 
Army , commanding , March  31,  1863— Continued. 


GREGG’ S BRIGADE. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Gregg. 

9th  Louisiana  Battalion,  Capt.  T.  B.  R. 
Chinn. 

3d  Tennessee,  Col.  R.  W.  MacGavock. 
10th  Tennessee,  Col.  R.  W.  MacGavock. 
30th  Tennessee,  Col.  R.  W.  MacGavock. 
41st  Tennessee,  Lieut.  Col.  T.  W.  Beau- 
mont. 

50th  Tennessee,  Lieut.  Col.  T.  W.  Beau- 
mont. 

51st  Tennessee,  Lieut.  Col.  T.  W.  Beau- 
mont. 

1st  Tennessee  Battalion,  Lieut.  Col.  T. 
W.  Beaumont. 

7th  Texas,  Maj.  K.  M.  Van  Zandt. 
Brookhaven  (Mississippi)  Artillery,  Capt. 
J.  A.  Hoskins. 

Missouri  Battery,'*  Capt.  H.  M.  Bledsoe. 


RUST’S  BRIGADE. 

Brig.  Gen.  Albert  Rust. 

35th  Alabama,  Lieut.  Col.  Ed.  Goodwin. 
9th  Arkansas,  Col.  Isaac  L.  Dunlop. 

1st  Confederate  Battalion,  Maj.  G.  H. 
Forney. 

12th  Louisiana,  Col.  T.  M.  Scott. 

6th  Mississippi,  Col.  Robert  Lowry. 

15th  Mississippi,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  R.  Binford. 


RUST’S  BRIGADE — Continued. 

Hudson’s  Battery,  Lieut.  J.  R.  Sweaney. 
Pointe  Coup6e,  Battery  A,  Lieut.  C.  L„ 
Ilsley. 

Pointe  Couple,  Battery  C,  Capt.  A.  Chust* 

BUFORD’S  BRIGADE. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  Buford. 

27th  Alabama,  Col.  James  Jackson. 

49th  Alabama,  Col.  Jeptha  Edwards. 

4th  Alabama  Battalion, t Lieut.  Col.  John 
Snodgrass. 

6th  Alabama  Battalion,  Lieut.  Col.  John 
Snodgrass. 

10th  Arkansas,  Col.  A.  R.  Witt. 

3d  Kentucky,  Col.  A.  P.  Thompson. 

7th  Kentucky,  Col.  Ed.  Crossland. 

Miles’  Louisiana  Legion.} 

Boone’s  Battery. } 

Watson  Louisiana  Battery,  Lieut.  E.  A. 
Toledano. 

ARTILLERY. 

1st  Alabama  Heavy  Artillery,  Col.  I.  G. 
W.  Steedman. 

12th  Louisiana  Battalion  Heavy  Artillery, 
Lieut.  Col.  P.  F.  De  Gournay. 

1st  Tennessee  Battalion  Heavy  Artillery, 
Lieut.  Col.  P.  F.  De  Gournay. 
Mississippi  Battery,};  Capt.  R.  T.  English* 


CAVALRY. 


9th  Louisiana  Battalion,  Col.  J.  H.  Wingfield 
Mississippi  Battalion, $ Maj.  W.  H.  Garland. 

Herren’s  company,  ||  Lieutenant-Colonel  Miller. 

Lester’s  company,  ||  Lieutenant-Colonel  Miller. 

Lewis’  infantry  company.} 

Norman’s  company.  || 

Stuart’s  company.  || 

9th  Tennessee  Battalion,  Lieut.  Col.  George  Gantt. 

Bryan’s  company, } Lieut.  Col.  George  Gantt. 

Cage’s  company,  Lieut.  Col.  George  Gantt. 

Daigre’s  company,  Lieut.  Col.  George  Gantt. 

Stockdale’s  company,  Lieut.  Col.  George  Gantt. 

Terrell’s  company,  Lieut.  Col.  George  Gantt. 

Wilbourn’s  (Mississippi)  battalion,  Lieut.  Col.  George  Gantt. 


* On  return  frgm  which  this  compilation  is  made  Bledsoe’s  battery  appears  also  as 
in  Moore’s  brigade. 

t Known  also  as  the  Sixteenth  Battalion. 

} Omitted  from  one  of  the  two  returns  on  file  and  commanders  not  indicated  on  the 
other. 

$ Capt.  T.  C.  Rhodes’  Mississippi  company  attached. 

||  On  one  of  the  returns  Herren’s  and  Lester’s  under  Miller’s  command ; on  the  other 
Norman’s  and  Stuart’s  companies,  no  battalion  commander  being  indicated. 


1034  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTL 

Abstract,  from  Return  of  the  District  of  Texas,  New  Mexico , and  Arizona,  commanded  by  Maj. 
Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder,for  March,  1863  ( headquarters  Houston,  Tex.). 


Commanding  officer. 

Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Piecos  of 
artillery. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present  | 

and  absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

£ 

© 

w 

Field. 

a 

*3 

-*> 

§ 

o 

a 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee 

W estern  Sub-District  of 

181 

2, 350 

9 

17 

1 

3,041 

4,  693 

Texas. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  R.  Scurry 

Eastern  Sub-District  of 

234 

3, 717 

4, 769 

7, 200 

Texas. 

Grand  total 

415 

6,  067 

9 

17 

1 

7, 810 

11,  893 

Note  from  [Return. — No  returns  received  from  five  regiments  cavalry ; supposed  aggregate  3,500. 


Headquarters, 

San  Antonio , April  1, 1863. 

General  Scurry, 

Commanding  Eastern  Sub-District  Texas : 

Sir  : I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Magruder  to  inform  you  that 
Golonel  Bradfute,  Provisional  Armj7  of  the  Confederate  States,  has  been 
assigned  to  the  command  of  the  line  of  troops  which  you  have  been 
charged  to  stretch  across  the  Indian  frontier  from  Montgomery  County 
to  Fort  Clark.  The  Frontier  Eegiment  of  State  troops  will  be  supplied 
in  every  respect  by  the  State  of  Texas,  inasmuch  as  it  was  accepted 
into  the  Confederate  States  service  upon  this  consideration  until  the 
action  of  His  Excellency  President  Davis  is  made  known  to  these  head- 
quarters. 

The  general  directs  that  you  confer  with  Governor  Lubbock  and  CQlonel 
Bradfute,  who  has  been  ordered  to  report  to  you  for  the  above  duty,  and 
proceed  to  carry  out  the  orders  given  in  regard  to  this  regiment  and 
Gould’s  or  Stone’s,  as  you  may  select. 

These  troops  are  by  the  general  orders  assigned  to  Colonel  Bradfute, 
who  will  receive  special  instructions  from  you.* 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  P.  TTJENEE. 


Engineer’s  Office, 

Galveston , April  1,  1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  San  Antonio , Tex.: 

Captain  : I respectfully  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  a co'py  of  instruc- 
tions addressed  to  Brigadier  General  Scurry  in  reference  to  a contem- 
plated attack  on  the  Brooklyn.  In  connection  with  it  I respectfully 
suggest  that  the  Harriet  Lane  be  sent  after  the  15th  instant  (when  I 
expect  to  have  the  Fort  Point  Battery  in  working  order)  to  Galveston, 
to  be  anchored  in  the  necessary  depth  of  water  near  the  head  of  Pelican 


Some  matters  of  detail  here  omitted. 


:hap.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1035 


island,  and  having  her  masts  taken  down  she  would  not  be  seen  from 
ratside  sufficient  to  recognize  her.  At  that  point  I may  be  able  to  as- 
sist Captain  Barney  with  the  Sappers  and  Miners  to  fit  her  out  as  the 
najor-general  commanding  desires. 

Since  my  residence  in  Galveston  (February  last)  there  have  been  sev- 
eral days  with  such  state  of  the  atmosphere  that  a sortie,  as  suggested 
>y  the  major-general  commanding,  would  have  in  all  probability  suc- 
seeded. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Y.  SULAKOWSKI, 

Chief  Engineer . 


Port  Hudson,  April  3,  1863. 

jieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

It  is  reported  that  the  enemy  have  only  one  division  at  Baton  Rouge. 
Che  rest  are  at  Plaquemine,  Donaldsonville,  and  Hew  Orleans.  Ru- 
mored movement  toward  Texas. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major - General . 


Jackson,  April  4, 1863. 

Vlaj or- General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson: 

As  the  enemy  is  not  threatening  you  I want  Rust’s  brigade  sent  here 
it  once.  Say  when  he  will  be  at  Osyka. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


Port  Hudson,  April  4,  1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

Rust’s  brigade  will  start  to-morrow,  but  his  wagons  come  to  Clinton. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 


Jackson,  April  4, 1863. 

fiajor-General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson : 

Let  General  Rust  take  all  infantry  he  brought  to  Port  Hudson  if  you 
ian  spare  it. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va .,  April  4,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  B.  Buckner,  Commanding : 

General  : The  Chief  of  Ordnance  has  telegraphed  your  ordnance 


1036 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [CiiAr.  XXVIl| 

officer  to  make  requisition  for  enough  ammunition  to  supply  200  round; 
to  eacfi  gun.  More  than  this  cannot  be  spared  at  present ; but  shoulc 
our  receijit  justify  a larger  quantity  your  necessities  will  not  be  oven 
looked. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War.  I 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond , April  4,  1863. 

General  S.  B.  Buckner,  Mobile , Ala.: 

If  your  forces  enter  Pensacola  respect  and  protect  the  gentlemaii 
acting  as  Spanish  consul,  Francesco  Moreno,  as  also  all  others  of  loyaj 
feelings  who  through  weakness  may  have  been  betrayed  into  concesl 
sions. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Port  Hudson,  April  5,  1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton: 

I can  spare  Buford’s  two  regiments  at  this  time  as  well  as  Rust’s,  but 
neither,  should  Banks  advance  his  whole  force.  He  has  withdrawn  twcjj 
divisions  from  Baton  Rouge.  Shall  I order  these  regiments  wher 
wagons  return  from  Clinton 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General . 


Port  Hudson,  April  5,  1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

I have  transferred  the  two  Kentucky  regiments  from  Buford’s  t<j 
Rust’s  brigade.  All  start  this  morning.  Strength  present,  3,500  offi 
cers  and  men. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi,  i 

Alexandria , La.,  April  5,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder, 

Commanding , Ac.,  Houston , Tex.: 

General  : Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith,  on  his  way  from  Little  Rock, 
was  informed  that  an  expedition  was  being  fitted  out  for  Arizona  under 
your  direction.  I am  instructed  to  say  that  great  as  is  his  desire  to  aid 
the  patriotic  people  of  that  district  the  exigencies  of  the  service  w ill  not 
permit  the  withdrawal  of  any  part  of  our  forces  from  points  more  ex- 
posed to  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  West  Louisiana  and  Arkansas 
being  now  threatened  and  your  own  district  likely  to  be  subjected  to 
invasion  at  any  moment  should  its  army  be  weakened.  The  general 
commanding  therefore  hopes  that  if  a movement  into  Arizona  should 
have  been  contemplated  you  will  promptly  check  it,  as  it  cannot  under 
existing  circumstances  be  authorized. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servaut, 

J ’ J.  F.  BELTON, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


1037 


3hap.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Jackson,  April  6, 1863. 

Major-General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson  : 

Will  not  order  General  Buford’s  two  regiments  unless  you  feel  safe 
to  spare  them.  Have  authority  to  order  General  Buford  to  join  Gen- 
eral Price,  and  will  do  so  if  he  desires  to  go  now. 

5 J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-General , Commanding . 


Port  Hudson,  April  6, 1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

I have  ordered  Buford  on  with  his  two  regiments,  as  I feel  satisfied 
I can  spare  them  at  this  time.  Buford  wishes  to  take  the  field  under 
your  command. 

J FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Jackson,  April  6,  1863 

General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson  : 

Look  out  for  enemy’s  boats  passing  down  to-night. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  98.  ( Port  Hudson , La .,  April  6,  1863. 

I.  Brigadier-General  Buford,  with  Twenty-seventh  Alabama  and 
Snodgrass’  consolidated  regiments,  will  proceed  without  delay  to  Jack- 
son,  Miss.,  and  on  his  arrival  there  report  to  the  lieutenant-general  com- 
manding. 

II.  The  Tenth  Arkansas  Regiment  and  Watson  Battery  are  assigned 
to  Brigadier-General  Maxey’s  brigade  and  the  Forty-ninth  Alabama  to 
Brigadier- General  Beall’s. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner: 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La .,  April  7,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  R.  Waddy: 

Colonel  : The  enemy  have  removed  two  divisions,  with  the  siege 
artillery,  from  Baton  Rouge,  leaving  there  one  division,  with  the  cavalry 
and  most  of  their  field  batteries.  The  troops  withdrawn  from  this  post 
! can  easily  be  spared  at  this  time  for  more  important  services,  but  the 
j garrison  as  it  was  at  the  time  of  the  advance  of  the  enemy  was  suffi- 
cient, and  ought  properly  to  be  re-enforced  again  to  the  same  strength 
in  case  this  point  should  again  be  threatened  with  as  strong  a force. 

I respectfully  urge  that  the  great  necessity  at  this  post  is  wagon 


1038  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 

transportation.  It  is  impossible  to  move  a brigade  with  all  its  baggage 
with  the  present  means,  and  each  movement  of  troops  has  materially 
diminished  the  transportation. 

More  heavy  artillery  would  be  of  important  service  if  it  could  be 
spared.  It  would  be  very  easy  for  the  enemy  to  bring  a heavier  arma- 
ment against  this  place  than  on  the  14th  of  March. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 
Major - General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Garland’s  Cavalry, 

Camp  Wheat , April  7,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner, 

Comdg.  Third  District  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana  : 

General:  Immediately  on  receiving  your  order  I transferred  my 
command  as  rapidly  as  possible  and  reported  to  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Miller. 

After  remaining  there  two  days  Colonel  Miller  dismissed  them,  and 
told  me  that  I would  do  him  most  service  by  guarding  the  Amite  River. 
The  little  skirmish  I had  with  the  enemy  at  Sevich’s  Ferry,  of  which  I 
advised  you,  was  of  great  service  to  the  protection  of  Ponchatoula.  The 
forces  that  turned  back  were  intended  for  Ponchatoula. 

When  I last  wrote  I did  not  suppose  I had  injured  the  enemy.  I 
have  since  learned  that  they  had  24  killed  and  wounded. 

The  line  that  I had  established  on  the  Amite  River  was  well  adapted 
for  defense  and  for  inroads  on  the  enemy,  and  I regret  that  I have  not 
a force  sufficient  to  maintain  it,  and  indeed  to  make  it  much  more  effi- 
cient. If  it  was  compatible  with  your  views,  if  you  could  consolidate 
with  my  battalion  three  more  companies  I could  assume  a line  on  the 
west  side  of  the  Amite  River  about  4 miles  from  the  river.  A line  can 
there  be  established  resting  upon  the  river  swamp  and  directly  con- 
necting with  the  three  ferries.  Since  Rhodes’  company  has  been  de- 
tached (and  it  was  a most  happy  riddance)  I have  but  the  three  com- 
panies of  my  battalion,  and  from  these  three  is  a detail  of  15  men  at 
Osyka  and  15  men  at  Camp  Moore,  thus  leaving  my  force  too  small  to 
successfully  hold  the  country  I have  referred  to.  The  enemy  have  over 
300  cavalry  that  pass  through  that  county.  To.  resist  this  force  it 
will  require  some  250  men;  75  men  to  hold  the  different  ferries  and  the 
rest  to  fight  wherever  the  enemy  can  be  found.  Three  more  companies 
added  to  mine  would  give  such  a force.  One  great  advantage  would 
be  confining  the  enemy  at  Baton  Rouge,  thus  leaving  full  half  the 
country  on  the  west  side  of  the  Amite  River;  a section  from  which  for- 
age can  be  drawn.  In  it  there  is  a large  quantity  of  corn  which  would 
be  made  available  for  our  forces.  This  force  would  also  enable  me  to 
completely  cut  off  all  communications  from  Baton  Rouge  to  New  Or- 
leans by  land.  At  this  time  I believe  there  are  a number  of  unat- 
tached companies.  Captain  Bryan  (formerly  Stuart)  and  Captain  Ter- 
rell have  both  in  personal  interviews  expressed  a wish  to  belong  tO' 
my  command.  In  a former  letter  I asked  for  Captain  Daigre’s  com- 
pany, not  that  I knew  Captain  Daigre,  for  I do  not  know  him  or  a 
member  of  his  company,  but  they  are  acquainted  with  the  country  be- 
low Baton  Rouge,  and  have  a local  knowledge  that  would  be  most  val- 
uable. These  three  companies  with  my  battalion  would  give  an  effect- 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


103$ 


ive  force  of  some  300,  which  would  be  able  to  whip  any  cavalry  force 
the  enemy  could  bring  against  them. 

Having  the  Amite  River  sweeping  along  in  from  12  to  16  miles  of 
Baton  Rouge,  it  affords  a safe  retreat  and  points  from  which  attacks 
can  be  most  advantageously  made.  Should  this  force  be  wanted  to- 
re-enforce  Colonel  Gantt  a march  of  15  miles  would  place  it  in  proper 
position. 

I hope  you  will  pardon  the  liberty  I have  taken  in  making  these 
suggestions ; they  are  made  with  the  utmost  respect,  and  prompted 
alone  by  the  conviction  that  the  line  is  a most  important  one  to  annoy 
the  enemy.  Should  you  think  proper  to  consolidate  three  companies 
with  my  battalion,  I propose  at  once  to  commence  active  operations. 
Everything  necessary  for  the  support  of  the  command  can  be  obtained 
down  there. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  GARLAND, 

Major , Commanding. 


p,  s. — Since  writing  my  letter  a scouting  party  from  the  Amite 
River  has  just  returned  and  brought  in  3 deserters,  which  makes  17  that 
I have  received. 

My  scouts  represent  everything  quiet  on  the  river,  but  that  the  river 
is  falling  fast  and  the  people  were  fearful  of  inroads  by  the  Yankees. 
The  deserters  left  Baton  Rouge  on  last  Saturday,  and  they  state  that 
there  were  not  more  than  4,000  Yankees  there  and  that  their  pickets 
do  not  extend  more  than  2 miles  from  town. 

These  deserters  state  that  their  whole  company  would  desert  if  they 
got  a chance.  This  is  a strong  reason  for  my  being  down  there  with 
an  effective  force.  Consolidate  some  of  the  unattached  companies  with 
my  battalion  and  I will  use  every  effort  to  give  you  a good  account  of 
the  force,  and  I feel  satisfied  I can  do  so. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient, 

W.  H.  GARLAND, 

Major , Commanding. 


Port  Hudson,  April  9, 1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

Farragut  sent  down  a dummy  last  night,  but  only  drew  fire  from 
sharpshooters.  His  fleet  reported  gone  up  the  river. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major- General. 


Port  Hudson,  April  10, 1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

More  troops  can  properly  be  withdrawn,  but  should  be  rapidly  sent 
back  in  case  of  need. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Port  Hudson , La .,  April  10,  1863. 


Lieutenant-Colonel  Gantt, 

Commanding  Cavalry: 

Colonel  : The  major-general  commanding  directs  that  you  send 


1040 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Ciiap.  XXY3X 


scouts  out  around  Monticino  Bayou  toward  Baton  Rouge  and  find  out 
if  possible  wbat  the  enemy  are  about.  Be  careful,  though,  not  to  have 
them  cut  off 5 also  instruct  your  pickets  on  the  river  to  keep  a look- 
out for  all  boats  passing  up  or  down  the  river;  also  at  Baton  Rouge, 
and  try  and  discover  if  the  enemy  are  moving  troops  down  the  river. 

Have  any  information  that  can  be  had  forwarded  direct  to  these 
headquarters. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  FRIEND  WILLSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Sub-District  of  the  Rio  Grande, 

Carrizo , Tex .,  April  13,  1863. 

Maj.  E.  F.  Gray, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  C.  S.  P.  A.: 

Sir  : I respectfully  submit  the  following  report : 

Yesterday  morning  I received  information  that  a party  of  thieves, 
with  a drove  of  stolen  cattle,  had  passed  the  day  previous  below  here 
on  their  way  to  Mexico.  I at  once  sent  a note  to  the  commanding  offi- 
cer at  Guerrero  (a  copy  of  which  and  of  his  reply  I inclose*)  and  started 
with  a party  of  30  men  in  pursuit.  I came  to  the  trail  and  followed  it 
across  the  river  direct  to  Guerrero.  When  I came  to  the  river  Salado, 
near  Guerrero,  I sent  a messenger  to  the  commanding  officer  there  thatj 
I had  a force  at  his  disposal  to  aid  him  to  arrest  the  robbers.  He  re- 
plied  that  I must  go  with  my  force  directly  back  to  my  own  side  of 
the  Rio  Grande,  for  he  would  not  on  any  account  allow  any  armed  body 
of  men  within  the  limits  of  his  command. 

Not  satisfied  with  this  reply  I went  up  to  the  town  to  have  an  inter- 
view with  him  in  regard  to  the  arrest  of  the  thieves.  I met  him  and' 
the  alcalde  together.  The  alcade  proposed  to  take  measures  for  the] 
discovery  and  apprehension  of  the  thieves,  urging  that  they  were  bound 
by  the  contract  made  between  the  authorities  of  the  two  States  to  do  i 
so.  The  military  officer  replied  that  the  contract  was  not  in  any  way 
binding  on  him  and  that  he  should  take  no  notice  of  it,  and  that  in  so 
doing  he  was  obeying  private  instructions  received  from  Governor 
Lopez,  thus  complicating  him  in  an  act  of  bad  faith.  In  this,  however, ; 
I think  the  officer  lied.  The  alcalde  said  he  had  no  such  private  in- 
structions of  the  sort  and  had  instructions  to  fulfill  the  conditions  of  the 
eontract;  but  the  military  officer  said  he  should  permit  no  such  thing; 
that  he  had  force  enough  to  prevent  his  doing  anything,  and  if  it  was 
necessary  he  should  use  it. 

I think  the  responsibility  of  protecting  the  thieves  is  entirely  with 
the  military  commander,  having  heard  Don  Juan  Fernandez  give  him 
last  winter  an  order  to  arrest  Jos6  Ma.  Salinas,  a noted  robber,  the  first 
time  he  could  find  him,  and  since  I have  positive  information  that  he  is 
frequently  in  Guerrero,  and  has  even  been  seen  on  the  streets  in  com- 
pany with  this  same  military  officer.  He  is  the  same  man  who  made 
the  report  to  Governor  Lopez  of  my  attack  on  New  Laredo,  and  were 
it  not  for  his  persistent  efforts  in  protecting  all  the  thieves  and  assas- 
sins who  come  within  the  limits  of  his  command  I see  no  reason  why 
this  part  of  the  line  would  not  be  on  as  good  a footing  as  any  other  part. 

Considering  the  course  he  is  taking  I have  thought  that  the  only  way 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1041 


to  check  the  bandits  who  have  their  headquarters  at  Guerrero  is  to 
force  the  people  to  drive  the  thieves  out  from  their  midst  without  any 
aid  or,  rather,  in  spite  of  the  authorities.  The  people  of  that  town  can 
only  live  by  keeping  what  stock  they  have  on  this  side  of  the  river,  and 
in  taking  care  of  their  stock  here  I propose  to  put  them  entirely  at  the 
mercy  of  the  banditti  they  are  harboring  there.  I therefore,  on  my  re- 
turn from  Guerrero,  immediately  published  an  order  forbidding  them  to 
have  arms  on  this  side  of  the  Rio  Grande.  I inclose  a copy  of  the  order. 
A number  of  the  leading  men  called  on  me  asking  me  to  countermand  it, 
as  they  were  afraid  to  go  to  their  ranches  without  arms.  I told  them 
when  they  stopped  harboring  thieves  to  plunder  our  citizens  I would  do 
so,  but  could  not  before.  They  left  saying  they  would  have  to  force 
their  authorities  to  drive  out  the  thieves  or  my  orders  would  force  them 
to  starve ; hence  I have  some  hopes  that  the  Mexican  authorities  will 
take  some  action  favorable  to  us  here  as  a matter  of  self-preservation 
for  their  own  citizens. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SANTOS  BENAVIDES, 
Captain,  C.  S.  Provisional  Army , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 
Alexandria,  La.,  April  14,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding,  &e.,  Little  Bock,  Ark. : 

General:  It  is  reported  that  General  Banks  has  evacuated  Baton 
Rouge  and  is  shifting  his  troops  to  Berwick  Bay,  to  make  that  point  a 
base  of  operations.  He  has  already  concentrated  there  some  15,000  men, 
and  everything  indicates  an  intention  to  occupy  Western  Louisiana. 
At  the  same  timeMcClernand,  with  a force  of  15,000,  has  occupied  Rich- 
mond, La.,  and  is  operating  along  Bayou  Macon. 

Order  General  Walker  without  delay  with  his  division  to  Camden, 
with  instructions  to  hold  himself  in  readiness  to  move  to  Monroe  should 
the  movements  of  McClernand  render  it  necessary. 

I will  delay  to  Little  Rock  until  the  plans  of  Banks  and  McClernand 
are  further  developed. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  KIRBY  SMITH, 
Lieutenant-General , Commanding. 


Engineer’s  Office, 

Galveston,  April  14,  1863. 

Oapt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Brownsville,  Tex.: 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  to  my  greatest  regret  I 
itiavebeen  disappointed  in  the  placing  of  rafts  across  the  main  channel; 
everything,  wind  and  tide,  working  against  it.  I had  half  of  them  again 
placed,  when  last  night  the  wind  changed,  blowing  a gale  to  the  north. 
The  current  came  with  (what  I never  believed  before)  a sweep  from  7 
| jO  8 miles,  which  the  rafts  already  in  position  could  not  resist,  and  not 

66  r r — yol  xv 


1042 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXm 

being  fastened  but  to  one  abutment,  got  broken  to  pieces  against  each 
other. 

On  account  of  want  of  material  and  the  extreme  difficulty  to  place  alii 
the  rafts  in  good  weather  before  a change  takes  place  the  plan  of  raft- 
ing will  have  to  be  abandoned,  and  three  cable  chains  will  be  stretched! 
across,  with  sufficient  support  to  keep  the  chains  near  the  surface.  This 
will,  however,  be  less  serious  impediment  to  the  enemy  than  the  rafts 
would  have  been  if  I had  been  able  to  get  them  all  in  position  and 
fastened  to  both  abutments  before  the  storm  came  on. 

I will  not  attempt  to  throw  the  blame  on  men  who  badly  seconded 
me.  It  is  a failure,  and  as  in  times  like  the  present  men’s  merit  is  judged] 
by  their  success,  I therefore  deem  it  proper  to  tender  you  most  respect| 
fully  my  resignation  as  chief  engineer  of  your  district. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

V.  SULAKOWSKI, 

Chief  Engineer. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Alexandria , La.,  April  15,  1863.  ! 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton,  Jackson,  Miss.: 

General  : The  enemy  have  crossed  Berwick  Bay,  and  a column  of 
about  15,000  men  is  operating  along  Bayou  Teche.  General  Taylor  hasl 
been  driven  back  by  overwhelming  numbers,  and  indications  are  that) 
the  enemy  intend  moving  upon  Opelousas  and  Alexandria.  This,  taken) 
in  connection  with  the  information  we  have  that  Baton  Bouge  has  been! 
evacuated,  renders  it  probable  that  Banks  has  changed  his  plan  of  cam-] 
paign,  and  contemplates  the  conquest  of  Western  Louisiana  and  the 
cutting  off  of  supplies  to  Mississippi  by  the  occupation  of  Red  River.) 

Taylor  has  only  about  5,000  men  in  the  District  of  Louisiana  to  meet) 
this  movement.  Cannot  you  re-enforce  him  with  a portion  of  the  troops: 
at  Port  Hudson,  which  by  the  change  of  plan  of  General  Banks  ought 
to  be  disposable?  If  not,  can  you  not  operate  toward  New  Orleans  with! 
that  force,  and  by  threatening  the  city  bring  back  the  enemy  from  Ber-| 
wick  Bay  and  the  Teche  country. 

Unless  we  are  re-enforced  or  some  counter-movement  is  made  on  the! 
other  side  of  the  river  the  enemy  must  succeed  in  their  occupation  of 
West  Louisiana,  and  thus  effectually  close  up  the  only  channel  by  which 
supplies  can  be  passed  east  of  the  Mississippi. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  KIRBY  SMITH, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Alexandria,  La.,  April  15,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding,  &c.,  Little  Bock , Ark. : 

General  : I inclose  a copy  of  a letter,*  from  which  you  will  see  that 
the  plans  of  the  enemy  are  being  developed.  His  movements  along  the 
Teche  show  an  evident  intention  to  occupy  that  portion  of  the  State  and 
perhaps  to  advance  toward  the  northwestern  part. 

I wish  you  to  hasten  the  movements  of  Walker’s  division  to  Monroe, 

* Not  found.  Perhaps  it  was  copy  of  that  to  Pemberton  of  same  date,  p.  1042, 


Chap  . XXVII.  1 CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  1043 

so  that  it  may  be  enabled  to  support  Taylor  should  the  enemy  advance 
toward  Alexandria. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  KIRBY  SMITH, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding . 


List  of  stores  in  Port  Hudson  April  15,  1863,  per  report  of  Maj . J.  P. 
Carr , depot  commissary. 

Rations. 


Meat: 


Bulk  pork 

Bacon  

Lard 

Salt  beef. . 


3, 760 
460, 000 

64. 000 

41.000 


Total 


568, 760 


Breadstuff  : 

Flour 3, 644 

Corn ,. .. 1,215,000 

Total 1,218,644 


Rice 

Tea 

Sugar  .. 

Soap 

Salt 

Molassas 


200, 000 
2, 000, 000 
2, 616, 666 
17, 500 
15, 466, 666 
6, 695, 000 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Alexandria , La .,  April  16,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder,  Houston , Tex. : 

General  : It  is  reported  that  General  Banks  has  evacuated  Baton 
Rouge  and  is  shifting  his  troops  to  Berwick  Bay,  making  that  point  a 
base  of  operations.  Some  15,000  of  the  enemy  are  now  about  the  Teche. 
General  Taylor  has  been  driven  back  by  overwhelming  numbers,  and 
it  is  probably  the  intention  of  the  Federals  to  advance  upon  Opelousas 
and  Alexandria  and  occupy  Western  Louisiana,  and  thus  cut  off  Texas 
from  the  rest  of  the  Confederacy. 

On  the  other  hand,  McClernand  has  occupied  Richmond,  La.,  with 
about  15,000  men,  and  is  operating  along  Bayou  Macon.  Taylor  has 
only  about  6,000  troops  to  oppose  these  movements,  and  unless  re-en- 
forced the  enemy  must  succeed  in  cutting  off  all  intercourse  with  the 
east. 

Lieutenant-General  Smith  directs  that  you  will  immediately  move  all 
your  disposable  force  toward  Opelousas.  These  troops  will  not  be  re- 
moved from  West  Louisiana,  and  will  be  returned  to  your  district  as 
soon  as  the  necessity  for  their  presence  here  ceases  to  exist. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  BELTOK, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


1044 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII 

Jackson,  April  17, 1863.  ! 


Oapt.  E.  Powell, 

Assistant  Quartermaster , Natchez  : 

Forward  the  following  to  Lieutenant-General  Smith  or  Major-Genera 
Taylor,  viz : 


For  the  want  of  necessary  transportation  I cannot  operate  effectually  on  the  wes 
side  of  the  river.  The  enemy  is  now  in  force  at  New  Carthage  and  Richmond,  and  || 
beg  your  attention  to  this. 


J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General , Commanding. 


Mil.  Oommandancy  State  of  Tamaulipas,  War  Dept., 

Matamoras , April  17,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee: 


The  authorities  of  the  line  of  Mier  transmitted  to  me  copies  of  corn! 
munications  which  I have  the  honor  herewith  to  inclose  you.  They  re  j 
fer  to  some  acts  of  Capt.  Santos  Benavides  which  are  not  in  conformity 
with  the  ratified  agreement  between  the  authorities  of  both  States,  anc 
which  in  fact  virtually  destroy  the  same.  Said  orders  were  issued  in 
consequence  of  an  affair  which  occurred  recently. 

Gapt.  Santos  Benavides  gave  notice  that  he  should  cross  the  rive: 
for  the  purpose  of  following  the  tracks  of  some  stolen  cattle,  and  In  I 
actually  proceeded  toward  Guerrero.  The  commander  of  that  town  an 
swered  him  that  he  would  immediately  dispatch  a force  to  pursue  tha 
malefactors,  upon  which  he  received  a note  from  Captain  Benavide: 
stating  that  he  had  arrived  at  the  edge  of  town  and  that  he  intended 
to  enter  it.  This  could  not  be  permitted,  as  it  was  not  in  conformity! 
with  the  agreement.  ....  I 

The  pursuit  could  haye  been  made  by  the  Mexican  authorities  it  tin 
delinquents  had  actually  entered  Guerrero,  in  which  case  the  object 
and  reasons  of  the  agreement  would  have  ceased,  there  being  no  necesj 
sity  for  it. 

Not  only  is  this  pretension  contrary  to  its  spirit,  but  also  to  its  letterf 
It  stipulates  that  only  in  cases  of  absolute  necessity  the  Texas  troops 
should  pursue  the  evil-doers  into  the  territory  of  the  Republic,  and  a| 
no  absolute  necessity  existed,  inasmuch  as  the  Mexican  authorities  hat 
commenced  to  exercise  their  official  duties,  Captain  Benavides  shoulc 
have  limited  himself  to  giving  information  in  order  to  institute  the  neo 
essary  investigation.  . 

Notwithstanding  these  strong  considerations,  the  authorities  of  Guer 
rero,  actuated  by  a principle  of  good  feeling,  would  have  admitted  saic 
captain  into  the  town  if  reasons  of  another  character  had  not  existed 
The  incidents  which  occurred  at  Monterey  and  Laredo  last  month  kepi 
up  a deep  distrust  against  him— a distrust  which  has  some  real  founda 
tion. 

It  is  painful  to  me  to  revert  to  the  past,  as  I accepted  the  explaua 
tions  of  Captain  Benavides  as  valid,  if  a new  and  disagreeable  occur 
rence  which  took  place  had  not  called  it  to  my  recollection. 

The  occurrences  at  Laredo  have  created  the  utmost  want  of  confi 
deuce  in  the  towns,  because  they  were  actually  contrary  to  the  agree 
ment,  and  howeyer  much  Santos  Benavides  may  disguise  them,  the^ 


Chap.  XXVIT.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1045 


were  a violation  against  the  Mexican  authorities.  This  cause,  together 
with  the  pretensions,  justified  the  answer  of  the  officials  of  Guerrero. 

On  the  day  when  Santos  Benavides  considered  the  agreement  broken, 
by  which  he  exceeded  without  a doubt  his  authority,  his  troops  crossed 
the  river  in  pursuit  of  other  malefactors.  No  notice  preceded  that  act, 
nor  were  the  reasons  for  crossing  the  river  afterward  communicated  to 
the  authorities  of  the  Republic.  I can  only  explain  proceedings  so  con- 
tradictory in  themselves  as  the  result  of  a confirmed  purpose  on  the  part 
of  Santos  Benavides  to  fulfill  the  agreement  whenever  he  finds  it  con- 
venient or  to  violate  it  without  pretext  or  motive. 

From  the  moment  it  should  be  disregarded  the  Mexican  authorities 
would  consider  themselves  relieved  from  its  fulfillment,  because  other- 
wise the  complications  which  were  intended  to  be  obviated  would  not 
be  terminated,  but,  on  the  contrary,  increased. 

I confide  as  ever  in  your  determination  to  maintain  harmony  between 
both  frontiers,  and  hope  that  you  will  give  orders  to  avoid  the  difficul- 
ties which  have  been  reproduced.  For  my  part  I have  proceeded  in 
this  spirit  by  giving  such  orders  as  I judged  proper. 

Please  accept  the  assurance  of  my  regard  and  consideration. 

Liberty  and  reform. 

A.  LOPEZ. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans- Mississippi, 
Alexandria , La .,  April  18,  18G3. 

(Received  Richmond  April  20.) 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.  : 

General  Banks  has  concentrated  a large  force  at  Berwick  Bay.  Tay- 
lor engaged  him  11th,  12th,  and  14th.  Has  fallen  back  before  superior 
numbers  to  New  Iberia. 

McClernand  is  advancing  in  Northern  Louisiana  along  the  Macon 
and  Tensas  with  a heavy  column.  The  attack  on  Port  Hudson  and 
Vicksburg  seems  to  have  been  abandoned  $ if  so,  re- enforcements  should 
be  promptly  sent  to  General  Taylor  from  across  the  Mississippi.  The 
State  is  threatened  with  conquest  by  the  overwhelming  force  of  the 
enemy. 

El.  KIRBY  SMITH, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  April  18, 1863. 
Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith  or  Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor  : 

The  enemy  are  cutting  a passage  from  near  Young’s  Point  to  Bayou 
Vidal  to  reach  the  Mississippi  River  near  New  Carthage.  Without  co- 
pperation  it  is  impossible  to  oppose  him. 

Inform  me  what  action  you  intend  to  take. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 

(Sent  through  Capt.  E.  Powell,  Natchez.) 


1046 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 
Alexandria , La .,  April  19,  1863. 

Lieut*  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  Little  Rock , Arlc. : 

General  : I send  you  the  following  information,  received  this  morn- 
ing from  scouting  parties : 

From  papers  taken  on  the  captives  and  from  the  citizens  we  removed  we  learned 
that  we  were  in  4 miles  of  a division  of  the  enemy.  * * * The  enemy  are  re-en- 

forcing on  the  other  side  of  Bayou  Vidal  daily.  They  are  building  boats  at  every 
place  they  can  find  lumber,  and  two  steamboat  loads  of  yawls  and  skiffs  have  been 
brought  down  the  Mississippi  River  to  this  place,  thus  enabling  them  in  a short  time 
to  overrun  this  entire  country,  &c. 

General  Smith  apprehends  that  if  the  enemy  should  reach  Monroe 
they  may  by  steamers  make  a raid  to  destroy  the  depot  at  Camden,  and 
desires  that  you  will,  should  you  receive  information  of  the  advance  of 
the  enemy  on  Monroe,  send  a portion  of  your  force  to  protect  that 
depot. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  R.  BOGGS, 

Brigadier- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 
Alexandria , La.,  April  19,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  Jackson , Miss. : 

General  : General  Taylor  has  been  forced  by  overwhelming  num- 
bers of  the  enemy,  now  supposed  to  be  Banks’  whole  army,  to  fall  back 
to  Opelousas.  He  will  endeavor  to  hold  them  in  check  near  that  place, 
but  unless  promptly  re-enforced  cannot  prevent  their  advance  upon 
Alexandria. 

As  Port  Hudson  is  no  longer  threatened,  cannot  you  order  troops 
from  that  point  to  Taylor’s  aid  ? It  is  necessary  that  this  re-enforce- 
ment to  be  effectual  should  be  promptly  made. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  KIRBY  SMITH, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Alexandria , La.,  April  19,  1863.  4 

Comdg.  Officer  Second  Brigade  Texas  Volunteers, 

On  Red  River,  near  Mill  Creek  : 

Sir  : You  will  immediately  proceed  with  the  troops  under  your  com- 
mand to  Alexandria  via  Shreveport,  the  quartermaster  at  which  place 
has  been  instructed  to  furnish  transportation  for  you. 

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  this  movement  be  made  with  great 
celerity,  as  the  troops  are  needed  to  oppose  the  advance  of  the  enemy 
into  Texas,  and  the  commanding  general  trusts  that  no  time  will  be 
lost  in  putting  your  command  in  motion. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  BELTOK, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Cuap.  XXVtt.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1047 


Jackson,  April  20,  1863. 

General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson,  La. : 

Bowen  reports  from  Grand  Gulf  two  iron  clads,  eight  guns  each ; one 
iron-clad,  nine  guns;  one  iron-clad,  ten  guns;  one  iron-clad,  eleven 
guns;  one  iron-clad,  thirteen  guns;  one  iron-clad,  guns  unknown  ; one 
iron-clad  ram,  three  guns,  in  iron  casemate  in  front;  one  small  tug,  two 
large  transports,  and  one  barge  heavily  laden.  They  are  1 mile  below 
New  Carthage. 

b J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

TAeutenant-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 
Alexandria , April  20,  1863.  (Received  April  22.) 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  Jackson : 

General  Taylor  has  fallen  back  beyond  Opelousas  before  an  over- 
whelming force  of  the  enemy,  and  is  retreating  toward  Alexandria. 
There  are  no  troops  in  this  department  that  can  now  be  sent  to  operate 
against  McClernand  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Mississippi.  I hope  that 
you  will  keep  the  force  at  Grand  Gulf  operating  against  McClernand 
as  long  as  possible. 

S 1 E.  KIRBY  SMITH, 

T lieutenant-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 
Alexandria , La.,  April  20,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  Commanding,  &c. : 

General:  The  lieutenant-general  commanding  desires  to  express 
his  gratification  at  the  conduct  of  the  troops  under  your  command  in 
the  various  conflicts  of  the  11th,  12th,  and  14th  instant,  and  his  ap 
preciation  of  the  skill  and  energy  displayed  in  extricating  them  from  a 
position  of  great  peril  and  in  presence  of  an  enemy  so  vastly  superior 
in  numbers.  . 

The  commanding  general  also  instructs  me  to  say  that  he  would  join 
you  at  once  but  for  the  belief  that  by  his  presence  here  he  can  serve 
you  more  effectively. 

As  far  as  knowledge  of  the  country  enables  him  to  judge,  he  considers 
the  position  you  have  chosen  the  best  that  can  be  occupied.  He  has 
written  to  General  Pemberton,  informing  him  of  the  state  of  affairs  and 
asking  for  re-enforcements  from  Port  Hudson.  Walker’s  division  from 
Arkansas  and  three  regiments  of  Texas  troops  (now  on  Red  River  near 
Mill  Creek)  have  been  ordered  down  to  your  support,  but  it  is  hoped 
that  the  enemy,  content  with  holding  the  lower  country,  will  not  at 
present  make  a further  advance. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

’ 6 ’ J.  F.  BELTON, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  Department, 
Alexandria,  La.,  April  20,  1863. 


Brigadier-General  Scurry, 

Commanding,  Houston,  Tex.: 

General  : The  enemy  in  large  force  have  driven  General  Taylor’s 


1048 


\Y.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIl. 


forces  from  the  vicinity  of  the  coast  and  are  advancing  toward  the 
interior  of  Western  Louisiana. 

Presuming  that  Major-General  Magruderis  temporarily  absent  from 
Houston,  Lieutenant-General  Smith  directs  that  you  will  concentrate  all 
the  available  force  within  your  reach  at  or  near  Niblett’s  Bluff,  on  the 
Sabine.  You  will  also  concentrate  supplies  and  transportation  for  any 
prompt  movement.  This  movement  is  in  anticipation  of  either  an  ad- 
vance of  the  enemy  on  Texas  or  for  the  purpose  of  concentrating  with 
the  force  now  on  the  way  from  the  northern  portion  of  the  department 
to  resist  any  movement  of  the  enemy.  The  efficacy  of  this  movement 
will  depend  entirely  upon  the  promptness  with  which  you  can  assemble 
your  forces. 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfullv,  &c., 

W.  E.  BOGGS, 

Brigadier -General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 
Alexandria , La .,  April  20,  1863. 

Major-General  Walker: 

General  : Lieutenant-General  Smith  directs  that  you  leave  one 
regiment  at  Monroe  and  proceed  with  the  rest  of  your  command  to  this 
place.  Should  the  enemy  blockade  the  mouth  of  Black  Eiver  you 
will  proceed  overland  from  Harrisburg.  Communication  will  be  estab- 
lished with  the  mouth  of  Black  Eiver  and  Harrisburg  in  time  to  give 
you  the  necessary  information. 

I remain,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  E.  BOGGS, 

Brigadier- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Special  Orders  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  Generates  Office, 

No.  96.  ( Richmond , April  20,  1863. 

******* 

XYI.  Brig.  Gen.  F.  A.  Shoup  will  proceed  without  delay  to  Mobile, 
Ala.,  and  relieve  Brig.  Gen.  J.  E.  Slaughter,  chief  of  artillery  of  General 
S.  B.  Buckner’s  command. 

Brigadier-General  Slaughter,  on  being  relieved,  will  proceed  without 
delay  to  Galveston,  Tex.,  and  report  to  Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder,  com- 
manding, as  chief  of  artillery  of  his  command,  reporting  to  Gen.  E.  K. 
Smith  at  Alexandria,  La. 

******* 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant- Adjutant  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

No.  5.  f Alexandria , La.,  April  20,  1863. 

I.  The  following  officers  are  announced  upon  the  staff  of  the  com- 
manding general : 

Col.  Duncan  Cage,  volunteer  aide-de-camp. 

First  Lieut.  J.  Compton  French,  volunteer  aide-de-camp. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.  CONFEDERATE. 


1049 


Sura’.  Jolm  M.  Haden,  medical  director. 

Sura.  S.  A.  Smith,  medical  director  of  department  hospitals. 

By  command  of  Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith:  ^ BELTON 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Port  Hudson,  April  21, 1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

I change  in  affairs  here  reported.  It  is  authentic  that  General 
Taylor  has  retreated  to  Vermillion ville  and  the  advance  of  the  enemy 
occupy  New  Iberia.  Queen  of  the  West  and  the  Diana  destroyed $ also 

reported  the  Hart  destroyed.  FRANK.  GAKDHER, 

TU/iiny.  flpwernl, 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Alexandria , Lei.,  April  21,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Scurry, 

Commanding , (fee.,  Houston , Tex. : 

General:  Colonel  Major,  of  the  Confederate  States  Army,  has  been 
ordered  to  Niblett’s  Bluff  to  collect  the  stragglers  and  deserters  from 
General  Taylor’s  army.  The  lieutenant-general  commanding  desires 
that  you  will  send  him  subsistence  for  such  men  as  he  may  gather,  ft 
is  reported  that  large  numbers  of  men  are  making  their  way  into 
Tgx&s 

General  Smith  directs  that  you  will  use  all  the  means  in  your  power 
and  call  upon  the  civil  authorities  to  assist  in  collecting  these  men  and 
to  rendezvous  them  at  NibletFs  Bluff. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ & 7 W.  E.  BOGGS, 

Brigadier- General,  Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

. Jackson , April  22.  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith, 

Commanding  Trans -Mississippi , Alexandria: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
munication of  15th  instant,  which  came  to  hand  to-day,  and  in  reply  to 
state  that  I addressed  you  telegrams  on  the  17th  and  18th  instant,  send- 
ing them  through  the  agent  at  Natchez,  informing  you  of  my  inability, 
on  account  of  want  of  transportation  and  the  presence  of  the  enemy  s 
gunboats  in  the  river,  to  operate  on  the  other  side  of  the  Mississippi, 
and  asking  therefore  your  actiop  and  co-operation  there  opposite  Grand 
Gulf,  near  New  Carthage.  I regret  very  much  the  necessity  General 
Taylor  was  under  of  retreating  before  overwhelming  numbers,  but  am 
utterly  unable  to  assist  him,  as  the  enemy  have  again  occupied  Baton 
Eouge  in  strong  force  and  have,  moreover,  eleven  gunboats  between 
Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson,  which  not  only  effectually  prevent  tne 
shipment  of  supplies  across  the  river,  but  are  almost  able  to  stop  com- 
munication between  the  two  departments.  I have  been  compelled  to 


1050 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX..  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII 


withdraw  4,000  troops  from  Port  Hudson,  and  could  not  therefore  pos- 
sibly send  any  forces  from  that  point,  severely  threatened  as  it  now  is. 

If  yon  purpose  making  an  attempt  against  the  city,  referred  to  in 
your  letter,  inform  me  of  your  intention,  and  I will  endeavor  to  co-oper- 
ate from  this  side,  but  deem  the  risk  too  great  to  justify  my  advance 
alone  on  this  point. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General , Commanding. 

(Through  Capt.  E.  Powell,  assistant  quartermaster,  Natchez,  Miss.) 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 
Alexandria , La .,  April  22,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  Little  Bock , Ark.  : 

General  Banks,  with  an  overwhelming  force,  is  near  Alexandria,  and  j 
this  whole  country  will  probably  fall  into  his  hands.  General  Taylor’s  j 
force  will  move  to  Shreveport.  The  Ouachita  will  be  the  base  of  opera-  j 
tions.  McOlernand  is  moving  down  from  Richmond  and  New  Carthage,  j 
The  possession  of  the  Ouachita  and  Black  Rivers  is  doubtful.  You  will  i 
have  to  look  to  your  supplies  at  Cam  den $ also  to  send  all  steamboats 
as  far  up  as  possible.  The  battery  at  Harrisburg  cannot  hold  out  long. 

The  following  dispatch  just  received,  viz  : 

The  enemy  is  organizing  a force  at  New  Carthage,  probably  to  move  up  Red  River. 
Nine  gunboats,  two  transports,  and  one  tug ; with  Farragut’s,  will  have  twelve  gun- 
boats. It  is  important  that  no  transports  should  fall  into  Ms  hands. 

General  Smith  moves  his  headquarters  to  Shreveport  and  desires  that 
you  will  give  your  personal  attention  to  the  above,  as  he  will  be  too  far 
away. 

Respectfully,  &c., 

W.  R.  BOGGS, 

Brigadier -General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 
Alexandria , La^  April  22,  1863.  (Received  April  29.) 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding , &c.,  Jackson , Miss. : 

General  : The  enemy  are  advancing  rapidly  upon  Alexandria.  Tay- 
lor is  left  with  but  a handful  of  men,  and  I have  no  hope  of  re-enforce- 
ments reaching  us  in  time  to  check  him.  Butte-A-la-Rose  is  in  his  pos- 
session, and  this  opens  the  Atchafalaya  and  a passage  for  his  gunboats 
from  the  Gulf  to  the  Red  and  Mississippi  Rivers,  though  I am  not  offi- 
cially informed  of  any  having  passed  up.  Our  boats  Queen  of  the 
West  and  Diana  were  lost  in  Taylor’s  operations  in  Grand  Lake,  and 
we  are  consequently  without  means  of  preventing  his  occupation  of  this 
district. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  KIRBY  SMITH, 
Lieutenant-General , Commanding. 


Dhap.  XXViT.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1051 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 
Alexandria , La.,  April  22,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor: 

General  : Lieutenant-General  Smith  directs  me  to  give  you  the  fol- 
lowing information,  viz : 

All  the  available  force  in  Eastern  Texas  has  been  ordered  to  concen- 
trate at  Mblett’s  Bluff.  A brigade  has  been  ordered  down  from  the 
Upper  Red  River.  Major-General  Walker’s  division  has  been  ordered 
from  Arkansas.  These  troops  ought  to  begin  to  arrive  about  the  last 
of  this  week  or  the  first  of  next. 

The  general  is  of  the  opinion  that  if  a portion  of  the  force  pursuing 
you  should  move  against  Fort  De  Russy  by  the  road  from  Hauffpaur 
it  will  be  impossible  to  hold  it.  If  you  are  of  the  same  opinion  he  de- 
sires that  you  will  give  the  necessary  information  of  the  movements  of 
the  enemy  to  the  commanding  officer  of  that  fort  to  enable  him  to  move 
the  guns.  Instructions  have  been  sent  to  the  fort  to  have  everything 
in  readiness  for  such  an  emergency. 

General  Smith  does  not  desire  to  abandon  Fort  De  Russy  if  it  can  be 
held.  Your  instructions  to  the  commanding  officer  will  govern  his 
actions. 

All  the  public  property  and  foundery  have  been  placed  on  board 
steamers  ready  to  start  if  necessary.  The  general  would  be  glad  to 
hear  from  you  frequently,  even  should  there  be  no  important  informa- 
tion. 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  R.  BOGGS, 

Brigadier-General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans- Mississippi, 
Alexandria , La.,  April  22,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Walker,  Camden,  Arh.: 

Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith  directs  that  immediately  upon  your  ar- 
rival at  Camden  you  will  march  with  your  command  across  the  country 
to  Shreveport,  La. 

The  general  further  directs  that  you  bring  with  you  all  your  trans- 
portation and  collect  as  many  wagons  as  possible  in  the  vicinity  of 
Oatnden,  loading  them  with  provisions  and  forage  for  the  command  on 
the  march. 

I If  before  receiving  this  order  you  have  proceeded  to  Monroe  you  will 
return  to  Camden,  and  move  from  that  point,  as  above  directed. 
Respectfully, 


W.  R.  BOGGS, 

Brigadier- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown,  April  22,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Albino  Lopez, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communi- 
cation of  the  17th  instant,  with  its  inclosures. 

Herewith  I transmit  a certified  copy  of  a letter  just  received  from 


1052 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


Capt.  Santos  Benavides,  commanding  at  Carrizo,*  to  which  I beg  to 
call  the  attention  of  Your  Excellency. 

It  appears  that  a party  of  thieves  with  stolen  beeves  crossed  the  Bio  i 
Grande  into  Mexico  a few  miles  below  the  encampment  of  Captain  Bena- 
vides ; that  on  discovering  the  trail  he  notified  the  authorities  of  Guer- 
rero that  he  was  about  to  cross  in  pursuit,  and  received  a response  that 
they  also  would  immediately  proceed  to  follow.  He  then  crossed,  and 
on  the  trail  in  less  than  two  leagues  found  himself  at  Guerrero,  the  trail 
leading  into  that  town.  He  then  notified  the  authorities  that  he  was 
ready  with  his  force  to  assist  in  the  capture  of  the  thieves,  but  it  seems 
that  the  commander  of  the  Mexican  forces  took  offense  at  his  presence 
and  ordered  him  back  to  the  Texas  side  of  the  river.  In  the  discussion 
which  ensued  he  informed  Captain  Benavides  that  he  should  not  respect 
the  mutual  agreement  entered  into  between  us,  for  he  had  private  in- 
structions from  Your  Excellency  not  to  do  so.  Upon  this  Captain  Bena- 
vides returned  to  his  camp  on  the  Texas  side  and  issued  an  order  that 
all  persons  should  cross  at  his  headquarters  and  deposit  their  arms  be- 
fore proceeding  to  the  interior,  &c. 

In  calling  your  attention  to  the  letter  of  Captain  Benavides  I need 
not  assure  Your  Excellency,  who'has  given  me  so  many  proofs  of  your 
good  faith,  that  I consider  the  language  of  the  military  commander  at 
Guerrero  concerning  the  private  instructions  he  may  have  received  from 
you  as  utterly  false,  but  it  appears  to  me  important  that  his  conduct 
should  be  inquired  into,  and  if  found  to  be  influenced  by  hostility  or 
antipathy  to  the  people  of  Texas  that  one  more  in  harmony  with  us 
should  replace  him. 

The  act  of  Captain  Benavides  seems  to  me  to  have  been  in  conformity 
with  the  spirit  of  our  agreement  up  to  the  time  of  his  arrival  in  front  of 
Guerrero.  He  did  not  then  pretend  to  enter  the  city,  but  contented 
himself  with  offering  his  services  if  they  were  needed.  The  pursuit  on 
the  part  of  the  Mexican  authorities  had  not  even  commenced,  so  short 
was  the  time  allowed,  and  yet  the  stolen  property  was  even  then  in  the 
streets  of  Guerrero,  which  would  show  that  the  u absolute  necessity” 
contemplated  by  the  agreement  had  arisen,  for  otherwise  the  trail  would 
have  been  lost. 

I trust  that  Your  Excellency  will  divest  the  occurrence  of  any  inten- 
tion to  trespass  on  the  rights  of  Mexico,  but  rather  consider  it  as  an 
energetic  effort  to  carry  out  the  spirit  of  an  agreement  mutually  bene- 
ficial to  the  citizens  of  both  nations.  The  object  was  to  punish  thieves, 
and  when  considered  in  that  light  it  was  in  itself  a friendly  act,  and  done 
with  the  best  motives  and  with  considerate  courtesy.  A different  con- 
struction of  this  act  may  have  been  instigated  by  the  local  and  personal 
enmities  unfortunately  existing  in  that  vicinity,  it  being  the  residence 
of  Zapata  and  the  headquarters  of  his  band. 

I would  respectfully  inquire  if  it  is  within  your  knowledge  that  the 
stolen  beeves  thus  traced  to  the  town  of  Guerrero  have  been  returned 
to  the  authorities  of  Texas  and  the  thieves  punished. 

I regret  to  state  that  I have  received  information  that  cattle  and 
horses  are  being  stolen  from  the  ranches  in  Texas  and  crossed  into  Mex- 
ico with  lamentable  frequency. 

I have  no  report  from  Captain  Benavides  of  having  crossed  the  river 
a second  time  in  pursuit  of  thieves,  and  shall  very  much  regret  that  he 
should  have  done  so  without  giving  the  necessary  notice,  but  presume 
it  was  done  because  the  military  commander  had  avowed  his  intention 


Probably  that  of  April  13,  p.  1040. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1053 


not  to  be  governed  by  the  agreement.  Instructions  will  be  immediately 
issued  to  Captain  Benavides  which  will  prevent  a recurrence  of  such 
acts. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army. 


Headquarters  Eastern  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Houston , April  23,  1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General , Fort  Brown , Tex. : 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  your  communication, 
dated  Santa  Kosa,  Tex.,  April  14,  1863,  and  have  particularly  noted  its 
contents. 

I beg  to  say  to  the  major-general  commanding  that  the  Lucy  G-winn 
has  been  in  Matagorda  Bay  for  near  if  not  quite  two  weeks. 

The  blockading  squadron  has  continued  off  our  coast  ever  since  the 
major-general  left,  the  only  change  being  a gunboat  (supposed  to  be 
the  Penobscot)  having  taken  the  place  of  the  Brooklyn,  she  having  left 
about  eight  days  ago. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  are  moving  about  from  one  place  to  another,  but  for 
no  great  distance.  Captain  Barney,  C.  S.  Navy,  has  declined  to  co- 
operate with  me  in  fitting  up  the  Harriet  Lane  in  the  manner  indicated 
to  me  in  one  of  the  major-general’s  former  letters  and  also  mentioned  in 
the  one  now  before  me. 

We  have  had  various  rumors  within  the  last  three  days  as  to  the 
operations  of  the  enemy  on  Bayou  Teche.  The  very  latest  account  is 
contained  in  the  inclosed  extra.  It  appears  that  General  Taylor’s  forces 
are  still  falling  back.  Yesterday  morning  I received  dispatch  marked  1, 
and  replied  as  in  dispatch  marked  2.  Feeling  that  the  enemy  was  press- 
ing us  in  Western  Louisiana  and  that  a call  for  re-enforcements  might 
be  made  at  any  time,  and  further  supposing  the  major-general  com- 
manding if  here  would  probably  have  done  likewise,  I issued  the  in- 
closed orders,  marked  3,  4,  and  5.*  I further  ordered  three  days  ago 
Stone’s  and  Phillips’  regiments  to  halt.  Yesterday  afternoon  I or- 
dered Gurley’s  and  Baylor’s  regiments  to  halt  also.  In  so  doing  I pur- 
sued the  course  which  I supposed  you  would  have  adopted  in  the 
premises.  This  morning  another  dispatch  was  received  from  General 
Smith  to  the  following  import : That  the  commanding  officer  at  Houston 
will  immediately  prepare  all  of  his  disposable  force  to  be  marched  into 
Western  Louisiana. 

We  do  not  know  when  the  call  for  re-enforcements  will  come,  but  we 
hope  to  be  ready  to  give  assistance. 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  for  the  information  of  the  major-general 
commanding  Lieutenant-Colonel  Griffin’s  rejiortof  an  engagement  with 
a detachment  of  the  enemy  on  the  18th  instant.f  It  will  be  seen  that  the 
only  casualty  on  our  side  was  1 killed — Lieutenant  Wright,  of  Griffin’s 
battalion.  Colonel  Griffin  succeeded  in  capturing  8 prisoners,  killed  1, 
and  4 escaped  in  their  boat,  some  of  them  wounded. 

The  honorable  Secretary  of  the  Navy  has  directed  Captain  Barney  to 
transfer  the  Harriet  Lane  to  the  Department  of  War.  Orders  have 
been  received  for  the  major-general  commanding  to  secure  her.  What 


Np  ixiclosures  found. 


t See  p.  402, 


1054 


,W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chap.  XXYIL 


shall  be  done  with  her  ? I will  place  a trusty  officer  in  charge  of  her. 
Might  she  not  be  sent  out  with  a load  of  cotton  and  sold  in  a Spanish 
port  and  purchase  made  of  an  effective  war  vessel  i 

Since  the  above  orders  were  issued  Major  Watkins  has  informed  me 
that  he  received  a dispatch  from  General  Smith  calling  for  all  of  the  j 
disposable  force  here;  consequently  I have  ordered  forward  to  the; 
Sabine  Eiver  the  following  regiments : Stone’s,  Phillips’,  Baylor’s,  and 
Gurley’s.  Gould’s  will  be  ordered  to-morrow.  I will  urge  forward  these ; 
troops  to  the  Sabine  Eiver,  instructing  the  colonels  to  send  couriers  j 
forward  to  General  Smith  as  to  what  direction  they  should  approach 
the  scene  of  operations. 

The  Harriet  Lane  has  not  been  fitted  up  as  you  directed,  in  conse- 
quence of  Captain  Barney  declining  to  co-operate  with  me.  I am  satis- 
fied that  the  dispatches  from  Alexandria,  La.,  are  to  a great  extent 
exaggerated. 

Inclosed  please  find  dispatches  from  Major  McKee,  correcting  the 
report  of  the  loss  of  the  Queen  of  the  West.*  j 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  E.  SCUEEY, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Alexandria,  La..  April  24,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  Little  Book  : 

General  : The  enemy,  with  his  whole  force,  is  now  within  a day’s 
march  of  this  point.  The  Eed  Eiver  is  in  his  possession. 

General  Taylor,  with  his  small  force,  is  retreating  toward  Natchi- 
toches and  Shreveport.  I myself  am  on  my  way  to  Shreveport,  and  \ 
you  will  have  to  make  your  own  arrangements  for  the  protection  of 
property  and  dispositions  for  the  defense  of  the  Ouachita  and  Upper 
Black  Eivers. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  KIEBY  SMITH, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

No.  6.  I Alexandria , La.,  April  24,  1863. 

I.  Until  further  orders  the  headquarters  of  the  Department  of  Trans- 
Mississippi  are  removed  to  Shreveport,  La. 

Commanders  of  districts  will  make  their  returns  accordingly. 

By  command  of  Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith  : 

H.  P.  PEATT, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Special  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Eastern  Sub  Dist.  of  Texas, 

Ko.  67.  1 Houston,  April  24,  1863. 

* ****** 

II.  The  officer  in  command  of  Stone’s  regiment  Partisan  Eangers 

* Not  found. 


Chap.  XXYII.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1055 


will  immediately  with  that  regiment  take  up  his  line  of  march  for  Lou- 
isiana, via  Crockett,  Nacogdoches,  and  San  Augustine.  On  approach- 
ing the  Sabine  Eiver  he  will  send  forward  to  Alexandria  couriers  to 
report  to  Lieut.  Gen.  Kirby  Smith  for  orders. 

# * # * # # * 

V".  The  officer  in  command  of  Phillips*  regiment,  Arizona  Brigade, 
will  immediately  with  that  regiment  take  up  his  line  of  march  for  Lou- 
isiana, via  Crockett,  Nacogdoches,  and  San  Augustine.  On  approach- 
ing the  Sabine  River  he  will  send  forward  to  Alexandria  couriers  to 
report  to  Lieut.  Gen.  Kirby  Smith  for  orders. 

# # # # # # # 

YI.  The  officer  in  command  of  Gurley’s  regiment  (Thirtieth  Texas 
Cavalry)  will  with  that  regiment  immediately  take  up  the  line  of  march 
for  Louisiana,  via  Columbus,  San  Felipe,  Cypress  City,  and  Liberty,  and 
passing  through  Jasper  County.  On  approaching  the  Sabine  River  he 
will  send  forward  an  express  to  Lieut.  Gen.  Kirby  Smith  at  Alexandria, 
or  wherever  he  may  be,  to  report  and  for  orders  and  instructions  how 
to  proceed. 

* * # * # # # 

By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Scurry,  commanding,  &c. : 

ALBERT  N.  MILLS, 
Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Monroe,  La.,  April  25, 1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  R.  Boggs,  Chief  of  Staff: 

| My  Dear  General  : The  latest  dispatch  from  Lieutenant-General 
\ Holmes  is  that  General  Walker  will  march  his  division  directly  to  this 
place;  upon  the  strength  of  which  I have  ordered  all  the  boats,  some 
twelve  in  number,  to  return  immediately  to  Monroe,  to  prepare  for  their 
transportation.  Two  Yankee  deserters  came  in  this  morning  from  Rich- 
mond, La.,  and  report  the  enemy  in  force  at  that  point,  but  intending 
to  march  directly  to  attack  Port  Hudson.  General  Hebert  is  stirring 
things  up  very  much.  Nothing  of  interest  to  communicate.  We  have 
heard  nothing  from  you  since  I left.  I propose,  if  Red  River  is  block- 
aded and  you  continue  in  possession  of  Alexandria,  to  run  the  troops 
into  Little  River,  io  within  17  miles  of  Alexandria,  and  embark  them. 
Does  this  meet  your  approval  ? Please  write  to  me.  I am  in  a terrible 
state  of  ‘‘expense.” 

Yery  truly,  &c., 

CHAS.  Y.  COSBY. 


Jackson,  April  26,  1863. 

General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson : 

One  hundred  and  eighty  thousand  pounds  of  bacon  and  2,000  bushels 
of  corn  en  route  for  Port  Hudson. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General , Commanding. 


Richmond,  April  27,  1863. 

Major-General  Buckner,  Mobile , Ala. : 
fura  over  your  command  to  the  next  ranking  officer  and  proceed  as 


1056 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Ciiap.  XXVH 


soon  as  practicable  to  take  command  of  Department  of  East  Tennessee.; 
where  you  will  see  and  relieve  General  Maury.  Give  him  full  informa- 
tion of  the  state  of  your  command,  and  specially  in  regard ‘to  all  mat 
ters  of  administration,  forsupplies  and  the  like,  which  have  engagedyoui 
attention. 

S.  COOPEE, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

I 


Bichmond,  April  27, 1863. 

Major-General  Maury,  Knoxville , Tenn.  : 

Eemain  in  command  of  your  department  until  arrival  of  General 
Buckner.  You  will  then  proceed  to  Mobile  and  take  command  of  that 
department. 

S.  COOPEE, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  i 


Monroe,  La.,  April  27, 1863.  ' 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  E.  Boggs,  Chief  of  Staff : 

My  Dear  General  : General  McCulloch  arrived  here  yesterday, 
but  left  again  this  morning  for  Camden.  He  thinks  the  advance  ot 
General  Walker’s  division  will  reach  Camden  to  morrow  and  will  push, 
rapidly  on  to  Shreveport.  He  also  requested  me  to  remain  for  a day! 
or  so  in  order  that  he  might  communicate  through  me  with  you.  He 
is  in  fine  spirits,  and  reports  his  command  down  with  same  disease,  all 
eager  and  anxious  to  join  General  Kirby  for  a fight.  Major  Ehett  u in- 
forms me  of  your  dispatch  (which  was  shown  me  by  General  Hubert), 
ordering  all  ordnance  and  ammunition  directly  to  Shreveport.”  Gen- 
eral Hubert  is  now  loading  two  steamers  with  stores  to  go  up  the  river. 
Everything  will  be  saved  in  case  of  evacuation.  He  thinks  the  general 
should  send  him  positive  and  explicit  orders. 

This  delectable  portion  of  the  world  is  full  of  rumors.  One  is  that 
General  Magruder  has  arrived  in  rear  of  Banks  with  6,000  troops  and 
causing  the  usual  havoc ; also  that  General  Johnston  has  utterly  anni- 
hilated Eosecrans  and  is  having  things  his  own  way,  &c.  We  have 
nothing  from  the  interior.  I presume  there  was  great  distress  when  you 
all  left  Alexandria.  I sent  you  on  Sunday  several  dispatches  relative 
to  the  movements  of  troops.  General  W.  thought  he  could  make 
Monroe  sooner  than  Camden,  and  General  Holmes  granted  him  permis- 
sion so  to  do.  I sent  a dispatch  to  Little  Eock  and  one  to  Pine  Bluff, 
directing  (also  a courier  to  intercept  him)  him  to  proceed  by  your  order 
to  Camden,  thence  to  Shreveport. 

Trusting,  amid  the  conflict  of  orders,  no  extraordinary  delay  may 
occur,  I am,  general,  very  truly,  &c., 

CHAS.  V.  COSBY. 


. Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , April  27,  1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz.: 

Sir:  The  enforcement  of  the  conscript  law  on  this  frontier  would 
have  had  but  the  effect  of  driving  the  Mexicans  across  the  Bio  Grande 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1057 


and  made  them  our  enemies.  It  has  proved  useless  wherever  enforced 
in  this  portion  of  Texas,  and  in  the  exercise  of  my  best  judgment  I 
have  sought  other  means  of  enlisting  the  services  and  sympathies  of 
this  people,  who  are  useful  to  us  and  would  be  dangerous  against  us. 

I first  availed  myself  of  the  proclamation  of  the  Governor  of  the  State 
of 'Texas  calling  out  the  militia  for  a limited  service  to  call  out  the  com- 
panies on  the  Rio  Grande  for  four-months’  service.  This  was  responded 
to,  and  the  companies  of  Captains  Thomas,  Spencer,  and  Justo  Treveno 
were  mustered  into  the  service  of  the  Confederacy  for  four  months. 
The  companies  are  composed  of  Mexican  citizens  and  have  performed 
their  duty  to  my  satisfaction. 

Since  the  establishment  of  headquarters  at  this  place  I have  initiated 
a course  of  policy  toward  the  Mexicans  on  this  frontier  by  which  I seek 
to  protect  them  in  their  rights  and  immunities  as  citizens  and  thereby 
attach  them  to  our  cause.  A registry  of  their  names  and  property  has 
been  made,  and  to  all  who  were  known  to  be  loyal  certificates  of  pro- 
tection have  been  given.  I have  also  called  on  those  who  were  willing 
to  respond  to  my  call  for  personal  service,  should  the  enemy  land  on 
this  coast,  to  enroll  themselves  and  furnish  a list  of  their  arms  and 
whether  mounted  or  not.  This  plan  is  meeting  with  success,  and  I hope 
for  a valuable  auxiliary  force  in  such  contingency. 

In  further  prosecution  of  my  policy  on  this  line  I respectfully  request 
that  the  major-general  commanding  will  sanction  the  organization  of 
two  companies  of  Mexican  citizens  to  serve  during  the  war,  to  be  com- 
posed of  those  living  on  this  river.  Their  services  will  be  needed  to 
enforce  the  police  of  the  river,  and  will  enable  me  to  bring  back  to 
Woods’  regiment  the  three  companies  of  cavalry  now  stationed  at 
Ringgold  Barracks. 

With  great  respect,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier-  General , Provisional  Army. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Shreveport , La .,  April  28,  1863. 

Comdgt.  Officer  Sub-Dist.  Eastern  Texas, 

Houston , Tex. : 

Sir  : I am  directed  by  Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith  to  say  that  you  will 
order  the  following  commands  to  proceed  without  delay  to  Niblett’s 
Bluff  and  await  orders,  viz : Arizona  Brigade,  Colonel  Gould’s  regi- 
ment, Colonel  De  Morse’s  regiment. 

The  general  further  directs  that  these  commands  bring  with  them  all 
the  transportation  possible,  and  if  it  can  be  procured  in  no  other  way 
* you  are  authorized  to  impress  it. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J H.  P.  PBATT, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Walker’s  Division, 

Near  Monticello , April  28,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert,  Monroe , La.: 

General  : 1 have  this  minute  received  the  dispatches  ot  General 

67  R R— VOL  XV 


1058 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL  j 

Boggs  forwarded  by  you.  It  is  impossible  for  me  to  reach  Camden  in 
any  reasonable  time,  owing  to  the  swollen  condition  of  the  streams,! 
particularly  the  Saline  and  Moro.  On  that  account  this  route  was 
adopted,  and  for  the  same  cause  will  have  to  be  adhered  to  or  wait 
indefinitely  for  the  falling  of  the  streams.  As  it  is  still  raining  this 
would  be  a question  of  weeks,  not  days.  I have  therefore  determined 
to  pursue  this  route  far  enough  to  get  below  the  mouth  of  the  Saline, 
crossing  the  Ouachita  at  a place  called  Marie  Saline,  and  go  thence  to 
Shreveport  via  El  Dorado.  I shall  rety  upon  you,  general,  to  keep  me 
informed  by  courier  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy  that  may  affect  my 
movements.  My  progress  is  distressingly  slow,  in  consequence  of  the 
execrable  condition  of  the  roads,  but  I shall  lose  no  time. 

As  this  note,  I believe,  explains  more  fully  the  reasons  for  taking 
this  course  than  that  I send  with  it,  addressed  to  Brigadier- General 
Boggs,  I will  be  obliged  to  you  if  you  will  forward  this  to  him  with  the 
note  which  accompanies  it. 

Yery  respectfully, 

J.  G.  WALKER, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Walker’s  Division, 

Near  Monticello , Ark.,  April  28,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  R.  Boggs,  Chief  of  Staff: 

General  : I have  this  moment  received  your  two  dispatches  of  the 
20th  and  22d  respectively.  My  orders  from  General  Holmes  were  at 
first  to  march  to  Monroe  via  Camden,  but  in  consequence  of  my  repre- 
sentations that  the  high  waters  of  the  Saline  and  Moro  would  detain 
me  indefinitely  I was  directed  to  proceed  by  this  route  directly  to 
Monroe,  and  the  head  of  my  column  has  reached  this  point.  The  rains 
for  ten  days  past  have  been  very  heavy  and  the  roads  are  in  a wretched 
condition,  and  it  will  be  entirely  impracticable  for  me  to  reach  Camden 
from  this  point  in  any  reasonable  time.  The  streams  are  all  up  and  it 
is  still  raining.  The  Saline  cannot  be  crossed  until  it  falls  within  its 
banks,  and  even  then  the  process  will  be  distressingly  slow  in  view  of 
the  urgent  want  you  have  for  re-enforcement.  The  same  cause  that 
made  it  necessary  to  adopt  this  route  to  Monroe  renders  it  impossible 
to  reach  Shreveport  via  Camden  without  great  delay.  I have  there- 
fore determined  to  proceed  on  this  route  for  20  or  30  miles  farther,  then 
turn  southwest,  and  strike  the  Ouachita  River  below  the  mouth  of  the 
Saline  at  or  near  a point  called  Marie  Saline.  I will  telegraph  General 
Holmes  in  regard  to  this,  and  ask  that  he  will  send  me  subsistence  and 
the  spare  transportation  at  Camden  to  that  point.  My  progress  is  dis- 
tressingly slow,  in  consequence  of  the  execrable  condition  of  the  roads. 
I shall,  however,  spare  no  exertions  to  reach  Shreveport  at  the  earliest 
moment. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

J.  G.  WALKER, 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

Jackson , April  29,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith,  Commanding , (he.,  Alexandria : 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  commu- 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE.  1059 

nication  of  22d  instant,  just  received,  and  to  say  in  reply  that  it  must  be 
a mistake  that  Banks’  whole  army  is  operating  against  Alexandria  from 
the  indications  of  their  renewed  activity  against  us  on  the  line  of  the 
river,  they  being  in  large  force  at  Hard  Times,  most  probably  with  the 
design  of  crossing  and  being  re-enforced  with  a body  of  cavalry,  which 
came  through  this  department  without  as  yet  being  stopped  or  cap- 
tured, our  deficiency  in  cavalry  being  very  great.  Could  1 possibly 
spare  the  infantry  to  re-enforce  you  they  could  not  at  present  be  trans- 
ported across  the  river,  several  additional  gunboats  having  to-day  passed 
down  by  Grand  Gulf,  so  increasing  their  number  between  that  point 
and  Port  Hudson  as  to  effectually  prevent  the  crossing  of  troops  were 
it  even  in  my  power  to  aid  you. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding, 


Port  Hudson,  April  29,  1863. 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 


Effective  infantry,  8,600 ; artillery,  1,700,  and  cavalry,  1,400,  includ- 
ing Ponchatoula  force. 


FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 


War  Department,  O.  S.  A., 

Richmond, Va.,  April  30,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Dabney  H.  Maury, 

Commanding , &c.,  Mobile , Ala. : 

General  : I avail  myself  of  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  return 
of  Major  Sheliha  to  communicate  with  you  on  the  assumption  of  your 
new  command.  With  your  military  duties  you  are  too  familiar  to  re- 
quire specific  instructions.  I requested  by  telegraph  General  Buckner 
to  communicate  with  you  fully  on  the  plans  adopted  by  him  for  the 
supply  of  his  army  and  other  matters  of  quasi  civil  administration.  I 
wish  generally  the  arrangement  which  he  had  initiated  carried  out. 
Among  other  things,  under  his  recommendation  inducing  the  action  of 
the  Department,  a large  amount  of  sugar  and  molasses  accumulated  or 
in  transitu  in  your  department  were  ordered  to  be  impressed  and  held 
for  the  Government,  to  be  paid  for  at  prices  ascertained  by  the  assess- 
ment provided  for  by  the  late  law  of  Congress.  In  doing  this  I did  not 
mean  that  the  impressment  should  be  carried  to  such  an  extent  as  not 
to  leave  fair  supplies  for  the  consumption  of  the  people  in  your  com- 
mand. In  the  spirit  of  the  law  of  Congress  surplus  supplies  only  should 
I be  impressed  for  Government  use.  You  will  observe,  too,  that  contracts 
have  been  made  by  General  Buckner  for  supplies  of  provisions  and 
other  stores  under  agreement  that  cotton  should  be  either  furnished  or 
allowed  to  be  purchased  by  contractors.  At  the  same  time  it  was  rep- 
resented to  him  that  it  was  not  the  policy  of  the  Department  to  allow 
| the  shipment  of  cotton  to  or  from  any  Confederate  port  in  the  posses- 
| ion  of  the  enemy,  and  that  it  was  especially  objectionable  that  such 
shipment  to  or  from  New  Orleans  should  be  tolerated.  A general  au- 
thority had  some  time  since  been  given  General  Pemberton  to  make 


1060 


W.  FLA., 


contracts  by  which  cotton  was  to  be  exchanged  for  supplies  for  his 
army  at  his  discretion.  . 

I have  lately  received  strong  and  indignant  protests  against  the  al- 
leged shipments  of  cotton  to  New  Orleans  under  contracts  said  to  be 
sanctioned  by  the  Department.  These  shipments,  I presume,  if  author- 
ized at  all,  are  being  made  under  contracts  by  General  Pemberton.  So 
far  as  actually  made  by  him  it  is  not  doubted  they  were  warranted  by 
the  exigency  of  his  situation  and  came  within  the  authority  granted 
and  must  be  sustained  by  the  Department.  You  will,  however,  please 
report  the  fact  and  the  extent  of  such  contracts  and  the  shipments 
made  in  pursuance  of  them.  General  Buckner  was  making  arrange- 
ments to  use  the  Alabama,  a steamer  purchased  under  impressment  for 
the  Department,  in  running  the  blockade.  I should  be  pleased  to 
know  the  extent  to  which  such  arrangements  have  been  completed  and 
your  own  views  as  to  the  best  mode  of  carrying  out  the  plan.  I nnd, 
from  various  applications  that  are  made  to  me  to  ship  cotton  from  Mo- 
bile  to  neutral  ports,  that  the  impression  prevails  that  this  can  be  done 
by  loyal  citizens  or  foreigners  only  by  special  authority  from  the  De- 
partment. There  is  no  law  prohibiting  or  submitting  to  the  discretion 
of  the  Department  such  exportation  made  upon  payment  of  the  pre- 
scribed export  duty,  nor  is  it  the  conviction  of  the  Department  that  it 
would  be  sound  policy  to  prohibit  or  impede  such  ventures.  If  the 
countenance  of  the  military  authorities  is  supposed  to  be  important  or 
essential  to  such  operations  it  might  be  well  to  make  the  allowance  an 
inducement,  with  the  understanding  that  the  return  cargoes  of  munitions 
or  other  articles  desirable  for  the  use  of  the  Army  should  be  brought. 
You  will  understand,  however,  that  I do  not  mean  to  limit  your  discre- 
tion as  commander,  under  any  exigency  of  a military  character,  to  tem- 
porarily suspend  or  delay  such  shipments. 

Major  Sheliha  will  explain  to  you  the  inability  of  the  Ordnance  Bu- 
reau,  under  more  pressing  exigencies  elsewhere,  and  especially  m Mis- 
sissippi, to  furnish  now  the  ordnance  of  the  class  important  to  and  de- 
sired by  you. 

I can  only  say  that  the  promptitude  with  which  General  Buckner 
acquiesced  in  the  transfer  of  guns  already  ordered  to  him  to  the  Missis- 
sippi Department  has  been  appreciated,  and  on  that  account,  as  well 
as  on  the  scere  of  the  real  wants  of  your  command,  great  anxiety  is 
felt  to  meet  the  requisitions  for  Mobile,  that  they  shall  be  constantly 
borne  in  mind,  and  complied  with  as  soon  as  the  resources  ot  the  De- 
partment and  superior  necessities  elsewhere  will  allow. 

With  high  esteem,  your  obedient  servant,  c^Tvrtrw 

J.  A.  bBDDOJN, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Jackson,  April  30, 1863. 

General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson : 

Six  gunboats  and  several  barges  have  passed  down  river  and  are 
taking  mules  and  wagons  on  board.  } Q pEMBERT0Nj 

Lieutenant-General , Gomma'nding . 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1061 


List  of  subsistence  stores  at  Port  Hudson,  La.,  April  30,  1863. 


Quantity. 

Number  of 
rations. 

Salt  pork do 

28, 371 
2, 480 
29,202 
39,820 

56,  742 
4,  960 
58, 404 
31,856 

Salt  beef do 

Total  meat - - 

151, 962 

Molasses - gallons . . 

Tallow  . ...... .do. .... 

2, 962 
14,  000 
44, 832 
124,  247 
266, 251 
20,  668 
820 
1, 038 

2,633 
630,  000 
448,  320 
6,212,  350 
2,  218,  760 
22,  045,  866 
20,  500 

MEMORANDUM. 

Since  30th  April  there  have  been  driven  into  Port  Hudson  1,000  beef 
cattle,  which,  at  an  average  of  325  pounds  each  and  at  1J  pounds  per 
ration,  would  be  260,000  rations  ; also  500  sheep,  1 pound  per  ration, 
would  be  25,000  rations;  285,000  rations.  Twenty-five  thousand 
bushels  of  corn  at  Woodville. 


Organization  of  Troops  in  the  Third  Military  District , Department  Mis - 
sissippi  and  East  Louisiana , commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner , 
April  30,  1863. 


MAXEY’S  BRIGADE. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  B.  Maxey  commanding. 

lOtli  Arkansas,  Col.  A.  R.  Witt. 

4th  Louisiana,  Lieut.  Col.  W.  F.  Penning- 
ton. 

30th  Louisiana,  Maj.  Charles  J.  Bell. 

42d  Tennessee,  Lieut. Col.  Isaac N.  Hulme. 
46th  Tennessee,*  Col.  A.  J.  Brown. 

48th  Tennessee,  Col.  A.  S.  Godwin. 

49th  Tennessee,  Maj.  D.  A.  Lynn. 

53d  Tennessee,  Capt.  H.  H.  Aymett. 

55th  Tennessee,*  Col.  A.  J.  Brown. 

Texas  Battalion  Sharpshooters,  Maj. 
James  Burnet. 

Fenner’s  Louisiana  battery,  Capt.  C.  E. 
Fenner. 

Roberts’  (Mississippi)  battery,  Lieut.  F. 
W.  Coleman. 

Watson  (Louisiana)  Battery,  Lieut.  E.  A. 
Toledano. 


BEALES  BRIGADE. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  N.  R.  Beall  commanding. 

49th  Alabama,  Col.  Jeptha  Edwards. 

1st  Arkansas,  Battalion,  Lieut.Col.  Bart. 
Jones. 

11th  Arkansas, t Col.  John  L.  Logan. 

17th  Arkansas, t John  Griffith. 

12th  Arkansas, Col.  T.  J.  Reid. 

14th  Arkansas, t Col.  F.  P.  Powers. 

18th  Arkansas, i Col.  R.  H.  Crockett. 

23d  Arkansas,!  Col.  O.  P.  Lyles. 

15th  Arkansas, $ Col.  B.  W.  Johnson. 

16th  Arkansas,  § Col.  David  Provence. 

1st  Mississippi,  Col.  J.  M.  Simonton. 

39th  Mississippi,  Col.  W.  B.  Shelby. 
Company  B,  1st  Mississippi  Light  Artil- 
lery, Capt.  A.  J.  Herod. 

Company  F,  1st  Mississippi  Light  Artil- 
lery, Capt.  J.  L.  Bradford. 

Company  K,  1st  Mississippi  Light  Artil- 
lery, Capt.  George  F.  Abbay. 


* Consolidated. 

t Consolidated  under  Logan’s  oommand. 
t Consolidated  under  Lyles’  command. 

$ Consolidated  under  Johnson’s  command. 


1062 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXViL 


GREGG’S  BRIGADE. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Gregg  commanding. 

9th  Louisiana  Battalion. 

3d  Tennessee. 

10th  Tennessee. 

30th  Tennessee. 

41st  Tennessee. 

50th  Tennessee. 

1st  Tennessee  Battalion. 

7th  Texas. 

1st  Missouri  Light  Battery. 
Brookhaven  Light  Battery. 

PONCHATOULA. 

Col.  J.  M.  Simonton  commanding. 

McLaurin’s  battalion. 

Cochran’s  command. 

Herren’s  company. 

Lester’s  company. 


CAVALRY  COMMAND. 

Lieut.  Col.  George  Gantt  commanding. 

9th  Tennessee  Battalion,  Maj.  James  H. 
Akin. 

Garland’s  battalion,  Maj.  W.  H.  Garland. 
Hughes’  battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Wilboum. 

Bryan’s  company,  Captain  Bryan. 

Cage’s  company,  Captain  Cage. 

Gonzales’  (Daigre’s)  company,  Captain 
Gonzales. 

Norman’s  company,  Captain  Norman. 
Stockdale’s  company,  Captain  Stockdale. 
Terrell’s  company,  Captain  Terrell. 

UNATTACHED. 

9th  Louisiana  Battalion  Partisan  Ran- 
gers, Maj.  J.  De  Baun. 

Rhodes’  company,  Capt.  T.  C.  Rhodes. 


HEAVY  ARTILLERY. 

Lieut.  Col.  M.  J.  Smith  commanding. 

1st  Alabama,  Lieut.  Col.  M.  B.  Locke. 

12th  Louisiana  Battalion,  Lieut.  Col.  P.  F.  De  Gournay. 
1st  Tennessee  Battalion,  Lieut.  Col.  P.  F.  De  Gournay. 

PROVOST  GUARD  ( unattached  companies). 

Lewis’  company  light  infantry,  Lieut.  C.  L.  Barrot. 
English’s  (Mississippi)  artillery,  Lieut.  W.  W.  Wilkins. 


General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

No.  9.  J Shreveport,  La .,  April  30,  1863. 

The  following  officers  are  announced  upon  the  staff  of  the  command- 
ing general : 

Maj.  George  Williamson,  assistant  adjutant-general. 

Maj.  T.  G.  Rhett,  chief  of  artillery. 

By  command  of  Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith  : 

J H.  P.  PRATT, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Shreveport , April  30,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Scurry, 

Commanding , &c.,  Houston , Tex. : 

General:  Since  my  letter  of  the  28th  instant  General  Smith  has 
learned  that  none  of  the  troops  designated  are  armed.  If  such  is  the 
case  he  desires  that  you  will  arm  them  if  possible  from  your  supplies. 

The  concentration  of  these  troops . upon  the  Sabine  places  them  in 
front  of  General  Banks  should  he  attempt  to  reach  Texas  by  direct 
march.  It  also  places  them  at  a convenient  point  for  action  should  the 
enemy  undertake  the  coast  of  Texas. 


3hap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE  106o 

It  is  of  the  greatest  importance  that  all  the  disposable  force  under  your 
sommand  should  be  concentrated  with  dispatch  upon  the  Sabine. 
Colonel  Herbert  will  communicate  more  fully  with  you  upon  the  subject. 
I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  w R BOGGS, 

Brigadier -General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Engineer’s  Office,  Galveston , April  30,  1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General,  Brownsville : 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  for  the 

Fort  Point-^casemated  battery. — The  wood,  iron,  and  earth  work 
was  completed  during  this  month;  live  iron  casemate  carriages  con- 
structed ; the  guns  mounted;  cisterns  placed,  and  hot- shot  furnace  con- 
structed. It  has  to  be  sodded  all  over,  the  bank  being  high  and  com- 
posed of  sand.  Two  10-inch  mortars  will  be  placed  on  the  top  behind 

^Fort  Maqruder— heavy  open  battery. — The  front  embankment,  trav- 
erses, platforms,  and  magazines  were  completed  during  this  month ; 
two  10  inch  columbiads  mounted.  The  Harriet  Lane  guns  are  not 
mounted,  for  want  of  suitable  carriages,  which  are  under  construction. 
Bomb-proofs  and  embankment  in  the  rear  commenced  and  the  front  em- 
bankment sodded  inside,  top  and  slope.  With  the  present  force  it  will 
require  nearly  the  whole  of  this  month  to  complete  it. 

Fort  Banhhead. — Guns  were  mounted  and  the  railroad  constructed 

during  this  month.  , . „ , , , 

South  Battery.— For  want  of  labor  the  reconstruction  ot  this  battery 
was  commenced  within  the  last  few  days  of  the  month ; also  the  con- 
struction of  the  railroad  leadiug  to  it. 

Intrenchment  of  the  town  is  barely  commenced,  for  want  ot  labor. 
Obstructions  in  the  main  channel. — Since  the  destruction  of  the  ratts 
bv  storm,  before  they  could  be  fastened  to  the  abutments,  this  plan  ot 
obstruction  had  to  be  abandoned  for  the  want  of  material  to  repair  the 
damage  done.  The  present  system  of  obstructing  consists  of  groups  ot 
piles  braced  and  bolted  and  three  cable  chains  fastened  to  them,  the 
groups  of  piles  in  the  deepest  part  of  the  channel  to  be  anchored  be- 
sides. This  was  the  first  plan  of  obstructing  the  channel  on  my  arrival 
here*  but  being  informed  by  old  sailors  and  residents  that  piles  could 
not  be  driven  on  account  of  the  quicksand,  and  not  having  the  neces- 
sary machinery  then  to  examine  the  bottom,  it  was  rejected.  Having  con- 
structed a machine  for  this  purpose,  it  is  certain  that  piles  can  be  driven 
and  are  actually  already  driven  half  across.  This  obstruction  will  be 
completed  and  the  chains  stretched  from  abutment  to  abutment  by  the 
10th  of  May.  Sketch,  letter  A,  represents  the  work. 

Obstructions  at  the  head  of  Pelican  Island. — Two-thirds  done.  It  will 
require  the  whole  of  May  to  complete  this  obstruction  and  erect  the 
casemated  sunken  battery  of  two  guns,  as  proposed  in  my  last  report. 
These  works  are  greatly  retarded  by  the  difficulty  of  procuring  the 

material.  , . . , , 

Pelican  Spit  ought  to  be  fortified,  as  submitted  in  my  last  report,  with 
a casemated  work.  For  its  defense  two  32-pounders  and  one  ^1- pounder 
can  be  spared.  This  work  is  of  great  importance,  but  it  had  to  be  post- 
poned until  the  intrenchments  around  the  tow  n shall  be  fairly  advanced. 


1064  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA,,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

The  force  of  negroes  on  the  island  consists  of  481  effective  men.  Of 
these  40  are  at  the  saw-mills,  100  cutting  and  carrying  sod  (as  all  the 
works  are  of  sand,  consequently  the  sodding  must  be  done  all  over  the  ! 
works),  40  carrying  timber  and  iron,  which  leaves  301  on  the  works, 
including  obstructions.  The  whole  force  of  negroes  consists,  as  above, 
of  481  effective,  42  cooks,  78  sick;  total,  601. 

In  order  to  complete  the  defenses  of  Galveston  it  will  require  the  labor  I 
of  1,000  negroes  during  three  weeks,  or  eight  weeks  with  the  present  i 
force.  The  work  of  soldiers  amounts  to  very  little,  as  the  officers  seem 
to  have  no  control  whatever  over  their  men.  The  number  of  soldiers 
at  work  is  about  100  men,  whose  work  amount  to  10  negroes’  work. 

Brazos  River. — After  having  examined  the  locality  I have  laid  out 
the  necessary  works,  and  Lieutenant  Cross,  of  the  Engineers,  is  ordered 
to  take  charge  of  the  construction,  inclosed  letter  B is  a copy  of  in-  j 
structions  given  to  Lieutenant  Cross.  Sketch,  letter  C,  shows  the  loca- 
tion of  the  proposed  works  at  the  mouth  of  Brazos  River. 

Western  Sub-District. — Major  Lea,  in  charge  of  the  Western  Sub-Dis- 
trict, sent  in  his  first  communication,  copy  of  which,  marked  D,  is  in- 
closed. I respectfully  recommend  Major  Lea’s  suggestions  with  regard 
to  procuring  labor  to  the  attention  of  the  major-general  commanding. 

I have  ordered  a close  examination  of  the  wreck  of  the  Westfield,  which 
resulted  in  finding  one  8-inch  gun  already,  and  I hope  that  more  will 
be  found.  Cash  account  inclosed  is  marked  letter  E;  liabilities  incurred 
and  not  paid  is  marked  letter  F.* 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Y.  SULAKOWSKI, 

Chief  Engineer . 


San  Antonio,  Tex.,  April  30, 1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Brownsville , Tex. : 

Captain:  Inclosed  you  will  find  copies  of  a letter  from  John  D.  Bur- 
gess to  General  Scurry;  also  one  from  Mr.  Hubbell,  his  agent,  to  me, 
on  the  subject  of  furnishing  supplies  for  the  contemplated  expedition 
to  New  Mexico  and  Arizona,  which  are  respectfully  submitted  for  the 
consideration  of  the  general  commanding  the  district.  I beg  leave 
further  to  say  that  I am  informed  that  the  Arizona  Brigade  is  now 
ordered  into  active  service,  and  that  the  Second  and  Third  Regiments 
and  Davidson’s  battalion  are  now  on  the  road  to  Louisiana. 

It  would  be  very  agreeable  to  the  officers  of  the  Fourth  Regiment  if 
the  general  would  cause  it  to  be  filled  up  from  any  troops  unattached, 
so  that  they  may  operate  with  the  brigade.  Navarro’s  company  is  yet 
unattached.  I have  not  yet  been  advised  as  to  whether  it  is  to  be  as- 
signed to  the  Fourth  Regiment  or  not. 

We  are  recruiting  with  considerable  success,  but  would  like  to  be 
filled  as  soon  as  possible. 

By  recent  arrivals  from  El  Paso  we  learn  that  things  are  not  ma- 
terially changed  in  New  Mexico  and  Arizona. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ [S.  M.  BAIRD,] 

Colonel , Arizona  Brigade. 


Inclosures  not  found. 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1065 


[Inclosure.] 

San  Antonio,  April  28,  1863. 

Col.  S.  M.  Baird, 

Arizona  Brigade , San  Antonio : 

Sir:  Previous  to  my  leaving  Presidio  del  Norte,  Mexico,  in  March 
last,  I learned  through  Captain  Skillman,  whom  I met  there  and  also 
from  letters  that  I received  by  him,  that  there  was  a probability  that 
troops  were  or  soon  would  be  on  their  way  to  Arizona  and  New  Mexico, 
under  the  command  of  General  W.  R.  Scurry.  Under  that  impression 
Mr.  John  D.  Burgess  wrote  to  General  Scurry  by  me  that  should  the 
troops  move  in  that  direction  he  was  in  a position  and  enabled  to  fur- 
nish them  with  such  supplies  as  they  might  require  from  Mexico,  such 
as  flour,  corn,  wheat,  beans,  soap,  salt,  sugar,  shoes,  &c.,  delivered  at  such 
points  as  might  be  required  with  reasonable  safety  to  the  transportation 
and  at  fair  and  reasonable  rates  in  the  market  where  purchased,  the 
same  to  be  paid  for  in  cotton  or  specie,  as  it  required  one  of  the  two  to 
purchase  those  articles  in  Mexico;  if  paid  in  cotton,  it  is  to  be  at  a like 
r8)to 

I inclose  you  a transcript  of  the  letter  to  General  Scurry,  that  you 
may  call  on  him  if  necessary  as  to  the  facts,  as  he  was  advised  to  inform 
me  whether  he  accepted  the  offer,  that  I might  advise  Mr.  Burgess  in 
time.  On  my  arrival  here  I learned  that  General  Scurry  was  at  Gal- 
veston and  that  you  were  an  officer  of  the  expedition.  I have  taken 
the  liberty  of  submitting  the  foregoing  for  your  examination  and  an- 
swer. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* J.  HUBBELL. 

[Sub-inoloaur*.] 


Presidio  del  Norte,  March  17,  1863. 

General  W.  R.  Scurry: 

Dear  Sir  : I have  understood  privately  from  Captain  Skillman  that 
the  presumption  was  that  your  command  would  move  toward  Arizona 
and  New  Mexico  this  spring.  Should  such  be  the  case,  I am  in  such  a 
position  here  that  should  you  require  any  army  supplies,  such  as  flour, 
corn,  beans,  soap,  shoes,  &c.,  I would  be  glad  to  furnish  the  same,  for 
which  I am  willing  to  take  cotton  at  a fair  price  in  exchange,  as  you  are 
aware  that  it  requires  specie  to  purchase  those  things  in  this  country. 

Should  you  require  anything  and  wish  me  to  furnish  you  will  j)lease 
advise  Mr.  Hubbell,  that  he  may  return  here  in  time  to  complete  the 
arrangements,  and  assist  him  in  doing  so  by  furnishing  him  an  escort 
or  cause  it  to  be  done. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  D.  BURGESS. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Shreveport , Xu.,  April  — , [1863]. 

Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor: 

General  : On  my  way  up  the  river,  by  direction  of  Lieutenant  Gen- 
eral Smith,  I examined  the  position  at  Grand  Ecore,  and  would  respect- 
fully make  the  following  suggestions : 

Above  the  bluff  upon  which  General  De  Russy’s  house  is  situated  is 


1066 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  HEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

a second  bluff ; the  latter  appears  to  be  the  apex  of  a ridge,  and  a few 
feet  from  the  river  is  higher  than  General  De  Russy’s  bluff;  is  flanked 
on  both  sides  by  ravines,  and  has  a gentle  slope  in  the  direction  of  the 
siege. 

If  it  is  determined  to  fortify  this  position  I think  that  the  main  work 
should  be  upon  the  upper  bluff,  with  a redan  upon  De  Russy’s  Bluff  for 
one  or  two  guns,  open  to  the  rear,  so  as  to  be  commanded  by  the  main 
work. 

If  Red  River  cannot  be  entered  from  the  upper  entrance  of  Cane  Rivei 
there  is  a far  better  site  for  a field  work  for  the  defense  of  the  river  just 
below  Montgomery. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  R.  BOGGS, 

Brigadier- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters, 

San  Antonio , Tex.,  April  — , 1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Fort  Brown , Tex.  : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  a communication  to  General 
Magruder  from  General  Yidaurri,  Governor  of  the  State  of  Nuevo  Leon 
and  Coahuila,  in  reference  to  the  cotton  trade  between  the  State  of 
Texas  and  the  one  over  which  he  presides. 

A copy  of  the  dispatch  was  read  to  me  by  the  direction  of  Governor 
Yidaurri,  and  I am  therefore  familiar  with  its  contents,  and  thus  feel 
myself  authorized  to  make  comments  otherwise  obtrusive. 

It  has  occurred  to  me,  in  view  of  the  very  friendly  sentiments  con- 
tained in  the  dispatch,  and  looking  to  the  great  importance  of  cultivat- 
ing a continuance  of  them,  that  it  would  be  not  unadvisable  for  the 
general  commanding  to  evidence  to  General  Yidaurri  in  some  special 
manner  the  gratification  it  affords  his  Government  and  himself  to  know 
that,  despite  the  misrepresentations  of  the  Federal  minister  at  Mexico 
and  the  Federal  consul  at  Monterey,  the  sympathies  of  so  distinguished 
a man  and  the  people  he  governs  should  be  with  us  in  our  great  strug- 
gle for  liberty,  and  to  express  his  high  appreciation  of  Governor  Yi- 
daurrPs  enlarged  and  humanitarian  view  of  national  law,  in  accordance 
with  which  he  assents  in  advance  to  such  modifications  of  commercial 
regulations  as  a nation  in  a state  of  war  has  always  a right  to  make 
without  a corresponding  right  on  the  part  of  foreign  traders  to  com- 
plain of,  and  to  assure  General  Yidaurri  that  the  policy  of  the  Govern- 
ment is  not  to  restrict  the  exportation  of  cotton  to  Mexico  or  in  anywise 
trammel  the  trade  with  that  country,  but,  on  the  contrary,  by  the  ap- 
pointment of  proper  officers  and  agents,  the  Government  proposes  to  pre- 
vent the  exportation  of  cotton  elsewhere  than  to  Mexico , and  that  one  of 
the  prime  objects  of  any  of  the  orders  regulating  commerce  is  to  insure 
the  exportation  of  cotton  to  Mexico  by  such  agents  as  will  insure  the 
importation  iuto  this  country  of  supplies  from  Mexico,  and  thus  increase 
to  a much  greater  extent  than  at  present  the  trade  with  that  country ; at  the 
same  time  assuring  him  of  his  steadfast  purpose  to  relieve  as  far  as  in 
his  power  any  cases  of  individual  hardship  resulting  from  carrying  out 
any  modification  of  the  existing  laws  of  trade. 

That  this  policy  must  necessarily  result  in  reducing  the  price  of  cotton 
(as  the  competition  among  buyers  will  be  less)  and  enable  the  Govern- 


1067 


Chap.  XXvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC— CONFEDERATE. 

ment  to  furnish  the  people  of  Mexico  with  a larger  supply  than  she  is 
now  receiving  and  at  prices  less  than  one-half  now  paid  in  other  for- 
eign markets.  By  this  policy  Mexico  finds  herself  enjoying,  despite  of 
herself,  almost  a monopoly  in  the  first  article  of  commerce. 

As  Governor  Vidaurri  has  no  interest  beyond  the  advancement  of 
his  State  and  his  people,  I think  if  these  views  were  placed  before  him 
in  some  special  manner,  calculated  to  impress  him  with  the  good  faith 
of  our  Government,  that  he  would  coincide  in  their  general  correctness 
and  give  a favorable  direction  to  public  opinion  in  the  adjoining  Mex- 
ican States.  . 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 

servant, 

SMITH  P.  BANKHEAD, 

Colonel  of  Artillery , Commanding  Post. 

[Incloaure.] 

Monterey,  Mexico,  24,  1863. 

General  Magruder, 

Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Confederate  Forces  : 

The  citizen  Evaristo  Madero  has  appeared  before  this  Government 
for  himself,  and  representing  several  merchants  who  trade  through 
Piedras  Negras,  in  the  pass  of  the  Aguila,  showing  that  by  virtue  of 
an  order  from  you  they  are  prohibited  from  carrying  their  cotton  on 
this  side  of  the  Eio  Bravo,  while  they  have  with  them  and  on  the  way 
several  trains  for  that  point,  and  their  commercial  operations  have 
been  injured  in  exporting  them  from  Texas  through  Piedras  Negras. 

If  by  that  measure  I did  not  see  anything  prejudicial  in  any  way, 
not  only  to  these  merchants  but  to  this  State,  which  has  heretofore 
held  and  still  entertains  kind  and  friendly  relations  with  Texas,  I would 
say  absolutely  nothing  about  it,  and  I should  regret  this  unfortunate 
correspondence  of  a people  who  have  not  only  never  restricted  their 
neutrality  on  the  North  American  question,  but  have  in  a certain  way 
lent  their  aid  to  Texas,  smoothing  the  difficulties  which  have  presented 
themselves  in  the  exchange  of  every  kind  of  articles. 

I do  not  pretend  that  the  measure  of  which  I speak  should  be  abso- 
lutely abolished,  but  that  at  least  a plan  may  be  given  by  which  the 
merchants  may  save  their  bonds,  and  not  find  themselves  suddenly 
ruined  by  the  paralyzing  of  trade  and  the  excessive  expense  which  they 
are  under  to  be  able  to  give  circulation  to  their  bills  of  exchange. 

May  it  please  you,  general,  to  consider  this  manifestation  as  the 
result  of  my  feelings  for  the  good  of  our  neighboring  people,  and  accept 
the  assurances  of  my  highest  appreciation. 

God  and  Liberty. 


SANTIAGO  VIDAURRI. 


1068  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 


Abstract  from  Report  of  the  Troops  in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  Maj.  Gen.  S.  B.  Buck- 
ner commanding,  May  1,  1863  ( headquarters  Mobile,  Ala.). 


Command. 

Present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Aggregate  last  re- 

port. 

Effective  total. 

•mo£ 

Aggregate. 

Remarks. 

Department  staff 

15 

15 

15 

Eastern  Division : 

Staff 

7 

7 

7 

Infantry  

756 

864 

903 

949 

950 

Artillery 

132 

141 

145 

151 

152 

Cavalry 

320 

368 

384 

456 

453 

Western  Division : 

Staff 

Infantry 

23 

25 

31 

Artillery 

2,  622 

2,847 

3, 010 

3, 431 

4,444 

Two  battalions  trans- 

Cavalry  

706 

750 

784 

1, 025 

1, 022 

ferred  to  Tennessee. 

Total  Infantry 

756 

m 

903 

949~ 

950 

Artillery 

2, 754 

2, 988 

3, 155 

3,  582 

4,  596 

Cavalry 

1, 026 

1, 118 

1, 168 

1, 481 

1,475 

Grand  total* 

4,  536 

4,970 

5,271 

6, 059 

7,074 

* Including  department  and  division  staff. 


Tabular  statement  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf  Maj . Gen.  S.  B. 
Buchner  commanding , ufor  April , 1863.” 

EASTERN  DIVISION .* 

Brig.  Gen.  James  Cantey. 

v ■ 

2d  Alabama  Cavalry,  Lieut.  Col.  James  Cunningham. 

29th  Alabama  Infantry,  Col.  John  F.  Conoley. 

Florida  Cavalry  Battalion,  Captain  T.  J.  Myers. 

19th  Louisiana  Infantry,  Col.  W.  P.  Winans. 

Amos’  cavalry,  Captain  Amos. 

Barry’s  (Tennessee)  battery,  Capt.  Robert  L.  Barry. 

Pegues’  command,  Captain  Pegues. 

WESTERN  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  W.  Mackall. 

FIRST  BRIGADE. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  E.  Slaughter. 

9th  Alabama  Battalion,  Lieut.  Col.  Bushrod  Jones. 

17th  Alabama  Infantry, t Col.  V.  S.  Murphey. 

21st  Alabama  Infantry!  (First  Battalion),  Col.  C.  D.  Anderson. 

Charpen tier’s  (Alabama)  battery, t Capt.  S.  Charpentier. 

Gid.  Nelson  (Alabama)  Artillery,  Capt.  Joseph  Selden. 

Humes’  (Tennessee)  battery, t Capt.  W.  Y.  C.  Humes. 

Apalachee  Battery,  Maj.  E.  L.  Winder. 

Belmont  Battery,!  Capt.  John  James  Ward. 

Mobile,  Ala.,  Lieut.  Col.  N.  Wickliffe. 

Pinto  Battery, $ Capt.  C.  E.  Sadler. 

Selma,  Ala.,  Maj.  N.  R.  Chamblin. 

Spanish  River  Battery,  $ Capt.  J.  H.  Hutchisson. 

* Troops  at  and  near  Pollard. 

t Bay  Shore,  near  Mobile,  Colonel  Murphey  commanding.  Detachment  of  Seven- 
teenth Alabama  manning  Apalachee  Battery. 

X Choctaw  and  Owen  Bluff,  as  heavy  artillery. 

$ Pinto  Island  and  mouth  of  Spanish  River,  Major  Quattlebaum  commanding. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1069 


. WESTERN  DIVISION—  Continued. 

SECOND  BRIGADE. * 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  Cumming. 

18th  Alabama  Infantry,  Col.  J.  T.  Holtzclaw. 

36th  Alabama  Infantry,  Col.  R.  H.  Smith. 

38th  Alabama  Infantry,  Col.  Charles  T.  Ketehum. 

Alabama  Battalion  Partisan  Rangers,  Maj.  William  Boyles 

1st  Confederate  Infantry  (First  Battalion),  Lieut.  Col.  J.  W.  Aderhold. 
Fowler’s  (Alabama)  battery,  Capt.  W.  H.  howler. 

Dorrance  Rangers,  Capt.  John  W.  Murrell. 

THIRD  BRIGADE. 

Col.  William  L.  Powell. 

1st  Alabama  Artillery  Battalion,t  Lieut.  Col.  R.  C.  Forsyth. 

21st  Alabama  Infantryt  (Second  Battalion),  Lieut,  Col.  C.  S.  Stewart. 

1st  Confederate  Infantryt  (Second  Battalion),  Lieut.  Col.  George  A.  Smith. 
Baldwin  Rangers,  $ Capt.  T.  C.  Barlow. 

Cary’s  (Alabama)  battery, If  Capt.  J.M.  Cary. 

City  Troop,  § Capt.  E.  T.  Arrington. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond , May  1,  1863. 

Col.  J.  H.  Clanton,  Montgomery , Ala.: 

The  Department  directs  you  to  move  your  cavalry  and  some  compa- 
nies of  infantry  to  Pollard,  to  take  the  place  of  a regiment  of  cavalry 
to  be  withdrawn.  The  time  for  completing  your  brigade  will  be  ex- 
tended till  the  1st  of  June.  The  Department  desires  activity  in  its 

completion.  j A CAMPBELL, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Richmond,  May  1,  1863. 

General  Buckner, 

Or  Commanding  Officer , Mobile  : 

If  there  is  a cavalry  regiment  at  Pollard,  Ala.,  send  it  at  once  to 
Mississippi  to  report  to  General  Pemberton.  Its  place  will  be  supplied 
bv  troops  raised  by  Colonel  Clanton,  who  has  been  instructed  to  that 
effect.  If  there  is  no  such  at  or  near  Pollard,  then  send  some  other 
cavalry  regiment  of  your  command  immediately  to  Mississippi. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Vicksburg,  May  1,  1863. 

General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson: 

Send  General  Gregg’s  brigade  at  once  to  Jackson.  On  reaching 
Osyka  if  transportation  is  not  furnished,  he  must  go  up  the  road  until 
he  meets  it.  Direct  him  to  move  rapidly.  ^ ^ p^MBERTON, 

Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 

* About  Mobile.  *t  Fort  Morgan,  t Fort  Gaines.  § Perdido  River.  If  Grant’s  Pass. 


1070 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  8.  MISS.,  LA  , TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Special  Orders, 
No.  123. 


) Headquarters, 

J Port  Hudson , La May  1,  18G3. 

I.  The  Fourth  Louisiana  Volunteers,  Fifty-fifth  Tennessee  Volun- 
teers, and  Fenner’s  battery  will  proceed  to  Williams’  Bridge,  on  special 
service,  with  as  little  delay  as  practicable. 


III.  Brigadier-General  Gregg,  with  his  brigade,  will  proceed  to  Jack- 
son,  Miss.,  with  as  little  delay  as  practicable,  according  to  instructions 
from  Department  Headquarters.  Quartermaster  will  furnish  transpor- 
tation. 

IV.  The  Ninth  Louisiana  Battalion  Infantry,  commanded  by  Captain 
Chinn,  temporarily  attached  to  General  Gregg’s  brigade,  is  transferred 
to  General  Maxey’s  brigade. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner: 


Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


Vicksburg,  May  1, 1863. 

Major-General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson: 

Bowen  is  hard  pressed.  Should  he  fall  back,  the  communication  with 
Port  Hudson  will  be  cut  off. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General , Commanding. 


Vicksburg,  May  1, 1863 

General  Gardner,  Port  Hudson  : 

You  must  now  make  arrangements  to  get  supplies  from  other  side  of 
river  at  every  opportunity.  Send  and  recall  Wilbourn’s  cavalry.  Send 
with  Gregg  only  cooking  utensils  and  ammunition.  He  must  leave  tent 
and  baggage.  Any  communication  with  me  you  must  make  at  once,  as 
most  probably  the  wires  will  soon  be  cut. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General , Com  m anding. 


Port  Hudson,  May  2, 1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton: 

Enemy’s  raid  has  successfully  passed  to  Baton  Rouge.*  I need  more 
cavalry  and  a good  commander.  Can  I break  up  the  post  at  Ponclia- 
toula? 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-General. 


Mobile,  May  2, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

I have  filled  requisitions  from  neighboring  commanders  until  this 
department  is  nearly  stripped  of  troops.  I sent  nearly  a thousand  cav- 


* Reference  is  to  Grierson's  raid,  reported  in  chapter  covering  operations  January 
20-July  4,  1863,  against  Vicksburg. 


Ciiap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1071 


airy  from  Pollard  to  General  Pemberton  several  weeks  ago.  1 have 
there  only  a few  companies  of  cavalry  to  guard  the  front  and  but  one 
infantry  regiment.  I have  no  other  infantry  in  the  department.  My 
entire  garrison  for  the  water  and  land  defenses  of  Mobile  is  one  regi- 
ment. acting  as  artillery.  I am  sending  now  the  only  cavalry  battalion 
left  me.  Only  three  small  companies  remain  to  guard  the  coast  to- 
wards Pascagoula. 

Cannot  General  Beauregard  send  me  re-enforcements'?  The  enemy 
are  making  another  raid  down  the  railroad  in  Mississippi. 

S.  B.  BUCKNER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  125.  ) Port  Hudson , La .,  May  3,  1863. 

I.  Colonel  Brown  with  his  command  will  remain  at  Williams’  Bridge. 
Colonel  Miles  with  his  Legion  will  take  post  at  Olive  Branch.  The 
senior  officer  will  command  the  whole,  cavalry  included,  and  take  chargb 
of  all  positions  of  the  outpost  up  to  Clinton  and  Tangipahoa. 

******  * 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner : 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Vicksburg,  May  4, 1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner,  Port  Hudson  : 

You  must  come  and  bring  with  you  5,000  infantry.  Leave  Beall  in 
command.  Bring  Maxey.  Call  in  outpost  except  cavalry.  Bring  cav- 
alry enough  to  protect  your  flanks  on  march,  leaving  sufficient  artil- 
lery for  defense  of  Port  Hudson. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Shreveport , May  4,  1863. 

Brigadier- General  Scurry, 

Commanding , <&c.,  Houston , Tex. : 

General:  You  will  concentrate  without  delay  at  some  point  near 
Niblett’s  Bluff  the  following  troops:  Col.  C.  L.  Pyron’s  regiment,  Col. 
J.  Bates’  regiment,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Spaight’s  battalion,  with  sup- 
plies and  transportation  for  an  active  campaign. 

The  regiment  of  Colonel  Gould  will  be  armed  in  the  best  possible  man- 
ner and  sent  to  supply  the  place  now  occupied  by  Colonel  Bates’  regi- 
ment 

Bv  command  of  Lieutenant-General  Smith : 

W.  R.  BOGGS, 

Brigadier- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


1072 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA,,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYIL 

Office  Brigade  Quartermaster, 

Fort  Brown , Tex .,  May  4,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  H.  C.  McNeill, 

Inspector - General , Brownsville , Tex.  : 

Colonel  : In  compliance  with  jrour  request  I have  the  honor  to  sub- 
mit for  your  consideration  my  views  in  regard  to  the  supply  of  the 
army  on  the  Bio  Grande  : 

In  the  first  place  I feel  authorized  to  say  that  negotiations  can  be  i 
made  in  this  city  and  Matamoras,  with  reliable  and  responsible  mercan- 
tile houses, by  which  every  article  required  in  each  one  of  the  departments 
(quartermaster’s,  subsistence,  ordnance,  and  medical),  can  be  obtained 
on  reasonable  terms,  in  quantities  sufficient  to  supply  the  entire  Trans- 
Mississippi  Department,  provided  we  can  devise  some  plan  by  which 
the  Government,  through  its  agents,  can  with  certainty  transport  and 
concentrate  at  convenient  depots  in  the  interior  cotton  to  meet  the 
payments  promptly. 

It  is  to  the  accomplishment  of  this  that  I would  direct  your  attention 
particularly,  believing  that  the  present  policy  in  regard  to  purchases 
based  upon  cotton  will  result  not  only  in  disappointment  in  procuring 
what  we  need  but  detrimental  to  the  credit  of  the  Government;  in  a 
word,  it  is  wholly  impracticable,  in  my  opinion,  for  the  following  rea- 
sons : 

1st.  The  distance  from  this,  the  only  point  for  the  exportation  of  cot- 
ton, to  the  cotton  growing  sections  of  the  State  is  from  300  to  600  miles, 
over  a country  destitute  of  grass  and  with  no  facilities  to  procure  forage.  ; 
It  is  therefore  not  only  impracticable  but  impossible  for  animals  to 
travel  this  distance  through  such  a country  and  arrive  at  their  destina- 
tion within  a reasonable  time. 

2d.  The  great  scarcity  of  transportation,  in  connection  with  the  de- 
mand by  speculators,  Government  contractors,  &c.,  who  offer  exorbi- 
tant rates  payable  in  specie,  renders  it  impracticable  to  obtain  trans- 
portation for  a sufficient  quantity  of  cotton  to  meet  the  wants  and  lia- 
bilities of  the  Government. 

3d.  I deem  it  impossible  for  any  one  man  to  successfully  discharge 
the  duty  this  policy  imposes  upon  the  officer  selected  for  that  purpose. 
When  you  take  into  consideration  the  vast  area  of  country  over  which 
he  has  to  travel,  first  to  purchase  the  cotton,  secondly  to  procure  trans- 
portation, and  lastly  to  return  to  Brownsville,  sell  the  cotton,  and  to 
attend  to  the  investment  of  its  proceeds  and  the  introduction  of  sup- 
plies, it  appears  to  me  that  a moment’s  reflection  will  prove  the  correct- 
ness of  my  position.  If  a doubt,  however,  should  exist  I would  respect- 
fully call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  this  agent  has  been  actively 
engaged  for  the  past  five  months,  clothed  with  every  facility  the  com- 
manding general  could  grant  him,  and  with  all  these  resources  and  his 
known  energy  only  40  bales  of  cotton  have  yet  reached  the  Bio  Grande. 
This  result  clearly  demonstrates  the  impracticability  of  the  present  pol- 
licy,  and  the  question  arises  how  is  this  to  be  remedied  ? I will  reply 
by  making  the  following  suggestions : 

First.  Establish  depots  at  Goliad,  San  Antonio,  and  Santa  Gertrudes : 
concentrate  the  cotton  purchased  by  the  Government  at  each  of  these 
points,  and  appoint  suitable  agents  to  attend  to  its  preservation  and 
delivery.  This  wall  avoid  to  a great  extent  the  difficulty  in  obtaining 
transportation.  Negro  labor  can  be  employed  in  hauling  to  each  one 
of  the  above-named  points  when  it  could  not  with  safety  be  sent  to  the 
Bio  Grande,  and  Mexican  teamsters  and  teams  could  be  employed  to 
transport  this  cotton  from  thence  to  Brownsville. 


Chap,  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1073 


Secondly.  I would  respectfully  suggest  a division  of  the  labor  now 
devolvent  upon  the  Government  agent,  as  follows:  Appoint  or  detail 
some  discreet  officer,  or  employ  a commission  house,  vested  with  au- 
thority to  purchase  cotton,  attend  to  its  transportation,  and  store  it  at 
each  of  the  above-named  points,  as  may  be  most  convenient  from  the 
place  of  purchase ; revoke  all  authority  granted  to  any  other  officer, 
agent,  of  contractor  to  purchase  cotton  within  the  State,  making  it  ex- 
clusively the  business  of  one  man  and  his  agents,  thus  preventing  com- 
petition between  officers  and  agents  purchasing  for  the  same  purpose. 

Detail  an  officer  (a  thorough  business  man,  if  to  be  found)  who  will 
inspire  confidence  in  his  intercourse  with  the  merchants  of  this  place 
and  Matamoras  for  the  purpose  of  disposing  of  this  cotton,  negotiating 
for  supplies,  filling  requisitions,  &c.,  his  office  or  headquarters  to  be  at 
this  place.  Eevoke  all  authority  heretofore  granted  to  contract  for  any 
article  based  upon  cotton  by  any  other  officer  or  agent;  vest  him  with 
discretionary  powers  to  sell  this  cotton  at  the  places  where  it  may  be 
concentrated  or  at  Brownsville,  as  he  may  deem  expedient,  and  I will 
guarantee  every  article  requisite  for  the  army  can  be  purchased  with- 
out difficulty  and  the  credit  of  the  Governmert  sustained. 

I will  remark  here  that  all  that  capitalists  require  to  furnish  the  army 
is  to  be  satisfied  that  the  cotton  to  meet  the  payment  is  stored  at  a given 
point,  and  there  will  be  no  disappointment  when  the  transportation  is 
sent  after  it.  They  will  either  take  it  at  the  market  price  here,  less  the 
regular  transportation  from  the  point  of  delivery,  or  they  will  have  it 
hauled,  advance  the  freight,  and  sell  it  on  account  of  the  Government, 
charging2J  per  cent,  commissions  for  selling  and  the  same  for  advancing. 

Another  advantage  to  be  gained  by  this  policy  is  that  stores  destined 
for  the  interior  can  be  purchased  to  be  delivered  where  the  cotton  is 
stored  and  sent  by  the  same  teams  that  haul  return  loads  of  cotton. 
Again,  no  facilities  are  granted  or  cotton  delivered  until  the  stores  are 
received. 

There  are  many  other  reasons  which  time  will  not  permit  me  to  men- 
tion, but  which  will  probably  suggest  themselves  to  you,  why  this  policy 
should  be  adopted.  I will,  however,  mention  one  other  which  I regard 
as  important  both  for  the  protection  of  the  officer  charged  with  this  duty 
and  the  Government.  It  is  this : At  present  there  is  no  check  or  way  by 
which  the  Government  can  be  protected  against  fraud,  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  one  officer  being  charged  with  the  duty  of  purchasing  cotton, 
transporting  and  selling  it,  purchasing  and  introducing  supplies,  is  forced 
to  rely  upon  his  own  statements  to  remove  any  censure  or  charges  that 
may  be  made  against  him,  while  the  plan  suggested  by  me  would  estab- 
lish a check  by  which  either  fraud  or  error  could  be  detected  and  cor- 
rected on  account  of  the  transaction  passing  through  two  officers. 

I have  thus  hastily  expressed  my  views  upon  this  important  question, 
and  it  affords  me  pleasure  to  say,  in  conclusion,  that  my  intercourse 
with  the  prominent  and  wealthy  merchants  of  this  city  and  Matamoras 
has  satisfied  me  that  they  are  willing  and  prepared  to  extend  us  every 
facility  that  we  can  reasonably  expect,  if  we  can  only  give  them  an 
assurance  that  they  will  be  reimbursed  and  reasonably  remunerated  for 
their  services.  Offers  have  been  made  to  me,  on  the  terms  above  stated, 
to  furnish  munitions  of  war,  quartermaster’s,  subsistence,  and  medical 
stores  in  any  quantity  that  is  required  with  any  guarantee  that  we  may 
ask  for  a faithful  compliance  with  their  agreement. 

In  regard  to  the  supply  of  the  troops  on  this  line  I have  the  pleasure 
to  inform  you  that  by  and  with  the  advice  and  approval  of  the  major- 

68  R R — VOX.  XV 


1074  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYII. 

general  commanding  I have  contracted  with  Messrs.  Richard  King, 
Mifflin  Kennedy,  and  Charles  Stillman,  of  this  city,  for  a supply  of 
quartermaster’s  and  subsistence  stores  for  six  months,  commencing 
June  1 proximo,  at  an  advance  of  15  per  cent,  on  the  original  cost  and 
charges  of  the  articles  delivered,  they  receiving  the  cotton  in  the  in- 
terior, providing  the  necessary  transportation,  and  selling  it  on  account 
of  the  Government,  charging  a commission  of  2\  per  cent,  for  selling 
and  2£  per  cent,  for  advancing.  These  gentlemen  are'too  well  known 
to  render  it  necessary  to  speak  of  their  ability  to  comply  with  this 
contract. 

My  duties  at  this  post  have  been  arduous  and  embarrassing  on  ac- 
count of  the  failure  in  the  transportation  of  cotton  with  which  to  make 
my  purchases.  I have,  however,  succeeded  in  providing  everything 
necessary  for  the  comfort  and  efficiency  of  the  army  without  compromis- 
ing in  any  manner  the  credit  of  the  Government,  and  at  prices  which  1 
flatter  myself  will  compare  favorably  with  any  purchases  that  have 
been  made  for  the  Confederacy.  I am  greatly  indebted  to  Maj.  J.  F. 
Minter,  chief  quartermaster  District  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 
for  the  present  organization  of  the  quartermaster’s  department.  Your 
statement  as  to  the  present  condition  and  efficiency  of  the  department 
is  truly  gratifying,  and  it  will  afford  me  pleasure  to  communicate  this 
fact  to  the  assistant  and  acting  assistant  quartermaster  on  this  line. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  RUSSELL, 

Major , C.  S.  P.  A.,  Brigade  Quartermaster. 


Headquarters  Eastern  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Houston , May  4,  1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Captain:  Under  the  orders  of  Lieutenant-General  Smith,  command- 
ing department,  &c.,  I beg  to  say  to  the  major-general  commanding 
that  I am  sending  to  Niblett’s  Bluff',  on  the  Sabine  River,  all  the  dis- 
posable force  at  my  command,  including  Major  Wilson’s  battery. 

I beg  to  know  of  the  major-general  commanding  as  to  the  propriety 
of  placing  Maj.  O.  M.  Watkins,  who  wishes  to  go,  in  command  of  that 
battery. 

I have  endeavored  to  keep  the  major-general  commanding  advised  of 
every  important  matter  that  has  occurred. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  R.  SCURRY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding , &c. 


Port  Hudson,  May  5,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton: 

1 have  managed  to  decipher  a portion  of  your  telegram  of  yesterday, 
but  cannot  understand  it  all.  I cannot  move  5,000  men  at  once,  but 
will  do  so  as  soon  as  wagons  return.  I will  move  as  many  as  possible 
to-morrow.  Shall  I order  Simonton  from  Ponchatoulaf 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-  General. 


Chap.  XXVII. J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  1075 

Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La.,  May  5,  1863. 

Maj.  R..W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  enemy’s  cavalry  raid* 
(1,200  cavalry  and  one  battery)  passed  successfully  to  Baton  Rouge  on 
the  evening  of  the  2d  instant,  having  evaded  my  cavalry,  which  was  all 
out  after  them,  and  by  an  extraordinary  march  from  Summit  to  Baton 
Rouge  between  the  afternoon  of  the  30th  and  the  afternoon  of  the  2d 
they  passed  before  the  arrival  of  infantry  and  artillery  that  I sent  out 
to  intercept.  The  enemy  came  suddenly  upon  my  outpost  toward  Baton 
Rouge  and  destroyed  Wilbourn’s  camp  and  captured  a number  of  men 
from  Captain  Bryan’s  company. 

1 respectfully  urge  the  great  necessity  of  increasing  the  cavalry  force 
in  this  district  and  giving  me  a good  cavalry  commander.  If  it  could 
be  deemed  expedient  to  abandon  the  post  at  Ponchatoula  that  would 
enable  me  to  concentrate  a larger  force  of  cavalry  in  my  front. 

1 also  respectfully  represent  that  the  very  limited  wagon  transporta- 
tion at  this  post  greatly  interferes  with  any  movement  of  troops  and 
also  the  gathering  in  of  supplies. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Fourth  Regiment  Arizona  Brigade, 

San  Antonio , Tex.,  May  5,  1863. 

Capt.  Edmund  P.  Turner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Brownsville  : 

Captain  : Since  my  communication  to  you  of  the  30th  ultimo,  inclos- 
ing communications  of  Messrs.  Burgess  and  Hubbell  in  regard  to  fur- 
nishing supplies  from  Chihuahua  and  vicinity,  I have  the  satisfaction 
of  informing  you  that  on  to-day  some  thirty-odd  wagons  and  carts 
owned  by  Messrs.  Solis  & Munis,  of  Santa  Cruz,  near  Chihuahua,  loaded 
with  flour,  shoes,  and  blankets,  discharged  and  stored  their  freight  at 
this  place. 

The  above  puts  the  question  of  supplies  for  Arizona  and  New  Mexico 
at  rest.  Messrs.  Solis  & Munis  crossed  the  Del  Norte  at  Presidio  del 
Norte  and  came  by  way  of  Fort  Lancaster.  I beg  leave  to  suggest  the 
importance  of  keeping  this  route  open. 

On  the  1st  instant  Judge  Nicholas  Cleary,  of  California,  and  late 
I United  States  naval  store  keeper  at  Shanghai,  China,  arrived  at  this 
place  from  California  via  Guavmas,  Navadista,  Sinaloa,  Monterey,  and 
Eagle  Pass.  He  came  on  foot  and  alone  from  Sinaloa  to  Monterey, 
buoyed  up  by  nothing  but  patriotism.  It  is  useless  for  me  to  say  that 
he  is  a Virginian.  He  reports  that  there  are  30,000  Confederates  in  the 
State  of  California  ready  to  take  up  arms  for  our  cause  when  a propi- 
tious moment  arrives,  and  says  that  Fort  Yuma  is  now  the  only  obstacle 
in  the  way  of  relief  and  encouragement  to  them ; that  it  (Fort  Yuma) 
contains  a large  amount  of  army  supplies  and  is  garrisoned  by  less 
than  500  men  of  doubtful  sympathies.  It  can  be  easily  captured,  and 
furthermore  it  is  the  key  to  Southern  California,  which  is  almost  to  a 


Grierson’s  raid 


1076  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

man  heart  and  soul  with  the  South  in  their  gallant  struggle  for  inde- 
pendence. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  M.  BAIRD, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fourth  Regiment  Arizona  Brigade. 


Port  Hudson,  May  6,  1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

Your  dispatch  in  cipher  is  not  understood.  Send  it  again,  and  better 
send  a courier  from  Brookhaven  with  duplicate. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major - General. 


Port  Hudson,  May  6, 1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

Gregg’s  division  ought  to  reach  Brookhaven  next  Thursday  or  Friday 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major - General. 

Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  128.  1 Fort  Hudson , La .,  May  6,  1863. 

******* 

II.  Brig.  Gen.  S.  B.  Maxey,  with  his  brigade,  except  the  Watson  Bat- 
tery, will  proceed  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  via  Clinton  and  Osyka,  La.,  with 
as  little  delay  as  practicable. 

III.  Coi.  Alexander  J.  Brown,  with  his  command,  will  proceed  to  the 
nearest  vpoint  of  the  Osyka  road  and  remain  until  Brig,  Gen.  S.  B. 
Maxey  arrives,  when  he  will  report  to  him.  Colonel  Brown  will  move 
without  delay. 

IV.  Col.  W.  R.  Miles,  with  his  Legion  (except  his  Parrott  gun  and 
detachment  with  it),  will  proceed  without  delay  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  via 
Clinton  and  Osyka,  La.,  cavalry  included. 

******* 

VI.  Captain  Cage,  with  his  company  of  cavalry,  will  proceed  to 
Clinton,  La.,  on  the  move  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  and  report  to  Maj.  Gen. 
Frank.  Gardner  with  as  little  delay  as  practicable. 

VII.  Captain  Stockdale,  with  his  company  of  cavalry,  will  proceed 
to  Clinton,  La.,  on  the  move  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  and  report  to  Maj.  Gen. 
Frank.  Gardner  with  as  little  delay  as  practicable. 

VIII.  Col.  J.  M.  Simonton  will  proceed  to  this  place  with  his  whole 
command  (cavalry  excepted)  with  as  little  delay  as  practicable. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner: 

j 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Executive  Department, 
Montgomery , Ala.,  May  6, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond  : 

Sir  : I telegraphed  you  to-day  that  the  citizens  of  Mobile  desired  the 


CHAP.  XXVII  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1077 


assignment  of  Brigadier- General  Mackall  to  the  command  in  that  city, 
in  lieu  of  Major-General  Buckner,  ordered  elsewhere,  and  urged  his 
appointment  according  to  their  request.  I am  advised  that  a memorial 
has  been  forwarded  to  your  department  in  support  of  this  application. 
May  1 not  hope  that  the  organization  of  the  army  in  Tennessee  can  be 
advantageously  made  without  the  presence  of  General  Mackall,  and 
that  he  can  be  spared  to  return  to  Mobile  I I need  not  remind  you  of 
the  vital  importance  of  assigning  to  such  a high  position  of  responsi- 
bility an  officer  of  skill  and  energy,  and  whose  qualifications  will  com- 
mand the  respect  and  confidence  of  the  citizens  of  Mobile  and  the  au- 
thorities of  Alabama.  We  are  not  satisfied  with  the  present  exposed 
condition  of  Mobile,  and  shall  continue  our  remonstrances  and  protests 
until  some  action  is  taken  by  the  Confederate  Government  to  give 
security  and  protection  to  our  seaport  city  and  the  gateway  to  the  cap- 
ital of  our  State. 

Hoping  for  a favorable  response  at  an  early  date,  I am,  respectfully, 
your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  GILL  SHORTER, 

Governor  of  Alabama . 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  May  7,  1863. 

Gov.  J.  G.  Shorter, 

Montgomery.  Ala. : 

The  assignment  of  a successor  to  the  command  at  Mobile  was  con- 
temporaneous with  the  transfer  of  General  Buckner,*  and  prior  to  the 
receipt  of  your  telegram  or  any  expression  of  preference  on  the  part  of 
the  citizens  for  General  Mackall. 

JAMES  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Brownsville,  May  7 [5],  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee, 

Commanding  West  Sub  - District : 

Sir  : The  order  published  this  day  for  the  removal  of  the  troops  now 
near  the  river  to  positions  of  greater  health  in  the  vicinity  is  intended 
to  cover  the  withdrawal  of  all  troops  from  the  Lower  Rio  Grande,  ex- 
cept one  regiment  of  cavalry,  one  battery  of  light  artillery,  and  the 
siege  guns,  and  excepting  also  such  companies  of  Mexicans  as  were  des- 
tined for  and  are  now  on  this  frontier.  You  will  therefore  move  as 
rapidly  as  possible  with  the  remainder  of  these  troops  to  the  eastern 
frontier  of  this  State,  leaving  Colonel  Duff,  whose  regiment  will  remain 
here  in  command,  with  such  detailed  instructions  as  your  experience 
may  suggest. 

You  are  authorized  to  avail  yourself  of  the  services  of  the  Militia  in 
the  neighborhood  to  guard  such  public  property  as  cannot  be  removed 
to  the  sanitary  camp,  in  which  Colonel  Duff’s  troops  will  be  placed,  or 
to  Ringgold  Barracks,  should  you  deem  it  best.  In  either  case  the 
troops  of  Colonel  Duff  will  remain  in  such  camps,  not  far  from  this 
post,  as  may  be  considered  most  convenient  and  salubrious.  Two 

* See  Cooper  to  Buckner  and  Maury,  April  27,  pp.  1055,  1056. 


1078 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX  , N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


heavy  guns  manned  in  part  by  details  from  the  three  light  batteries  on 
the  Rio  Grande  and  protected  by  such  company  or  companies  as  may  j 
be  formed  from  the  acclimated  citizens  of  Brownsville  and  vicinity 
should  be  left  to  hold  Fort  Brown  and  to  present  a force  to  our  neigh- 
bors. 

It  is  very  desirable  that  the  troops  destined  for  Louisiana  should  be 
marched  away  as  quietly  as  possible. 

It  is  supposed  that  the  publication  of  the  order  to-day  placing  all 
the  troops  into  sanitary  camps  and  the  exercise  of  a rigid  reserve  as  to 
the  time  of  removal  of  any  troops  from  thence  will  accomplish  the  pur- 
pose of  concealing  our  exact  movements  from  our  neighbors  as  well  as 
from  our  declared  enemies.  At  all  events  it  will  not  be  easy  for  them 
to  know  with  any  certainty  the  number  and  position  of  those  who  re- 
main. 

Colonel  Duff’s  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  interest  of ‘the  fron- 
tier and  the  character  of  our  neighbors  make  it  very  desirable  that  he 
should  be  in  command.  His  men  are  also  from  West  Texas,  and  he 
has  some  companies  of  Mexicans  who  must  remain  in  service  on  this 
frontier. 

Captain  Wey man’s  company  can  be  ordered  to  join  its  regiment  here 
and  Captain  Ireland’s  company  can  take  its  place  at  San  Antonio. 
The  fewer  the  troops  on  this  frontier  the  more  important  it  is  to  intrust 
its  defense  to  the  officer  who  is  best  qualified  by  experience  and  in 
other  respects  for  the  task.  The  march  of  some  2,000  troops  across  | 
the  desert  will  be  somewhat  difficult  and  tedious,  and  it  is  impossible 
to  give  detailed  instructions  as  to  the  precise  manner  of  performing  it. 

It  may  be  stated  in  general  terms  that  it  ought  to  be  performed  by 
regiments  or  even  battalions  with  a day’s  interval  between  the  moving 
bodies;  this  for  the  convenience  of  water  and  perhaps  other  supplies. 

Depots  of  supplies  should  be  previously  established  at  convenient 
points  on  the  road  and  allowance  should  be  made  for  the  time  neces- 
sary to  recruit  the  draught  and  other  animals,  but  as  it  is  of  the  greatest 
importance  that  the  march  should  be  made  rapidly,  you  are  especially 
required  not  to  lose  any  more  time  than  may  be  absolutely  necessary  j 
to  enable  you  to  accomplish  your  march.  ^ 

An  officer  of  experience,  energy,  and  talent  should  be  kept  on  this 
fi  on  tier  in  the  quartermaster’s  department,  as  well  as  one  of  similar 
qualifications  in  the  commissary  department.  You  will  please  make  j 
such  selections,  if  in  your  power,  and  report  them  to  me. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Commanding , &c. 


Headquarters  District  of  Texas,  &c., 

Brownsville , Tex.,  May  7,  1863. 

Col.  J.  F.  Belton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

I have  the  honor  to  state,  for  the  information  of  the  lieutenant-gen- 
eral commanding,  that  I have  ordered  all  the  troops  from  the  Rio  Grande 
frontier  to  the  eastern  portion  of  the  State,  with  the  exception  of  one  reg- 
iment of  cavalry,  one  battery  of  light  artillery,  and  six  siege  guns,  the  lat- 
ter manned  by  one  company  of  the  cavalry  regiment.  The  troops  were  ' 
hastened  to  this  place  upon  the  written  representations  of  Brigadier- 
General  Bee,  commanding  this  frontier,  to  the  effect  that  he  expected 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1079 


an  attack  within  a month,  and  calling  for  re-enforcements.  The  great 
excitement  created  in  Mexico  by  the  arrest  on  her  soil  of  Colonel  Davis, 
of  the  Federal  Army,  and  a man  named  Montgomery,  the  latter  having 
been  hung  by  our  troops,  and  the  ease  with  which  the  frontier  could 
have  been  occupied  by  the  Federals  at  any  other  than  the  yellow-fever 
season,  in  the  absence  of  a sufficient  force  for  its  defense,  together  with 
the  information  conveyed  by  private  letters  and  the  New  York  papers 
of  a determination  by  the  enemy  to  occupy  it,  rendered  an  attack  on 
the  small  body  of  troops  here  very  probable.  I therefore  ordered  heavy 
re-enforcements,  so  as  to  mass  about  5,000  men  in  this  region  of  country, 
and  all  but  two  regiments  had  arrived  when  I received  intelligence  of 
the  movements  of  Banks  into  the  interior  of  Louisiana. 

Having  found  on  my  arrival  that  the  probability  of  an  attack  was 
remote,  owing  to  the  approaching  yellow-fever  season  and  hearing  of 
the  movements  of  the  enemy  in  Louisiana,  I ordered  these  two  regi- 
ments to  halt,  and  have  since  directed  2,000  additional  men  to  march 
from  here  for  the  Louisiana  frontier.  Brigadier-General  Scurry  has  or- 
dered five  regiments,  including  the  two  above  mentioned,  to  proceed  to 
Louisiana,  which,  with  the  troops  sent  from  here,  will  make  about  5,000 
effective  men. 

I have  requested  the  Governor  to  call  out  5,000  organized  militia  for 
service  on  the  coast,  in  order  to  relieve  several  effective  regiments  now 
defending  it,  and  hope  in  six  weeks  or  two  months  to  have  about  10,000 
good  troops  in  Louisiana.  The  five  regiments  ordered  by  General 
Scurry  will  probably  be  on  the  Louisiana  frontier  within  a few  days. 
I have  also  requested  the  Governor  of  the  State  to  call  out  5,000  addi- 
tional militia  in  the  northeastern  part  of  the  State  if  he  can  arm  them. 
Six  thousand  stand  of  arms  left  Havana  for  us  a month  ago,  but  not 
having  arrived,  it  is  feared  they  are  captured. 

I am  trying  to  make  arrangements  for  the  introduction  of  arms,  so 
much  needed,  but  have  not  much  confidence  in  the  success  of  the 
attempt. 

Should  it  become  necessary  I will,  with  the  consent  of  the  lieutenant- 
general  commanding  the  department,  call  upon  the  citizens  of  all  classes 
who  are  armed  to  rendezvous  at  convenient  localities,  and  attach  them 
for  temporary  service  to  organizations  already  existing.  I will  be  with 
the  advance  of  the  troops  in  the  east,  ready  to  afford  all  the  assistance 
in  my  power  to  the  army  in  Louisiana,  for  which  purpose  I leave  here 
on  the  9th  instant  for  Houston. 

I have  made  arrangements  to  conceal  the  withdrawal  of  troops  from 
this  frontier,  and  request  that  it  be  kept  secret. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona, 

Fort  Brown , May  7,  1863. 

Brigadier* General  Scurry,  Commanding , &c. : 

Sir  : I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Magruder  to  state  that  he 
has  ordered  from  this  frontier  2,000  troops  to  Louisiana,  which  number 
will  be  on  the  march  in  a very  short  time. 

The  Governor  has  been  requested*  to  call  out  5,000  militia,  and  also 
5,000  in  addition,  if  he  can  arm  them  by  any  possibility.  Orders  have 

* By  letter  of  same  date,  to  appear  in  Series  IV. 


1080 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  8.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [CHAr.  xxvn. 

been  sent  you  to  make  the  necessary  arrangements  for  subsisting  these 
troops.  The  additional  5,000  militia  will  come  from  the  northeastern 
part  of  the  State. 

The  major-general  commanding  has  made  arrangements  to  conceal 
the  withdrawal  of  the  troops  from  this  frontier,  and  desires  that  you 
will  regard  this  as  confidential. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  P.  TURNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Vicksburg,  May  8,  1863. 

General  Gardner,  OsyJca: 

Return  with  2,000  troops  to  Port  Hudson  and  hold  it  to  the  last. 
President  says  both  places  must  be  held. 

J.  G.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

Enqineer  Office.  Mobile , Ala..  May  8,  1863. 

Lieut.  J.  W.  Glenn, 

Engineer , Fort  Gaines  : 

Sir  : Brigadier-General  Slaughter  directs  that  Grant’s  Pass  be  ob- 
structed. You  will  stop  up  the  opening  you  have  just  made  without 
delay. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  LEADBETTER, 
Brigadier  General  and  Engineer. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

No.  134.  j Fort  Brown , May  8, 1863. 

* # * * * * * 

VII.  Brig.  Gen.  W.  R.  Scurry,  commanding  East  Sub-District,  will 
cause  to  be  placed  in  depot  at  Harrisburg  ninety  days’  rations  for  5,000 
militia.  He  will  also  cause  ninety  days’  rations  to  be  placed  in  depot 
at  some  convenient  point  on  the  frontier  of  Texas  - and  Louisiana  for 
5,000  additional  militia,  if  they  should  be  called  out  by  the  Governor 
and  armed  by  him.  He  is  directed  to  communicate  with  His  Excellency 
the  Governor  of  Texas  on  this  subject.  The  point  most  suitable  for  a 
depot  on  the  Louisiana  and  Texas  frontier  will  probably  be  found  some- 
where on  the  Nacogdoches  road. 

* # * * * * * 

XI.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brown,  commanding  battalion,  will  cause 
one  company  from  his  command  to  relieve  Captain  [J.  T.]  Brackenridge 
at  Lavaca,  who  is  hereby  directed  to  proceed  with  his  company  at  once 
to  Port  Brown  and  report  to  Colonel  Duff  at  that  point. 

******  # 

By  command  of  Major-General  Magruder : 

J E.  P.  TURNER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chaf.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1081 


OSYKA,  May  9,  L863. 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

Maxev  will  reach  Brookkaven  on  Tuesday. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major -General. 


Vicksburg,  May  9,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Beall,  Port  Hudson  : 

A portion  of  General  Gardner’s  command  has  been  ordered  back. 

P J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Shreveport,  La.,  May  9,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  Natchitoches: 

General  : The  lieutenant-general  commanding  directs  me  to  inform 
you  that  General  Walker’s  division,  5,000  strong,  was  at  Monroe  on  the 
7th  instant,  and  was  to  leave  early  on  the  8th  by  water  from  Le  Croix, 
landing  near  Alexandria. 

If  no  delay  occurs  he  should  be  at  Alexandria  on  the  10th.  He  has 
about  a dozen  boats,  sufficient  to  transport  his  whole  force,  together 
with  his  artillery  and  ordnance  train.  The  remainder  of  his  wagons 
will  take  the  shortest  route  from  Monroe  to  Alexandria. 

General  Smith  is  not  informed  of  what  has  occurred  on  the  river  below 
this  point  since  General  Walker  was  heard  from,  and  is  therefore  un 
certain  whether  the  route  proposed  is  practicable.  He  desires  you  to 
put  yourself  in  communication  with  General  W alker  as  speedily  as  pos 
sible,  and  give  him  such  information  of  the  enemy’s  movements  as  con 
cern  his  command,  indicating  to  him  how  and  where  he  can  best  form 
a junction  with  you.  General  Walker  has  three  light  field  batteries. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  CUNNINGHAM, 
Lieutenant  and  Aide-de-Camp. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Shreveport,  La.,  May  11,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor: 

General  : I have  kept  you  constantly  informed  of  all  changes  in  the 
movements  of  troops  and  furnished  you  with  copies  ot  orders  afiecting 
their  march.  Two  of  the  cavalry  regiments  intended  for  General  Mon 
ton  were  ordered  by  General  Scurry  to  San  Augustine,  Tex.  I directed 
them  to  march  from  that  point  to  Nackitoches  and  to  report  to  you  for 
orders. 

Lane’s  regiment  of  cavalry  is  in  that  vicinity.  It  is  but  partly  armed. 
I have  ordered  it  inspected  by  Major  Williamson,  who  is  sent  to  Natch- 
itoches for  that  purpose.  He  wili  furnish  you  a copy  of  his  report.  It 
at  all  efficient  this  regiment  should  be  armed  without  delay.  I have  no 
arms  at  my  disposal.  The  Governor  sends  you  some  350  Enfield  rifles, 
which  leave  on  the  boat  this  morning. 

A brigade  of  Texas  infantry  have  been  ordered  into  camp  near  Nib- 


1082 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

lett’s  Bluff;  they  are  instructed  to  prepare  ■supplies  and  transportation 
to  take  the  field  without  delay ; Colonel  Pyron  commands  the  brigade, 
about  2,000  bayonets.  The  brigade  from  the  Indian  country  should 
soon  commence  arriving  at  this  point;  boats  have  been  sent  to  Jeffer- 
son for  their  transportation.  Tne  brigade  is  reported  but  partly  armed, 
and  will,  I think,  be  under  2,000  effective.  General  Walker’s  division, 
at  your  suggestion,  was  ordered  by  steamer  from  Monroe  to  La  Croix 
Ferry.  I have  not  since  heard  of  its  movements.  In  evacuating  Alex- 
andria you,  I presume,  notified  General  Walker,  and  gave  him  the  nec- 
essary instructions  for  concentrating  with  you  at  some  point  abo\e  on 

Eed  River.  , _ . , . 

General  Holmes  telegraphs  that  Marmaduke  has  been  driven  back 
from  Missouri  and  that  the  enemy  are  at  Jacksonport,  Ark.  The  In- 
dian country  is  also  threatened  by  a force  from  Kansas.  It  maj  be- 
come necessary  to  abandon  the  Arkansas  Valley  and  concentrate  oui 
whole  force  for  the  recovery  of  Lower  Louisiana.  This  when  the  waters 
fall  will  be  a practicable  operation. 

The  force  which  has  been  ordered  to  your  support  will,  I hope,  be 
sufficient  to  enable  you  until  that  time  to  maintain  the  defensive,  hold- 
ing the  country  above  Natchitoches. 

The  11-inch  gun  arrived  here  by  boat  this  morning.  I cannot  learn 
by  whose  direction  it  was  sent,  and  think,  with  the  9-inch,  it  should  be 
in  position  at  Grand  Ecore.  1 have  ordered  them  both,  with  a battery 
of  field  pieces  found  here,  to  be  placed  in  position  2 miles  below  the 
town.  Shot  and  ammunition  are  being  prepared  for  the  two  heavy  guns, 
and  they  can  be  shipped  from  here  by  the  20th,  with  200  rounds  ot  am- 
munitiou,  to  any  point  you  may  desire  below. 

I have  ordered  a couipany  of  Colonel  Lane’s  regiment  to  be  put  on 
courier  duty  between  this  point  and  Natchitoches.  They  aie  well 
mounted,  though  unarmed,  and  will  do  well  for  this  duty.  Should  you 
think  it  probable  you  may  be  forced  to  fall  back  from  the  position  at 
Grand  Ecore,  it  will  be  well  to  provide  for  obstructing  the  river  between 
that  point  and  this.  In  the  narrows  the  river  is  for  many  miles  not 
over  40  yards  wide,  and  could  be  readily  obstructed  by  telling  trees  or 
by  sinking  a boat  in  the  channel  where  the  fire  of  sharpshooters  would 
prevent  or  materially  delay  the  passage  of  gunboats. 

Write  me  constantly— if  too  much  occupied,  through  your  staff— and 
keep  me  posted  in  regard  to  both  your  and  the  enemy’s  movements.  I 
have  had  but  little  information  officially,  whilst  every  boat  brings  re- 
ports and  rumors  innumerable. 

Respectfully,  yours,  &c,  R KIRBY  8MITH, 

Lieutenant - General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Shreveport,  May  12,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor: 

General  : I am  directed  by  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to 
inclose  a communication  just  received  from  Major-General  Walker  and 
to  communicate  the  following  information  in  regard  to  the  movements 

of  his  division.  _ _ __r  , . . ^ 

The  troops  were  disembarked  at  Monroe.  General  Hawes  bngade 
left  Monroe  in  advance  on  the  10th  instant  at  daylight,  Colonel  Ran- 
dal’s brigade  following  them  immediately. 


’hat.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1083 


The  brigade  commanded  by  General  McCulloch  being  delayed  by 
the  transportation  which  had  been  sent  overland  to  Alexandria  would 
not  probably  be  able  to  move  until  Tuesday  morning. 

The  first  two  brigades  expect  to  reach  Natchitoches  by  Saturday  next. 
The  troops  are  in  splendid  spirits  and  condition. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ S ’ H.  P.  PBATT, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Hudson , La.,  May  12,  1863. 

Colonel  Simonton  : 

The  major-general  commanding  directs  that  you  move  forward  with 
your  command  to  or  near  Plaints  Store,  establish  communication  by 
couriers  with  the  outposts  on  Bayou  Sara  and  Baton  Bouge  road,  also 
with  Colonels  Logan  and  Witt  at  Olive  Branch. 

Should  the  enemy  move  on  Olive  Branch  you  will  proceed  there  as 
rapidly  as  practicable  and  assume  command  unless  a force  threaten  you 
on  the  Bayou  Sara  andBaton  Bouge  road.  Keep  us  accurately  informed 
of  all  movements  of  the  enemy,  giving  the  name  of  the  place  they  are 
and  noting  the  hour  they  were  seen.  All  communications  addressed 
to  the  general  he  desires  you  to  open  and  read. 

The  general  places  reliance  upon  your  discretion. 

I am,  sir,  vour  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ " C.  M.  JACKSON, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Shreveport , May  14,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Bichard  Taylor: 

General  : I inclose  herewith  a copy  of  a letter  received  this  morn- 
ing from  General  Walker,*  also  a copy  of  General  Smith’s  answer. 

Speight’s  brigade  is  now  arriving.  It  has  an  aggregate  present  ol 
1,650,  of  which  about  600  are  unarmed.  It  will  take  all  day  to  fit  up 
this  brigade.  General  Smith  wishes  to  know  if  this  brigade  can  reach 
Grand  Ecore  in  time  to  be  of  service  to  you. 

The  general  commanding  directs  me  again  to  call  your  attention  to 
obstructing  the  river,  and  suggests  that  by  sinking  the  Falls  City  in 
narrows  a serious  obstacle  can  be  put  in  the  way  of  the  enemy’s  boats. 

If  the  Falls  City  is  not  below  he  will  send  it  or  any  other  boat  down 
again  when  you  require  it. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ 7 W.  B.  BOGGS, 

Brigadier -General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Shreveport , La.,  May  14,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Walker: 

General  : Your  communication  of  the  12th  has  just  been  received. 
Your  instructions  were  to  march  with  your  division  to  Bed  Biver.  The 


Walker’s  letter  not  found. 


1084 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 


question  of  and  necessity  for  leaving  a portion  of  your  commaud  bad 
been  fully  weighed  before  sending  you  orders.  By  your  delay  at  Mon- 
roe you  have  defeated  the  possibility  of  a junction  with  Taylor  at  Natchi- 
toches. General  Taylor  will  be  driven  back  to  Shreveport,  at  which 
point  there  is  possibly  yet  time  for  you  to  effect  a junction  with  his 
command. 

You  will  march  immediately  by  Minden  to  this  point  as  rapidly  as 
the  condition  of  your  troops  will  allow.  I have  ordered  supplies  sent 
by  boat  to  Minden  for  the  use  of  your  command. 

I have  no  report  from  General  Taylor  since  the  11th;  he  was  then  at 
Natchitoches,  preparing  to  evacuate  the  place.  Your  junction  with  him 
being  of  the  most  vital  importance  you  can  change  your  line  of  march 
according  to  any  instructions  you  may  receive  from  General  Taylor, 
rendering  yonr  junction  certain  with  him  below  this  point. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

’ E.  KIRBY  SMITH, 

Lieu  tenant - General , Co  mmanding. 


p.  s. — Information  having  been  received  that  abundant  supplies  can 
be  obtained  near  Minden,  an  officer  will  be  sent  to  collect  these  supplies 
for  your  command  instead  of  sending  a boat  from  here. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  R.  BOGGS, 

Brigadier- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


— 

, 

Headquarters  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

Shreveport , La .,  May  14,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  R.  Scurry,  Houston , Tex. : 

General  : At  the  last  information  received  from  General  Taylor  he 
was  prepared  to  evacuate  Natchitoches.  General  Banks,  with  a column 
estimated  at  28,000,  was  pressing  up  the  valley  of  Red  River.  Gen- 
eral Taylor  has  but  a handful  of  men  under  his  command.  The  re-en- 
forcement expected  from  Arkansas  cannot  arrive  in  time  to  effect  a 
junction  with  General  Taylor  at  Shreveport,  and  iu  all  probability  the 
valley  of  Red  River  up  to  Jefferson  will  fall  into  the  possession  of  the 
enemy. 

The  enemy  are  acting  in  the  most  ruthless  manner.  Their  avowed  de- 
termination is  to  prevent  the  raising  of  crops  in  the  valley  of  Red 
River.  They  do  not  expect  to  retain  possession  of  the  country,  and 
should  be  made  to  suffer  for  their  temerity  in  venturing  so  far  from  their 
base.  Should  they  reach  this  section  Eastern  Texas  will  be  endangered. 
All  the  infantry  force  ordered  to  Niblettfs  Bluff,  with  all  the  disposable 
force  throughout  the  District  of  Texas,  should  be  concentrated  immedi- 
ately at  Nacogdoches,  or  at  some  point  in  that  vicinity,  where  supplies 
for  their  subsistence  can  be  collected  and  where  they  threaten  Banks’ 
communication.  The  people  of  Eastern  Texas  should  be  organized  iu 
minute  companies.  The  danger  is  great  and  near  at  hand,  and  no  effort 
should  be  spared  in  your  district  to  prepare  to  meet  the  emergency. 

If  Major-General  Magruder  has  returned  it  will  be  well  for  him  to 
use  his  influence  and  popularity  in  stirring  up  the  people  throughout 
the  State,  and  he  had  better  take  command  of  the  force,  if  he  can  or- 
ganize one,  which  concentrates  in  the  vicinity  of  Nacogdoches. 

By  command  of  Lieutenant-General  Smith : 

W.  R.  BOGGS, 

Brigadier- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Chap,  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1085 


General,  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Tex.,  N.  Mex.,  and  Ariz., 

No.  66.  j Corpus  Christ i,  Tex.,  May  20,  1863. 

The  major-general  commanding  takes  this  opportunity  to  express 
officially  to  Colonel  [A.  M.]  Hobby,  and  the  officers  and  men  under  his 
command,  his  high  sense  of  the  heroic  gallantry  which  has  rendered 
successful  their  efforts  in  repelling  the  attempts  of  the  enemy  to  effect 
a landing  on  this  part  of  the  coast,*  and  of  their  activity  and  energy 
exhibited  in  the  recent  brilliant  affair  which  resulted  in  the  capture  of 
a launch,  with  5 of  the  enemy,  and  the  death  of  12  or  15  others.  This 
gallant  feat  was  performed  by  28  men  of  Captain  [E.  E.]  Hobby’s  com- 
pany. Major-General  Magruder  feels  sure  that  those  of  the  troops  who 
have  been  ordered  to  Louisiana  bore  with  them  willing  hearts  and 
strong  arms  to  assist  their  sister  State  in  expelling  the  ruthless  in- 
vader, and  begs  to  assure  those  who  remain  that  he  feels  confident  that 
Texas  will  be  nobly  defended  while  her  sons  stand  between  the  enemy 
and  their  loved  homes. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Magruder : 

E»  P.  TURNER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


APPENDIX. 


Embracing  documents  received  too  late  for  insertion  in  proper  sequence. 


NOVEMBER  1-6,  1862.— Naval  operations  on  Berwick  Bay,  La  * 

Report  of  Capt.  T.  A.  Faries , Louisiana  Artillery. 

Quarters  Faries’  Battery,  P.  L.  A., 

Bayou  Teche , La.,  November  10,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  afternoon  of  the  3d  of 
November,  instant,  the  right  section  of  this  battery,  consisting  of  two 
3-inch  rifled  guns,  Parrott  pattern,  commanded  by  First  Lieut.  B.  F. 
Winchester,  having  taken  position  at  Cornay’s  residence,  on  the  rights 
and  a short  distance  in  advance  of  the  O.  S.  gunboat  J.  A.  Cotton  (four 
guns),  commanding  the  obstructions  at  the  bridge  just  below  that  place, 
opened  fire  about  4 o’clock  on  the  four  gunboats  of  the  enemy  then  ap- 
proaching, engaging  three  boats  following  each  other  in  succession  for 
about  thirty  minutes,  under  a severe  fire  from  their  heavy  guns,  at  short 
range  and  unsupported,  but  in  battery  with  a section  of  Capt.  O.  J . 
Semmes’  battery,  consisting  of  two  James  rifles  (bronze  12-pounders), 
under  First  Lieut.  J.  A.  A.  West.  Both  sections  then  fell  back  to  the 
Bayou  Teche  road,  in  the  rear  of  and  above  their  first  position,  when, 
after  firing  ten  to  fifteen  minutes,  [they]  retired  in  good  order  and  re- 
turned to  this  camp. 

The  nature  of  the  ground  and  cover  in  our  front  (guns  being  in  bat- 
tery among  a number  of  large  live-oak  trees)  prevented  the  effect  of 
all  the  shots  being  observed.  It  has  been  ascertained,  however,  and 
believed,  that  two  of  the  gunboats  retired  badly  crippled,  and,  from  the 
cries  heard  on  board,  a number  of  the  enemy  must  have  been  wounded. 

Being  the  first  engagement  for  this  section  and  for  most  of  the  men, 
all  behaved  well  under  fire.  The  horses,  for  new  ones,  were  remarkably 
quiet. 

1 have  no  casualties  to  report. 

The  distance  fired  from  the  first  position  was  about  300  yards.  The 
number  of  shell  (fuse)  fired  by  this  section  was  58. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ T.  A.  FABIES, 

Captain , Commanding  Battery , Mouton’s  Brigade. 

Capt.  R.  C.  Bond,  Chief  of  Artillery. 


See  also  pp.  183-188. 


(1087) 


1088  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

NOVEMBER  21-22,  1862. — Affairs  at  Petite  Anse  Island,  La. 

Report  of  Gapt.  T.  A.  Faries , Louisiana  Artillery, 

Quarters  Faries’  Battery,  P.  L.  A., 

Camp  Bis  land.  Bayou  Teche , November  26,  1862. 

Sir  : 1 have  the  honor  to  report  that,  agreeably  to  orders,  the  right 
and  left  sections  of  this  battery,  viz,  two  3-iuch  rifles  and  two  12- 
pounder  bronze  field  howitzers,  were  put  on  the  steam  transport  Hart 
about  1 a.  m.  on  the  19th  November,  instant,  to  proceed  to  Petite  Anse 
Island,  on  Vermillion  Bay,  via  Bayou  Teche  (three  caissons  being  sent 
by  land).  The  steamer,  with  the  four  pieces,  reached  New  Iberia  the 
same  day,  and  the  command  bivouacked  at  night  9 miles  beyond  that 
point,  near  the  end  of  the  causeway  connecting  the  mainland,  or  prairie, 
with  the  island.  This  causeway  was  built  through  a sea  marsh,  subject 
to  tidal  action;  the  road  over  it  had  become  impassable  from  the  action 
of  frequent  rains  on  the  soft  soil. 

On  the  20th  instant,  after  much  trouble  and  delay,  succeeded  in 
crossing  to  the  island  by  removing  the  six-horse  teams  in  each  carriage 
and  substituting  oxen  in  their  stead.  On  the  same  day  the  left  or  how- 
itzer section,  under  Second  Lieut.  Oscar  Gaudet,  took  position  on  the 
outskirts  of  a narrow  strip  of  woods  on  the  sea  front  of  the  island, 
bordering  the  sea  marsh  which  surrounds  the  island.  A small  bayou 
runs  through  the  marsh  from  the  island  to  the  bay,  distance  some  1£ 
miles.  Two  gunboats  of  the  enemy  could  be  seen  in  the  mouth  of  this 
bayou,  but  beyond  the  range  of  the  howitzers,  posted  within  range  of 
their  heavy  guns. 

On  Friday,  the  21st  instant,  the  enemy  having  landed,  by  means  of 
boats,  a small  body  of  men,  five  spherical  case  were  fired  as  they  ap- 
proached Lieutenant  Gaudet’s  position,  which  caused  them  to  disperse 
and  retire  hastily  to  their  boats,  dragging  with  them  a number  of  dead 
or  wounded  men. 

The  right  section,  two  3-inch  rifles  (iron),  from  their  position  on  an 
elevated  part  of  the  island,  opened  fire,  on  the  22d  instant,  upon  the 
gunboats  of  the  enemy,  distant  about  1 £ miles.  After  firing  thirty-three 
shot  and  shell,  and  finding  that  only  a few  reached  the  gunboats,  ceased 
firing  and  moved  the  section  below  the  hill.  Immediately  after,  a shell 
from  one  of  the  gunboats  struck  the  ground  just  where  Lieutenant 
Winchester,  the  chief  of  the  section,  had  been  posted. 

The  two  sections  remained  at  Petite  Anse  Island  until  Monday,  24th 
instant,  at  5.30  a.  m.,  when  orders  were  received  to  return  to  this  post. 
Marching  some  10  miles  to  New  Iberia,  the  two  sections  were  placed  on 
the  steamers  Darby  and  Hart,  and  reached  here  at  3 o’clock  on  the 
morning  of  the  25th  instant,  in  good  order  (excepting  the  breaking  of 
one  pole  and  two  sponge  staffs),  considering  the  very  scant  subsistence 
furnished  the  men  and  horses. 

The  cartridges  furnished  by  the  Ordnance  Department  from  the 
arsenal  at  New  Iberia,  for  the  3-inch  rifles,  proved  to  be  filled  with  very 
inferior  powder,  and  unfit  for  use.  This,  I trust,  will  account  for  the 
absence  of  effective  execution  by  these  two  guns. 

I inclose  herewith  a detailed  report  of  First  Lieut.  B.  F.  Winchester, 
the  senior  officer  commanding  the  two  sections.* 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  FARIES, 
Captain , Commanding  Battery. 

Oapt.  R.  O.  Bond,  Chief  of  Artillery. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXVII.]  OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA.  1089 

JANUARY  14,  1863.— Engagement  on  Bayou  Teche,  La.,  and  destruction 
of  Confederate  gunboat  Cotton.* 

Report  of  Lieut.  B.  F.  Winchester , Louisiana  Artillery. 

Quarters  F aries’  Battery,  P.  L.  A., 

Camp  Bisland , Bayou  Teche , La.,  February  19,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  say  that,  having  forwarded  a detailed  re- 
port of  the  late  action  (January  14)  on  the  Teche  to  brigade  head- 
quarters, I now  submit  a synopsis  thereof  for  your  information.  This 
battery  took  position  here,  under  orders  dated  January  13.  Early  on 
the  morning  of  the  14th,  the  left  section  (two  12-pounder  bronze  field 
howitzers),  under  First  Lieut.  J.  R.  Winchester,  proceeded  down  the 
main  bayou  road  and  got  in  battery  just  in  time  to  protect  the  0.  S. 
gunboat  J.  A.  Cotton,  whose  gunners  and  pilots  had  left  their  posts, 
they  being  unable  to  stand  the  hot  fire  of  the  Yankee  sharpshooters. 
Here  the  left  section  dispersed  the  Yankees,  and  enabled  the  gunboat, 
which  had  swung  against  the  bank  of  the  bayou,  to  become  manageable, 
and  retire  up  the  Teche. 

The  left  section  remained  there  until  it  had  exhausted  all  its  canis- 
ter, 20  rounds.  It  then  fell  back  to  its  original  position,  on  the  right  of 
the  earthworks  of  Battery  Fusileer,  and  about  4 p.  m.  dislodged  the 
entire  force  of  the  enemy  from  the  shelter  of  the  Bethel  residence  and 
negro  quarters,  by  the  discharge  of  40  rounds  of  spherical  case. 

The  center  section  (two  6-pounder  bronze  smooth-bore  guns),  under 
Second  Lieut.  Oscar  Gaudet,  stationed  in  the  open  field  to  the  right  of 
the  bayou,  about  12  m.  dispersed  an  advancing  Yankee  column  and  a 
section  of  artillery  by  the  discharge  of  19  spherical  case.  This  section 
was  soon  after  ordered  to  cross  Bayou  Teche  and  report  to  Col.  Leopold 
[L.]  Armant,  commanding  Eighteenth  Regiment  Louisiana  Infantry 
Volunteers,  where  it  remained  until  the  Federals  retired. 

The  right  section  (two  3-inch  Parrott  rifles)  took  position  in  this  for- 
tification and  played  on  the  enemy ; first  on  this  bank  of  the  bayou 
and  then  on  the  other,  alternately,  at  intervals  during  the  day,  termi- 
nating with  7 shots  on  the  evening  of  the  15th  of  January.  The  rifle 
section  fired  a total  of  40  fuse  shell. 

Casualties : 3 men  slightly  wounded  ; 2 horses  slightly  wounded,  and 
1 fatally. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  F.  WINCHESTER, 

Senior  First  Lieutenant , Commanding  Furies'1  Battery. 

Capt.  T.  A.  F Aries,  Commanding  Battery. 


APRIL  9-MAY  14,  1863. — Operations  in  West  Louisiana.1 

Report  of  Capt.  T.  A.  Faries , Louisiana  Artillery , of  engagement  at  Fort 

Bisland. 

Faries’  Battery,  P.  L.  A., 

Fear  Lecompte , La.,  April  22,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I left  camp  at  Bisland  with  this 
battery  on  Friday  morning,  the  10th  of  April,  instant,  crossing  to  the 

* See  also  pp.  233-237. 

69  R R — YOL  XY 


t See  also  pp.  292-400. 


1090  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS  , LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  IChaf.  XXVII. 

east  bank  of  Bayou  Teche,  by  Palfrey’s  Bridge,  and  moved  to  the  line 
of  proposed  fortifications  on  the  skirt  of  the  woods  extending  from  the 
Teche  to  the  swamp  on  Grand  Lake,  and  took  position  as  follows:  The 
right  section  (two  3-inch  rifle  guns),  under  First  Lieut.  B.  F.  Winches- 
ter, in  the  redoubt  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  line,  near  the  swamp ; the 
left  section,  two  12-pounder  field  howitzers,  under  Lieut.  J.  R.  Win- 
chester, on  the  left  of  the  center  of  the  line  of  battle,  near  the  bayou, 
and  the  extreme  right  of  the  left  wing,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  Alfred 
Mouton ; the  center  section  (two  6-pounder  bronze  smooth-bore  guns), 
under  Second  Lieut.  Oscar  Gaudet,  was  posted  midway  between  the 
right  and  left  sections.  The  six  pieces  remained  in  battery,  as  stated, 
until  night  on  Saturday,  the  11th  instant,  when  the  battery  was  moved 
forward  to  the  new  line  of  works  then  in  course  of  construction,  about 
450  yards  in  advance  of  the  line  first  occupied.  To  connect  with  the  re- 
doubt on  our  extreme  left,  before  referred  to,  it  became  necessary  to 
run  the  line  of  works  at  an  angle  from  the  center  of  this  line  to  the 
redoubt.  This  redoubt  was  constructed  with  platforms  for  four  field 
guns. 

The  right  or  rifle  section  was  posted  near  the  center  of  the  new  line 
of  defense.  The  left  section  took  position  immediately  in  front  of  its 
original  position.  The  center  section  moved  forward  on  the  plantation 
road  through  the  cane-field  that  lay  between  the  right  and  left  sections. 

Early  after  noon,  on  Sunday,  the  12th  of  April,  the  battery  opened 
on  the  enemy’s  advancing  cavalry  and  artillery,  firing  97  rounds  of 
spherical  case  and  shell  with  such  effect  as  to  cause  the  torce  in  our 
front  to  retire  hastily.  The  firing  was  continued  with  intervals  for 
nearly  two  hours.  About  dusk  the  ammunition  chests  were  all  refilled. 

A section  of  Captain  [F.  O.]  Cornay’s  Saint  Mary’s  Battery,  composed 
of  two  12-pounder  bronze  field  howitzers,  under  Lieut.  Oscar  Berwick, 
had  reported  to  me  on  the  morning  of  the  12th  instant.  This  section 
was  placed  in  the  redoubt  on  the  left  of  the  line,  where  it  remained 
without  firing  until  the  morning  of  the  13th,  when  I ordered  Lieutenant 
Berwick  to  report  with  his  section  at  headquarters,  on  the  west  bank 

of  the  Teche.  . 

No  casualties  occurred  during  the  firing  on  Sunday,  the  12th  instant. 

About  10  o’clock  on  Monday  morning,  the  13th  instant,  the  enemy 
made  their  appearance  along  our  entire  front,  advancing  in  four  lines 
of  battle,  with  artillery  in  advance  of  infantry.  This  battery  opened 
first  with  howitzers,  on  the  right,  near  the  bayou.  Soon  after,  the  en- 
tire battery  of  six  pieces  commenced  firing,  which  was  continued  at 
intervals  until  after  dark,  under  a very  severe  fire  from  the  Yankee 
batteries  on  both  sides  of  Bayou  Teche,  accompanied  the  whole  of  the 
afternoon  with  a continuous  shower  of  Minie  balls  from  the  enemy’s 
skirmishers  and  sharpshooters. 

I beg  leave  to  make  a detailed  report  of  the  three  sections  compos- 
ing this  battery.  . 

The  rifle  -section,  under  Lieut.  B.  F.  Winchester,  commenced  firing 
about  10  a.  m.,  and  continued  with  occasional  intermissions  during  the 
forenoon,  directing  its  fire  against  the  enemy’s  cavalry  and  artillery. 
During  the  afternoon  the  firing  was  more  continuous  from  this  section, 
as  the  enemy  brought  more  of  their  pieces  to  bear  on  it.  Later  in  the 
afternoon  it  was  under  very  severe  fire  from  artillery  and  sharpshoot- 
ers. The  latter  having  advanced  within  400  yards  of  our  line  and  kept 
up  an  incessant  shower  of  Minie  balls  over  the  low  breastworks,  hastily 
thrown  up,  which  were  not  high  enough  to  protect  cannoneers  or  horses, 
the  rifles  still  continued  to  return  the  fire,  all  the  men,  including  the  ser- 


CHAP.  XXVII.  ] 


OPERATIONS  IN  WEST  LOUISIANA. 


1031 


geants  and  corporals,  taking  turns  with  the  sponge  staff,  and  only  rest- 
ing occasionally  on  their  knees  from  sheer  exhaustion,  and  frequently 
sponging  and  loading  these  rifles  in  this  position. 

Lieut.  B.  F.  Winchester  and  all  the  men  of  his  section  acted  with  dis- 
tinguished bravery  and  coolness,  under  a long  continued  and  concen- 
trated fire,  to  which  they  responded  until  long  after  dark. 

The  casualties  in  rifle  section  were  1 man  killed  (Private  Fortier) 
and  3 slightly  wounded  ; 9 horses  killed  and  6 wounded. 

The  left  or  howitzer  section,  under  Lieut.  J.  R.  Winchester,  on  the 
extreme  right  of  General  Mouton’s  line,  near  the  east  or  left  bank  of 
Bayou  Teche,  commenced  firing  at  10  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  13th 
of  April,  firing  at  intervals  until  afternoon,  when  its  fire  was  more  con- 
tinuous and  effective.  The  enemy  having  moved  up  nearer  our  line, 
this  section  was  under  a fire  from  the  front  and  right  flanks,  the  la^t 
from  the  batteries  of  the  enemy  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Teche.  It 
continued  firing  until  after  nightfall,  alternating  from  right  to  left  bank 
of  the  bayou,  often  enfilading  with  spherical  case  the  enemy’s  three  or 
four  lines  of  infantry  and  their  batteries  on  the  west  bank.  Here  also 
the  cannoneers,  to  protect  themselves  from  the  incessant  fire  of  the  Yan- 
kee sharpshooters,  sponged  and  served  the  pieces  kneeling. 

Lieutenant  Winchester  and  all  the  men  of  his  section  behaved  with 
their  accustomed  coolness  and  gallantry. 

Lieut.  J.  R.  Winchester,  by  my  order,  was  compelled  to  abandon  one 
of  his  caissons,  which  was  so  damaged  by  shot  as  to  be  unserviceable. 
He  succeeded  in  hauling  it  to  Palfrey’s  Bridge,  where,  after  destroying 
the  cartridges,  the  caisson  was  run  off  the  bridge  and  sunk,  in  the^ cen- 
ter of  the  bayou. 

Casualties  in  left  section : 2 men  wounded,  1 seriously  5 12  horses 
killed. 

The  center  section  on  the  13th  instant  was  commanded  by  Senior 
Second  Lieut.  S.  R.  Garrett,  who  had  reported  for  duty  on  the  night  of 
the  12th.  He  was  assisted  by  Second  Lieut.  Oscar  Gaudet,  chief  of  the 
line  of  caissons.  The  two  6-pounder  bronze  smooth-bore  guns  of  this 
section  opened  at  10  a.  m.  on  the  advanced  infantry  of  the  enemy  and 
Federal  battery  on  their  right.  At  11  a.  m.  I ordered  this  section  to 
the  left  of  the  line,  between  the  rifle  section  and  the  redoubt  on  the 
extreme  left,  as  I had  been  informed  by  General  Mouton  that  the  enemy 
was  massing  his  infantry  on  our  extreme  left,  where  the  Seventh  Reg- 
iment Texas  Cavalry,  under  Col.  A.  P.  Bagby,  had  been  for  some  hours 
skirmishing  heavily  with  the  enemy.  This  section  remained  near  the 
extreme  left  for  two  hours,  during  which  time  they  were  under  a very 
severe  and  continuous  infantry  and  artillery  fire  in  their  front,  and 
from  an  enfilading  fire  from  a Federal  rifled  battery  on  the  west  bank 
of  the  Teche,  which  killed  9 and  wounded  5 horses.  Up  to  this  time  3 
men  had  been  wounded.  The  enemy  having  been  driven  back  on  the 
left  by  the  united  efforts  of  this  section  and  the  command  of  the  gallant 
Bagby,  who  was  severely  wounded,  as  soon  as  the  harness  could  be 
taken  from  the  dead  horses  the  right  piece  was  ordered,  under  Lieu- 
tenant Garrett,  to  return  to  its  former  position,  on  the  right  of  the  rifle 
section,  where  he  fired  until  dusk,  when  a solid  shot  from  the  enemy’s 
rifle  battery  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Teche  cut  the  tire  and  felly  of  the 
right  wheel  of  the  carriage,  instantly  killing  Acting  Gunner  Private 
Joseph  Landry,  who,  with  his  hands  on  the  elevating  screw,  was  in  the 
act  of  aiming  the  piece  5 at  the  same  time  a shower  of  Minie  balls  con- 
tinued to  pass  over  the  slight  earthworks.  The  disabled  wheel  was  at 
once  exchanged  for  the  spare  wheel  from  the  caisson,  and  the  piece  con- 


1092  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVJX 

tinued  firing  with  canister  until  after  dark.  The  other  piece  of  the 
center  section,  under  Lieut.  O.  Gaudet,  remained  on  the  left  of  the  rifle 
section,  and  continued  to  fire  until  dark,  under  a very  severe  fire  from 
the  artillery  and  sharpshooters  of  the  enemy,  when  it  was  moved  to  the 
extreme  left  of  the  line  and  took  position  in  the  redoubt,  covering  the 
position  of  the  Seventh  Regiment  Texas  Cavalry,  Col.  A.  P.  Bagby,  in 
its  front. 

The  conduct  of  Lieutenants  Garrett  and  Gaudet  and  the  men  of  the 
center  section  was  marked  by  the  most  becoming  coolness  and  gallantry. 

Casualties  in  center  section  : 1 man  killed  and  4 wounded  ; 9 horses 
killed  and  5 wounded. 

This  battery  remained  in  position  until  2.30  on  the  morning  of  the 
14th  of  April,  when  I received  the  order  from  you  to  retire  toward 
Franklin,  13  miles  in  our  rear,  which  place  was  reached  soon  after 
sunrise  on  the  14th  instant.  By  direction  of  General  Taylor,  the 
commander-in-chief,  I then  sent  the  rifle  section,  under  Lieut.  B.  F. 
Winchester,  to  report  to  General  Mouton,  above  Franklin,  where  some 
4,000  of  the  enemy  had  landed  on  :he  lake  shore  for  the  purpose  of 
turning  our  position  at  Bisland,  which  was  not  prevented  by  a small 
force  sent  from  our  lines  the  night  of  the  12th  instant.  I proceeded 
with  the  other  four  pieces  by  the  road  called  the  u Cut-off,”  and  at 
Jeanerette,  that  night,  was  rejoined  by  the  rifle  section.  Here  the  right 
and  left  sections  took  position  in  battery,  commanding  the  road  through 
the  prairie,  to  cover  the  passage  of  our  wagon  train.  On  the  morning 
of  the  15th  instant,  the  battery  moved  forward  up  the  bayou  road  to 
Nelson’s  plantation,  where  the  rifle  section  was  again  detached  with  the 
rear  guard,  composed  of  Sibley’s  brigade  of  Texas  cavalry  and  the 
Second  Regiment  of  Louisiana  Cavalry,  all  under  Col.  Tom  Green.  The 
rifle  section  remained  at  Nelson’s  until  3.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of 
the  15th,  when  it  moved  forward,  passing  through  New  Iberia  at  day- 
light. In  the  mean  time  the  other  two  sections  had  passed  through 
New  Iberia.  The  rifle  section  was  relieved  by  a section  of  Cornay’s  ' 
Louisiana  battery  2 miles  above  New  Iberia.  The  battery  went  into 
park  and  encamped  at  old  Camp  Pratt,  above  Spanish  Lake,  on  the 
night  of  the  15th  instant.  Marching  on  the  16th,  crossed  the  prairie 
some  20  miles  to  Vermillion  Bridge,  crossing  which,  camped  on  the 
west  bank  until  the  afternoon  of  Friday,  the  17th  instant,  when  the 
right  and  left  sections  moved  forward,  passing  through  Vermillionville, 
leaving  the  center  section,  under  Lieut.  O.  Gaudet,  in  battery,  posted 
with  a section  of  Captain  [J.  D.]  Sayers’  Valverde  Battery,  Lieutenant 
[William]  Smith  covering  the  Vermillion  Bridge,  and  commanding  the 
prairie  beyond.  About  2 p.  in.,  the  enemy  having  thrown  a body  of 
sharpshooters  in  several  houses  on  the  right  of  the  bridge,  in  the  prairie 
on  the  east  bank,  supported  by  cavalry  and  artillery,  the  sharpshooters 
were  dislodged,  and  retired  after  Lieutenant  Gaudet  had  fired  13  rounds 
of  spherical  case.  The  enemy’s  artillery  shelled  Lieutenant  Gaudet’s 
position  until  night  closed  in,  but  without  effect,  his  pieces  and  caissons 
being  protected  by  a heavy  growth  of  timber,  and  the  enemy’s  shells 
exploding  too  high  and  in  his  rear. 

Casualties  in  the  center  section,  on  the  17th  of  April:  1 man  slightly 
wounded  1 horse  crippled  and  abandoned. 

Soon  after  night,  Lieutenant  Gaudet  retired  his  section,  and,  march- 
ing all  night,  rejoined  the  battery  at  Opelousas,  20  miles  distant,  on 
the  morning  of  the  18th  instant. 

It  becomes  my  duty,  and  it  affords  me  much  pleasure,  to  report  an  act 


Chap.  XXVD.] 


COURT-MARTIAL  FINDINGS. 


1093 


of  resolute  gallantry  on  the  part  of  Corporal  Gaiennie  and  a private 
(whose  name,  unfortunately,  I could  never  learn)  of  Company  — , Eight- 
eenth Regiment  Louisiana  Infantry  Volunteers.  On  the  afternoon  of 
the  13th  of  April,  when  the  fire  from  the  enemy’s  artillery  and  infantry 
was  hottest,  all  of  the  drivers  of  a caisson  of  the  center  section  having 
been  wounded,  the  team  of  four  horses — two  having  been  killed — took 
fright  and  ran  over  the  cane-field  in  rear  of  the  battery,  for  some  time 
closely  pursued  by  these  two  intrepid  soldiers,  until  the  horses  became 
sufficiently  exhausted  to  allow  themselves  to  be  secured,  when  these  two 
men  alone  restored  the  caisson  to  its  position,  in  rear  of  its  piece.  Both 
of  the  horses  of  the  chiefs  of  pieces  had  been  killed,  and  none  of  the  can- 
noneers could  be  spared  from  their  posts. 

Five  hundred  and  fifteen  rounds  of  ammunition  were  fired  by  this 
battery  on  the  12th  and  13th  of  April,  at  Bisland. 

Total  casualties  : 2 men  killed,  10  men  wounded,  2 severely ; missing, 
5,  captured  on  hospital  boat  Cornie,  sick  ; wounded,  13 ; detailed  as 
pilot  and  engineer  on  gunboat  Diana,  captured,  2.  Total  horses  killed, 
33;  wounded,  11. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  F ARIES, 

Captain , Comdg.  Battery , Acting  Chief  of  Artillery, 
(Montori’s)  First  Brigade  Louisiana  Infantry. 

Maj.  J.  L.  Brent, 

Chief  of  Artillery,  District  of  Western  Louisiana. 


Findings  of  a General  Court-Martial  in  the  cases  of  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley 
and  Capt.  Alexander  Grant , C.  S.  Army. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  Trans-Mississippi, 

No.  47.  ] Shreveport , La.,  September  25,  1863. 

I.  At  the  general  court-martial  convened  at  the  Headquarters  District 
of  Louisiana,  pursuant  to  Paragraph  1,  Special  Orders,  No.  91,  current 
series,  from  these  headquarters,  and  of  which  Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Walker, 
Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  is  president,  was  arraigned 
and  tried, 

1st.  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States,  in  the  following  charges  and  specifications : 

Charge  1st. — Disobedience  of  orders. 

Specification  1st. — In  this,  that  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley,  Provisional 
Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  was,  on  the  night  of  April  12,  1863,  at 
Camp  Bisland,  ordered  by  Maj.  Gen.  R.  Taylor,  commanding  District  of 
Western  Louisiana,  to  make  the  necessary  arrangements  for  an  attack, 
and  to  attack  the  enemy  at  daylight  on  the  13th  of  April,  1863,  below 
Camp  Bisland,  and  the  said  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley  did  not  make  the 
necessary  arrangements  for  said  attack,  and  did  not  make  the  attack 
on  the  morning  of  April  13,  1863,  as  ordered  to  do.  This  at  Camp  Bis- 
land, La.,  April  12  and  13,  1863. 

Specification  2 d. — In  this,  that  the  said  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  (Sibley,  Pro- 
visional Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  was  ordered  by  Maj.  Gen.  R. 
Taylor,  commanding,  to  remove  the  sick  and  wounded  officers  and  sol- 
diers of  the  C.  S.  Army  from  Camp  Bisland  and  transport  the  same  from 
Franklin,  La.,  to  New  Iberia,  La.,  in  wagons,  carts,  carriages,  and  ambu- 


1094  W.  FLA,  S ALA.,  3.  MISS,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

lances ; but  he,  the  said  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley,  ordered  the  said  sick 
and  wounded  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  0.  S.  Army,  and  certain  pris- 
oners who  had  been  captured  from  the  enemy,  to  be  placed  on  the 
steamboat  Oornie,  and  the  said  steamboat  having  on  board  the  sick 
and  wounded  and  prisoners  aforesaid,  was  ordered  by  the  said  Brig. 
Gen.  H,  H.  Sibley  to  proceed  up  the  Bayou  Teche,  from  Franklin  to 
New  Iberia,  although  he,  the  said  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley,  had  been 
informed  by  Major-General  Taylor,  commanding,  that  the  enemy  was  in 
position  on  said  bayou,  between  Franklin  and  New  Iberia,  and  com- 
manded the  passage  of  the  same  between  those  points ; and  by  these 
orders  of  the  said  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley  the  steamboat  Oornie  and  a 
large  number  of  sick  and  wounded  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  C.  S.  Army 
were  captured  by  the  enemy,  and  the  said  Federal  prisoners  were  recap- 
tured by  the  enemy.  All  this  between  Camp  Bisland  and  Franklin,  on 
the  13th  and  14th  days  of  April,  1863. 

Specification  3d. — In  this,  that  on  the  14th  day  of  April,  1863,  at 
Franklin,  La.,  Maj.  Gen.  R.  Taylor,  commanding,  ordered  the  said  Brig. 
Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley  J Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  to  place 
himself  at  the  head  of  the  column,  then  retreating  from  Franklin  toward 
New  Iberia,  to  conduct  and  direct  the  same,  to  prevent  straggling  and 
disorderly  conduct  by  the  troops,  and  to  select  a suitable  encampment 
for  the  army  for  the  night  of  the  14th  April,  1863  ; the  said  army  being 
closely  pursued  by  a largely  superior  force  of  the  enemy ; but  he,  the 
said  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley,  without  obtaining  permission  from  his  com- 
manding officer,  without  reporting  to  his  commanding  officer  his  inten- 
tion, without  applying  for  permission  to  leave  his  command,  and  without 
communicating  the  orders  and  instructions  aforesaid  to  the  officer  next 
in  command  with  the  said  retreating  column,  did  leave  his  command, 
and  retire  toward  New  Iberia  by  a road  different  from  that  taken  by  the 
said  troops,  and  did  fail  and  neglect  to  execute  the  order  aforesaid,  by 
which  said  failure  and  neglect  to  obey  the  orders  aforesaid  great  con- 
fusion was  created,  much  straggling  occurred  among  the  troops,  and  the 
safety  of  the  army  and  its  train  was  seriously  endangered.  This  on  the 
march  between  Franklin  and  New  Iberia,  on  the  14th  of  April,  1863. 

Charge  2d. — Unofficer-like  conduct. 

Specification  1st— In  this,  that  on  the  14th  April,  1863,  Brig.  Gen.  H. 
H.  Sibley,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  having  been 
ordered  by  Major-General  Taylor,  commanding,  to  conduct  the  retreat- 
ing column  from  Franklin  toward  New  Iberia,  while  Col.  Thomas  Green, 
Fifth  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers,  in  command  of  the  rear  guard,  was 
covering  the  retreat,  did  send  an  order  by  one  of  his  staff  officers  to  the 
said  Colonel  Green,  to  fall  back  in  haste  through  the  town  of  Franklin, 
stating  that  the  enemy  was  advancing  on  the  only  road  by  which  the 
retreat  could  be  made,’ and  this  order,  given  by  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley 
when  the  enemy  were  not  advancing  as  stated  by  him,  was  not  commu- 
nicated to  the  major-general  commanding,  who  was  in  the  rear,  and  per- 
sonally superintending  the  retreat  through  Franklin  ; and  by  the  falling 
back  of  the  said  rear  guard,  in  obedience  to  Brigadier-General  Sibley’s 
orders,  the  retreat  of  the  force  under  Brigadier- General  Mouton,  then 
holding  the  enemy  in  check  to  the  right  of  and  above  Franklin,  was 
greatly  endangered,  and  Captain  [O.  J.]  Semmes  and  the  other  officers 
and  crew  of  the  gunboat  Diana  were  captured  by  the  enemy. 

Specification  2d. — In  this,  that  the  said  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley,  Pro- 
visional Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  having  been  ordered  by  Major- 
General  Taylor,  commanding,  to  superintend  and  conduct  the  retreat  ol 


OuAr.  XXVII.] 


COURT-MARTIAL  FINDINGS. 


1095 


the  forces  from  Camp  Bislaud,  and  the  removal  of  the  train,  and  to  give 
his  personal  supervision  and  attention  to  the  same,  did  fail  and  neglect 
so  to  do,  but  went  to  his  bed  and  remained  in  it  during  the  greater  por- 
tion of  the  night,  without  giving  his  personal  management  to  the  move- 
ment. This  at  Camp  Bislaud,  on  the  night  of  the  13th  of  April  and  the 
morning  of  the  14th  of  April,  1863.  ...  „ 

To  which  charges  and  specifications  the  accused  pleaded  “ Not  guilty.77 

Finding. 

The  court,  after  mature  deliberation  on  the  testimony  adduced,  finds 
the  accused,  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confed- 
erate States,  as  follows : 

Of  the  lstf  specification  of  the  1st  Charge,  “ Specification  proven, 
and  although  the  court  are  of  opinion  that  Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley  (the 
accused)  did  not  display  that  promptness  in  making  the  necessary 
arrangements  for  the  attack  that  he  should  have  done,  and  is  to  that 
extent  censurable,  yet  they  are  of  the  opinion  that  the  evidence  shows 
a train  of  circumstances  that  relieve  him  from  the  consequences  of  a 
deliberate  disobedience  of  orders.” 

Of  the  2 d specification  of  the  1st  Charge,  “ Specification  proven 
(except  as  to  that  portion  relating  to  the  Federal  prisoners),  but  attach 
no  criminality  thereto,  inasmuch  as  the  evidence  shows  that  there  was 
no  other  possible  means  in  Brigadier-General  Sibley’s  control  to  save 
the  sick  and  wounded  from  capture  by  the  enemy  than  by  using  the 

steamer  Cornie.”  . 

Of  the  3d  specification  of  the  1st  Charge,  “ The  facts  set  forth  m 
the  specification  proven,  aud  although  the  court  do  not  acquit  the 
accused  of  having  done  all  that  he  should  have  done  in  conducting  the 
retreating  column,  and  in  the  selection- of  the  camp,  they  are  of  opinion 
that  the  apparent  disobedience  of  orders  arose  from  a misconception  of 
the  orders  of  his  superior.” 

Of  the  1st  Charge,  “Not  guilty.” 

Of  the  1st  specification  to  2d  Charge,  “Not  guilty.” 

Of  the  2d  specification  to  2d  Charge,  “Not  guilty.” 

Of  the  2d  Charge,  “Not  guilty.” 

And  the  court  does  therefore  acquit  the  accused,  Brig.  Gen.  Henry 
H.  Sibley,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States. 

2d.  Capt.  Alexander  Grant,  serving  with  the  Confederate  States 
gunboat  Cotton,  on  the  following  charge  and  specification : 

Charge. — Disobedience  of  orders. 

Specification.— In  this,  that  the  said  Alexander  Grant,  serving  with 
the  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  and  commanding  the 
gunboat  Cotton  or  Mary  T.,  having  been  ordered  to  assist  with  his  said 
boat  in  the  defense  of  Fort  Burton  against  any  attacks  which  might 
be  made  against  it  by  the  enemy,  and  to  remain  with  his  said  boat,  and, 
in  the  event  of  its  being  necessary  to  evacuate  the  said  fort,  to  remove 
the  garrison  guns  and  stores  on  the  said  gunboat  Cotton  or  Mary  T., 
did,  although  repeatedly  ordered  and  required  by  Captain  Holmes,  com- 
manding  said  fort,  to  remain,  for  the  purposes  above  mentioned,  on  the 
20th  of  April,  1863,  leave  the  said  fort  and  its  vicinity  with  his  said 
boat,  without  rendering  suitable  assistance  in  its  defense,  and  did  aban- 
don the  fort  and  its  garrison  without  making  proper  efforts  to  assist  in 
their  defense  or  in  the  removal  of  the  garrison  guns  and  stores. 

To  which  charge  and  specification  the  prisoner  pleaded  “Not  guilty.” 


1096  Wt  FLA.,  S.  ALA,,  8.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Cbvp.  XXVII. 

Finding. 

The  court,  after  mature  deliberation  on  the  testimony  adduced,  finds 
the  accused  as  follows  : 

Of  the  specification , “Not  guilty.” 

Of  the  Charge,  “Not  guilty.” 

And  does  therefore  acquit  the  accused,  Capt.  Alexander  Grant,  serving 
with  the  gunboat  Cotton. 

II.  The  proceedings,  findings,  and  sentences  in  the  foregoing  cases  of 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  H.  Sibley,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States, 
and  Capt.  Alexander  Grant,  serving  with  the  gunboat  Cotton,  are  ap- 
proved, and  they  will  be  released  from  arrest. 

III.  The  general  court-martial,  of  which  Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Walker 
is  president,  is  dissolved. 

By  command  of  Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith  : 

S.  S.  ANDEBSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


UNION  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Orleans , December  18,  1863  [1862]. 
President  of  the  United  States: 

Sir  : My  command  reached  this  port  Sunday  evening,  14th  instant, 
after  a voyage  of  ten  days.  It  would  be  impossible  to  find  a better 
passage  at  this  season  of  the  year.  The  transports  which  preceded 
and  those  which  followed  had  some  rough  weather,  but  without  disaster, 
except  in  one  instance. 

The  steamer  M.  Sanford  was  reported  lost,  with  all  her  crew  and 
passengers.  It  was,  however,  a false  report;  she  struck  upon  a Florida 
reef,  but  got  off  again  without  loss.  All  the  troops  are  well,  with  ex- 
ception of  General  Emory’s  command,  which  has  shown  cases  of  small- 
pox, measles,  and  fever,  which  they  brought  from  Newport  News  and 
Fortress  Monroe.  My  intercourse  with  General  Butler  has  been  pleas- 
ant, and  he  has  cordially  assisted  me  in  entering  upon  my  duties. 

There  is  much  excitement  in  regard  to  public  affairs,  but  1 am  unable 
to  decide  upon  the  merits  of  the  questions  connected  with  the  adminis- 
tration.  It  is  not  my  purpose  to  enter  upon  subjects  which  belong 
exclusively  to  toy  predecessor.  The  exposition  of  his  measures  made 
to  me  by  General  Butler  was  very  satisfactory. 

It  appears  from  information  received  here  that  the  rebels  occupy 
Baton  Bouge  with  about  500  men.  They  have  fortified  Port  Hudson, 
20  miles  above,  where  there  is  a force  of  about  12,000.  A vessel  of 
Admiral  FarraguPs  fleet  was  fired  upon  a few  days  since  from  a battery 
above  Port  Hudson.  At  Vicksburg,  it  is  represented  here,  there  is  a 
large  force,  and  a determined  resistance  is  expected.  Beports  have 
been  received  here  that  Commodore  Porter  had  attacked  the  works  at 
Vicksburg,  but  nothing  is  known  with  certainty.*  On  Tuesday  morn- 
ing, the  transports  which  had  arrived  up  to  that  time,  without  disem- 
barkation, sailed  directly  for  Baton  Bouge,  with  8,000  or  10,000  men, 
under  command  of  General  Grover.  He  has  doubtless  occupied  Baton 
Bouge  before  this.  As  soon  as  the  forces  here  can  be  consolidated 
with  the  new  troops,  we  shall  attack  Port  Hudson,  and  open  communi- 
cation with  the  forces  above  Vicksburg.  I shall  send  one  regiment, 
possibly  two,  to  occupy  the  island  of  Galveston,  Texas,  in  a week  or 


Chap.  XX  VII.  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.—UNION.  1097 

ten  days;  not  under  any  circumstances  to  enter  upon  any  movement 
on  the  main  land,  but  to  support  the  naval  forces  and  afford  a rendez- 
vous for  recruits,  refugees,  &c.,  from  Matamoras  and  Texas.  This  with 
concurrence  of  Admiral  Farragut.  No  time  will  be  wasted  or  lost. 

I delivered  your  letter  to  Admiral  Farragut  Monday,  the  15th  instant, 
the  morning  after  my  arrival.  He  was.  much  gratified  to  receive  it,  and 
promised  a hearty  and  cordial  co-operation.  He  is  earnest  for  work, 
and  full  of  enthusiasm.  I was  delighted  with  him,  and  feel  assured 
that  we  shall  act  together  without  difficulty.  I did  not  advise  the  ex- 
pedition intrusted  to  me,  and  it  is,  therefore,  with  greater  pleasure 
that  I can  say  I think  it  the  best  movement  the  Government  could 
enter  upon  at  this  season.  The  indications  of  the  campaign  are  far 
more  auspicious  than  I could  have  hoped.  If  the  rebel  army  can  be 
held  in  Virginia,  in  three  months  the  whole  West  can  be  cleared  of  the 
enemy.  I believe  in  that  time  all  that  was  expected  on  the  Mississippi 
and  in  Texas  can  be  accomplished. 

It  is  possible  that  the  .enemy  is  too  strong  in  Virginia  to  be  success- 
fully attacked  at  this  season.  An  army  large  enough  to  beat  them, 
where  they  have  concentrated  the  flower  and  strength  of  the  Confed- 
erate Army,  may  not  be  able  to  move  the  necessary  distance  with 
requisite  celerity  during  the  winter  months.  If  so,  the  campaign  in 
the  West,  on  the  river,  becomes  of  vital  importance,  and  its  success 
will  bring  results  which  no  mere  victory  in  Virginia  can  accomplish.  I 
hope  all  the  forces  that  may  be  necessary  may  be  used  to  strengthen 
the  line.  If  this  rebellion  is  driven  into  the  Gulf  States  it  is  substan- 
tially at  an  end.  Different  opinions,  I know,  obtained  at  Washington, 
but  I feel  assured  that  the  final  result  will  show  your  measures  in  the 
West  to  be  the  wisest  that  can  be  adopted. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

P.  S. — Information  received  this  morning  reports  the  force  at  Port 
Hudson  at  23,000.  New  conscripts  from  the  country  near  have  been 
brought  in. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Orleans , January  27,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  George  F.  Shepley, 

Military  Governor  of  Louisiana: 

General  : It  gives  me  pleasure  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  of  the  24th  instant,  relating  to  the  appointment  of  Colonel  Dwight, 
vice  Colonel  French,  as  provost-marshal* general  of  Louisiana.  Some 
weeks  since  I expressed  to  you  my  opinion  of  the  line  that  should  divide 
the  powers  committed  to  us  respectively  by  the  Government.  I under- 
stand your  commission  to  confer  upon  you,  as  far  as  possible  under  the 
circumstances,  the  privileges  and  powers  of  the  Governor  of  Louisiana, 
receiving  his  appointment  from  military  authorities.  This  confers  power 
to  appoint  such  officers  as  are  required  in  the  operation  and  as  are 
necessary  to  the  State  government.  It  embraces  judges  of  courts, 
sheriffs,  police  officers,  &e. 

The  commanding  general  of  this  department  must,  in  the  nature  of 
things,  have  the  control  of  military  appointments — as  well  those  to 
whom  are  confided  matters  of  military  police  as  of  military  command. 
These  officers  should  not  only  receive  their  appointments  from  the  chiefs 
of  the  different  departments,  that  is  the  civil  and  military,  but  they 


1098  W.  FLA  , S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  IChap.  XXVII. 

should  be  confined  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties  to  the  specific  objects 
to  which  they  are  limited. 

The  provost-marshal  is  an  officer  of  a purely  military  character.  He 
is  charged  with  more  important  and  delicate  duties  than  any  other  class 
of  officers.  He  has  necessarily  the  entire  supervision  of  the  military 
police  and  the  granting  of  passes  within  the  lines  and  beyond  the  lines, 
both  for  persons  and  supplies.  These,  among  other  equally  important 
matters,  are  confided  to  his  care.  The  commanding  general  must  rely 
for  his  action  chiefly  upon  the  examination  and  report  of  this  officer.  It 
is  impossible  that  the  Government  can  have  assigned  to  any  other  officer 
the  control  of  these  appointments.  The  authority  cited  by  you  does  not 
furnish  it,  and  it  is  not  probable  under  any  circumstances  that  it  ever 
would  be  conferred  upon  any  person  other  than  upon  the  commanding  i 
general.  The  provost-marshal  is  a military  officer.  Colonel  French  is  not 
an  officer,  nor  do  I understand  that  he  belongs  to  the  army,  or  is  amen- 
able in  any  way  to  the  Army  Regulations.  He  is,  moreover,  employed  in 
other  and  inconsistent  official  duties,  with  responsibilities  to  other  per- 
sons. It  is  unnecessary  to  suggest  other  reasons  to  justify  the  change 
to  which  you  refer.  I have  relieved  him  from  the  performance  of  those 
duties  only  which  must  be  exclusively  under  my  own  supervision  and 
direction,  and  for  which  I am  alone  responsible.  My  action  does  not 
interfere,  and  was  not  intended  to  interfere,  in  any  matter  whatever, 
with  your  rights  either  as  to  Colonel  French  or  any  other  person. 

I regret  very  much  that  some  communication  was  not  made  to  you 
more  specific  than  the  general  remarks  to  which  I referred  in  the  com- 
mencement of  this  note.  Its  omission  was  a matter  of  accident,  conse- 
quent upon  my  absence  from  the  city.  My  desire  is  to  interfere  with 
the  privileges  or  rights  of  no  person,  least  of  all  with  one  who  repre- 
sents the  same  Government  and  sustains  the  same  interests  which  I 
have  deeply  at  heart. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major  General , Commanding. 


Quartermaster-General’s  Office, 

Washington , February  4,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  N.  P.  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf  New  Orleans  : 

General  : Col.  J.  W.  Shaffer,  late  chief  quartermaster  Department 
of  the  Gulf,  reports  to  me  that  to  send  horses  from  the  North  to  New 
Orleans  is  a waste  of  money;  that  there  is  an  abundance  of  horses  in 
Louisiana,  acclimated,  worth  for  service  in  that  country  much  more  than 
horses  from  the  North.  The  risk  and  the  cost  of  sending  horses  from 
Northern  ports,  especially  at  this  rough  season,  are  both  great.  Many 
horses  have  died  lately  on  the  voyage. 

Colonel  Shaffer  stated  that  Captain  Perce,  of  a Michigan  regiment, 
who  had  acted  as  acting  assistant  quartermaster,  and  who  has  been 
recommended  for  an  appointment  as  captain  and  assistant  quartermas- 
ter, had,  in  twelve  days,  mounted  seven  batteries  of  artillery  from  the 
resources  of  the  country,  and  he  also  states  that  5,000  or  6,000  horses 
can  be  obtained  without  difficulty. 

I communicated  these  statements  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  and  am 
directed  to  permit  300  cavalry,  now  under  orders  at  New  York,  to  go 
forward  by  steamer  and  take  horses  with  them,  but  to  suspend  other 
shipments  of  horses  until  you  are  heard  from. 

I am  also  instructed  to  communicate  the  facts  to  you. 


CHAP.  XXVII  ] 


1099 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

I f there  be  any  mistake  in  the  late  chief  quartermaster  s estimates, 
it  should  be  made  known.  The  question  is  of  importance,  both  to  your 
army  and  to  the  heavily  burdened  treasury. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  aerv]^llt’3  ME1GS 

Quartermaster-  Genera  l . 


General  Orders, 
No.  15. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , February  8,  1863. 

War  necessarily  brings  with  it,  to  a great  extent,  the  suspension  of 
ordinary  pursuits  and  vocations,  and  naturally  affects  most  materially 
those  whose  resources  are  derived  from  the  product  of  their  lands,  and 
it  is  not  just  that  too  pressing  creditors  should  be  permitted  to  cripple 
well-disposed  citizens  in  their  efforts  to  return  to  their  former  state  ot 
prosperity,  and  acquire  the  ability  to  promptly  meet  all  just  demands. 
As  a measure  beneficial  to  all  concerned,  the  general  commanding  di- 
rects as  follows : ^ ^ , 

1st.  The  foreclosure  of  mortgages  or  instruments  that  are  such  by 
their  effect,  and  sales  under  foreclosures,  as  against  loyal  citizens  hav- 
ing interests  in  the  subject-matter,  whether  as  owners,  mortgagers,  or 

otherwise,  are  prohibited.  . 

2d.  The  property  of  loyal  citizens,  owning  and  working  plantations, 
is  exempted  from  forced  sale  under  execution  or  otherwise  until  further 
orders.  Provided,  however,  that  this  exemption  shall  not  be  effectual 
as  to  debts  created  or  obligations  incurred  subsequently  to  the  date  of 
this  order,  which  shall  have  remained  uncanceled  for  six  months. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks  : 

J RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


New  Orleans,  February  19, 1863. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  \ TJ.  8.  Army , Washington , I).  C. : 

General  : 1 have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter 
of  the  2d  February,*  which  refers  to  my  dispatch  of  the  15th  of  January, 
relating  to  the  condition  of  military  affairs  in  the  department.  The 
papers  accompanying  my  dispatch  were  intended  to  give  a truthful  ex- 
hibit of  the  state  of  military  preparations,  as  presented  to  the  officers  in 
charge  of  the  different  departments  of  the  army  organization  upon  my 
assuming  command  here,  and  not  as  justifying  delay  in  my  movements, 
or  as  a demand  upon  the  Government  at  Washington  for  the  supplies 
that  were  deficient.  It  was  intended  as  a statement  of  a historical 
fact,  and  was  in  no  respect  overstated.  In  confirmation  of  this,  I regret 
to  be  obliged  to  say  that  the  representation  of  Colonel  Shaffer,  late 
quartermaster-in-chief  of  this  department,  to  General  Meigs  is  entirely 
without  foundation.  There  are  not  5,000  horses  and  mules  to  be  ob- 
tained within  the  lines  of  the  army.  There  are  not  a sufficient  number 
of  mules  in  this  department  at  present  to  cultivate  the  grain  crops  that 
are  necessary  to  preserve  the  people  from  famine,  and  as  for  horses,  there 
are  not  100  to  be  obtained  fit  for  military  service  within  the  reach  of  the 
army.  I beg  your  attention  to  the  report  of  Major  Robinson,  of  the  Louis- 
iana cavalry,  who,  thoroughly  searching  the  State  for  cavalry  horses,  and 
seizing  any  animal  that  could  be  taken  with  any  justification  what- 


See  p.  671 


1100  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVn. 

ever,  even  those  of  neighborhood  physicians,  was  not  able  to  obtain 
more  than  100,  leaving  scarcely  nothing  for  the  service  of  the  people 
I also  ask  your  attention  to  the  other  official  statements  as  to  the 
extent  and  character  of  our  transportation.  I do  not  know  what  has 
become  of  the  horses  and  mules  that  formerly  stocked  the  plantations. 
With  the  exception  of  a few  blooded  animals  of  high  value,  and  held  for 
sale  by  the  Government,  the  horses  have  all  disappeared,  and  the  mules 
are  insufficient  for  a partial  cultivation  of  the  soil.  Admiral  Reynaud 
of  the  French  navy,  upon  my  arrival  here,  applied  for  permission  to 
ship  mules  to  Mexico,  representing  that  it  had  been  understood  by  the 
commander  of  the  French  navy  that  they  could  be  obtained  here,  and 
very  pressing  applications  were  made  upon  me  by  contractors  for  per- 
mission to  ship  500  mules  from  this  port  to  Mexico.  Application 
was  again  made  yesterday  for  this  purpose  by  the  intendant  of  the 
French  army  and  the  consul  of  France.  I declined  these  several  re- 
quests, for  the  reasons  stated  herein.  A copy  of  my  answer  to  the  last 
application  is  inclosed.  The  water  transportation  is  quite  as  deficient 
for  the  purpose  of  the  army.  We  have  constant  calls  for  trans- 
ports and  dispatch  vessels  in  the  Gulf,  from  Pensacola  to  the  Rio 
Grande  (where  our  positions  are  constantly  threatened),  on  the  Missis- 
sippi, and  upon  the  numerous  bayous,  bays,  and  lakes  that  intersect 
every  part  of  the  State,  and  the  occupation  of  all  of  which  are  indis- 
pensable to  the  defense  of  this  city,  not  to  speak  of  more  extended 
military  operations,  which  are  especially  incumbent  upon  me,  or  the 
private  commerce  which  is  necessary  to  supply  the  people  with  food 
and  to  bring  their  products  to  market,  and  yet,  after  the  inland  naviga- 
tion, and  seizing  for  the  Government  all  vessels  adapted  to  use,  we  have 
but  twelve  or  fourteen  steamers  for  all  this  service,  five  or  six  of 
which  are  only  adapted  to  the  interior  navigation,  to  which  at  this  mo- 
ment our  most  important  military  movements  are  limited.  A list  of 
these  vessels,  with  a statement  of  their  draught  and  capacity  as  trans- 
ports, one  of  which  is  detained  at  a cost  of  $1,200  per  day,  is  inclosed. 
With  the  increase  of  trade  which  has  occurred  in  the  last  two  months, 
the  number  will  soon  be  increased  by  private  enterprise,  but  it  does  not 
answer  our  present  imperative  demand.  I do  not  understand  how, 
with  the  occupation  of  this  extent  of  coast  and  inland  navigation,  there 
should  be  such  a most  remarkable  deficiency  of  vessels  suitable  to  the 
public  service,  unless  it  be  that  the  trade  has  been  committed  to  few 
hands,  and  the  increase  of  the  number  of  vessels  has  interfered  with 
that  monopoly.  I desire  the  Government  to  understand  that  my  requi- 
sition upon  the  country  for  everything  of  service  to  the  army  has  been, 
and  will  be,  most  rigid  and  exacting.  Nothing  has  been  taken  from  the 
people  to  benefit  the  individuals  of  my  command  when  I could  help  it, 
but  nothing  has  been  left  them  which  would  benefit  or  strengthen  the 
public  service  beyond  what  absolute  necessity  demanded;  and  I am 
happy  to  be  able  to  say  that  no  people  ever  did,  or  ever  could,  acqui- 
esce more  cheerfully  in  the  demands  made  upon  them.  In  another 
communication  I have  referred  to  military  topics.  Be  assured,  general, 
that  I appreciate  deeply,  very  deeply,  the  difficulties  and  the  necessi- 
ties of  the  Government,  and  that  I shall  not  fail  in  performing  my  duty 
so  far  as  it  lies  in  my  power,  and  that  I shall  readily  and  cheerfully 
acquiesce  in  any  measure  that  may  be  deemed  for  the  good  of  the  public 
service. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  most  obedient 
servant,  w 


N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Chap.  XXVII. J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  1101 

[Inclosures.] 

New  Orleans,  February  19,  1863. 

Mr.  SUBOUREAU  : 

Sir  : In  answer  to  your  application  for  the  export  of  mules  from  this 
port  to  Mexico,  I have  the  honor  to  say  that  while  under  other  circum- 
stances than  those  that  attend  the  application  presented  by  you  it 
would  afford  me  great  pleasure  to  comply  with  your  request,  the  pres- 
ent condition  of  affairs  in  this  department,  and  the  interest  of  the  Gov- 
ernment I represent,  make  it  impracticable  for  me  to  do  so.  A large 
number  of  the  plantations  in  the  State  have  been  deprived  of  mules  in 
various  ways  during  the  past  year.  The  cultivation  of  the  staples  of 
the  country,  as  well  as  the  cereals  which  are  indispensable  to  preserve 
the  people  from  famine,  requires,  as  far  as  possible,  these  estates  should 
be  restored  with  animals  of  this  class.  There  are  not  now  in  the  de- 
partment sufficient  to  supply  this  demand  at  reasonable  prices,  and 
there  must  necessarily  be  for  some  time  a deficiency  of  this  class  of 
transportation  for  the  domestic  service  of  the  country. 

In  addition,  I have  also  the  honor  to  suggest  that  the  military  neces- 
sity of  the  Government  requires  that  all  property  of  this  description  that 
can  possibly  be  spared  from  the  cultivation  of  the  soil  is  indispensably 
necessary  to  the  public  service  of  the  United  States.  For  these  reasons 
I am  unable  to  comply  with  your  request. 

In  answer  to  the  suggestion  of  the  consul  of  France,  Monsieur  , 

that  it  had  been  understood  that  your  requisition  for  mules  would  be 
answered,  to  some  extent  at  least,  by  the  military  authorities  of  the  de- 
partment (a  suggestion  that  was  also  made  to  me  by  Admiral  Reynaud 
and  the  late  consul,  Mejan),  I have  only  to  say  that  I had  not  received 
from  my  predecessor  any  intimation  of  this  character,  and  that  if  such 
expectation  was  entertained,  it  could  not  at  present  be  fulfilled,  for  the 
reason  I have  stated. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major  General , Commanding . 

Asst.  Quartermaster’s  Office,  19th  Army  Corps, 

New  Orleans , La .,  February  20  [?],  1863. 
Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General , Nineteenth  Army  Corps  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  facts,  for  the  consider- 
ation of  the  commanding  general,  as  to  the  resources  of  so  much  of  this 
country  as  I have  knowledge  of,  in  its  capability  to  furnish  means  of 
land  transportation,  for  the  use  of  our  forces  operating  here: 

It  is  well  known  that  the  ordinary  land  transportation  of  the  country, 
existing  on  its  plantations,  consists  of  heavy  cotton  carts,  with  clumsy 
bodies,  on  two  wheels,  without  covers,  drawn  by  three  mules  harnessed 
abreast.  The  carts  at  this  time  are  very  much  out  of  repair.  The  har- 
ness in  most  cases  is  patched  up  with  old  ropes  and  strings,  the  leather 
old  and  worthless  and  unfit  for  service  or  repair.  The  mules  are  gen- 
erally old  and  lazy ; they  are  not  raised  here,  and  as  forage  is  scarce 
only  sufficient  are  brought  to  work  the  plantation.  As  it  appears,  crops 
will  be  made  this  year;  all  the  teams  will  be  wanted,  and  there  will  be 
no  surplus.  It  is  said  that  many  of  the  best  mules  and  horses  were  put 
into  service  by  the  rebel  authorities.  Should  the  planters  not  work 
their  plantations  generally,  many  mules  of  the  quality  just  stated  might 
be  obtained  by  seizure.  Many  of  those  already  taken,  however,  are 


1102  W.  FLA  , S ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII.  i 

being  already  claimed  by  persons  who  have  taken  the  required  oath  of 
allegiance.  In  regard  to  horses,  they  are  very  scarce ; most  of  those  to 
be  found  scattered  about  the  country  are  light,  too  light  for  draught 
and  even  for  cavalry  purposes.  From  necessity,  most  of  those  found  in 
the  districts  we  occupy  are  now  in  public  service,  so  there  are  no  more 
to  be  had. 

The  transportation  peculiar  to  the  country  has  been,  up  to  this,  from 
necessity  used  at  the  stations  and  depots  more  or  less  permanent  ; but 
I consider  it  impracticable  to  form  any  reliable  army  transportation  or 
get  together  any  number  of  horses  from  the  ruins  found  here. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  CHANDLER, 

Lieut.  Col.  and  Asst.  Quartermaster , Nineteenth  Army  Corps. 


List  of  steamers,  public  and  private , in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf. 


Names. 


Philadelphia* . . . 


Bio  Bio* 

Che  Kiang*  

New  Brunswick* 
Eastern  Queen*. . 
General  Banks*.. 
Crescent* 


Honduras* . 
Nassau*  . . . 
Union* 


QuinnebaugJ 
Relief] 


Saint  Charles*  . . . 
Anglo-American* 

Fox* 

Landis* 

Reliance* 


Baltic] 

Neafie| 

Abe  Lincoln]: . . . 

Laurel  Hill* 

Iberville* 

Sallie  Robinson* 


Empire  Parish* 
Saint  Maurice* 
Morning  Light* 


Erank  Mumford§ 

Bee§ 

New  Orleans  job 
boat.§ 

Belleville§ 

G.  W.  Forrest§  . . 
Pontchartrain§  . . 

Southerner^  

J.  M.  Brown*. . .. 
W.  B.  Savory*  . .. 


Ownership. 

Route. 

Capacity  for 
troops  (in- 

fantry). 

Capacity  foi 
freight. 

Condition.  ( 

Draught  when 
loaded. 

Private;  not 

New  York  to  New 

1,200  1 

Tons. 

800 

Running  order . i 

Feet,  h 
115 

chartered. 

(]() 

Orleans. 

do  

1,200  ! 
1,200  | 

800 

do 

15  ! 

Chartered 

Sound  steamer 

500 

New  steamer . . 

9 

do 

do 

1,  000 

1,  000 

1,  000 

1,  000 

200 

...  do  

9 

fin 

do 

200 

do 

9 

TTmf Pfl  Ktn.tp.s 

do 

200 

,Good  order 

6 

Chartered 

New  Orleans  to  Gal- 

400 

New  steamer  . . j 

8 

do 

veston. 

Sound  steamer 

400 

150 

Running  order. 
do 

« 

flo 

Ho  . _ ' 

700 

150 

10  : 

Private;  not 

...do 

700 

150 

do 

10 

chartered. 

Phn  l’t.Arfifl 

Sound  steamer 
(screw). 

do  

600 

200 

do 

9 

vllal  IClCU  ------ 

Private ; no  t 
chartered, 
do  . 

400 

200 

do 

9 j 

•Steam- tug 

700 

100 

do 1 

8 

fin 

do  - 

700 

100 

do 

8 

United  Stfvtes 

do 

600 

100 

....do ! 

8 

do 

. do 

700 

150 

do 

6* 

Private;  not 
chartered. 
United  States. . . 
do 

do  - - 

500 

100 

...  do  

7 

Steam-tug  (screw)  . . 
do  

60 

60 

Good  order 

8 

8 

do 

Cutter  (screw) 

10 

Needs  repair. . . 
Running  order . 

2i 

do 

Mississippi  River  . . . 

1,  000 

500 

6 

do 

1,  000 
800 

450 

do 

6 

do 

do 

200 

...  do  

do 

do - 

500 

100 

...  do  

Private ; seized. 

fin 

do 

800 

250 

do 

6 

700 

180 

do 

5J 

1 ^0 

do 

600 

150 

...  do ... 

5 1 

1 nn 

500 

150 

Good  order  — 

4i 

i do 

do 

500 

150 

Running  order. 
Good  order 

44  , 

do 

. do 

400 

100 

5 ! 

do 

. . do 

300 

100 

Needs  repairs.. 

44 

United  States 

do 

250 

75 

Running  order. 
do 

4 

T>tm  ttqIa 

do 

250 

100 

44 

JT - - 

do 

1 Ferry-boat 

200 

50 

do 

5 

do 

1 do 

100 

40 

do 

5 

do 

200 

40 

Needs  repairs  . 

44 

44 

dn 

! Mississippi  River  . . 
Lake  Pontchartrain. 

200 

50 

do 

United  States  . . 

600 

160 

Running  order . 

44 

do 

do  

250 

20 

do  

4 

1 

' Side  wheel. 


t About. 


{ Screw  steamer.  § Stern  wheel. 

J.  G.  CHANDLER,  Lieut.  Col.  and  A.  Q.  M. 
Assistant  Quartek;h.%8TER’£  Office,  New  Orleans,  La.,  February  20,  1863. 


Chap.  XXVII.  J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


1103 


Headquarters  First  Louisiana  Cavalry, 

New  Orleans , La .,  February  — , 1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Bichard  B.  Irwin,  / . 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

Sir  : I beg  most  respectfully  to  call  the  attention  of  the  commander- 
in-chief  of  the  department  to  "the  great  scarcity  of  cavalry  horses  in 
this  army.  With  every  facility  afforded  by  Col.  S.  B.  Holabird,  chief 
quartermaster,  I have  not  been  able  to  procure  more  than  200  service- 
able cavalry  horses  since  the  1st  of  January.  The  rural  districts  are 
entirely  void  of  good  horses.  Within  the  precincts  of  this  city  it  is 
deemed  an  impossibility  to  forcibly  take  any  more  horses  without  inter- 
fering with  foreign  property  or  the  daily  routine  of  a large  city,  except 
by  seizing  animals  of  too  great  a value  for  military  purposes,  and  owned 
by  citizens  who  have  taken  the  oath  of  allegiance.  Hack  or  car  horses, 
as  a rule,  from  their  having  been  long  driven  on  the  hard  pavements, 
are  entirely  unfit  for  cavalry.  Since  procuring  the  129  horses  mentioned 
in  accompanying  extract  of  report  to  Colonel  Holabird,  the  parishes  of 
La  Fourche  ^and  Assumption  have  been  again  visited  at  my  request 
by  Lieutenant  Perkins,  of  the  Massachusetts  cavalry,  and  every  avail- 
able horse,  to  the  number  of  60,  forwarded  to  this  city.  Ot  this  60,  5 
only  were  deemed  serviceable.  My  command  of  500  men  are  at  present 
fairly  mounted,  but  without  a spare  horse  in  the  department  for  the 
companies  that  are  now  being  raised  to  fill  the  regiment,  as  also  for 
several  companies  of  Texas  cavalry.  No  horses  can  be  procured  unless 
imported  from  the  North.  I would  beg  to  suggest  that,  in  addition  to 
the  regular  monthly  return,  a further  report  be  required  from  command- 
ers of  cavalry  regiments  and  companies,  viz  : 

1st.  A descriptive  list  of  all  horses,  with  their  size,  age,  weight,  &c.; 
also  name  and  weight  of  rider  to  whom  assigned. 

2d.  That  a monthly  return  be  made  stating  the  condition  of  each  horse, 
the  distance  over  which  ridden  during  the  month,  the  state  of  the  roads, 
the  quantity  and  quality  of  forage  used,  and,  if  disabled,  the  causes. 

Such  a report  I deem  would  be  the  means  of  checking  many  abuses 
in  volunteer  cavalry,  more  especially  with  independent  or  detached 
companies,  and  make  both  officers  and  men  emulous  of  appearing  favor- 
ably on  a report  on  which  each  individual  would  by  comparison  be 
judged,  and  that  a copy  of  such  report  be  sent  monthly  to  the  inspector- 
general  of  the  department  and  division  and  to  the  commander  of  the 
regiment. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HABAI  BOBINSON, 

Major , Commanding  First  Louisiana  Cavalry. 


[Sub-In  closure.] 

New  Orleans,  La.,  January  16,  1863. 

Col.  S.  B.  Holabird, 

Chief  Quartermaster , Department  of  the  Gulf: 

Sir  : Herewith  you  will  please  find  duplicates  of  the  receipts  to  me 
from  Lieut.  Col.  A*.  N.  Shipley,  assistant  quartermaster,  for  129  horses 
and  1 mule,  which  I have  taken  for  cavalry  purposes  within  our  lines, 
in  accordance  with  your  order  of  December  31,  1862. 

Accompanying  also  are  the  names  of  parties  to  whom  receipts  have 
been  given  by  myself,  and  for  me  by  Capt.  Luther  Goodrich,  provost- 
marshal  at  Thibodeaux,  and  Sergeant  [William  H-l  Clemence,  of  his 
guard. 


1104  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

Of  the  above  129  horses,  80  only  have  been  receipted  for ; the  re- 
mainder were  taken  from  officers,  soldiers,  and  camp  followers  and 
negroes,  who  were  using  the  animals  and  could  not  claim  or  show  title 
for  them.  I have  taken  every  serviceable  horse  that  could  be  found  in 
the  parishes  of  La  Fourche,  Saint  Charles,  Saint  John  Baptist,  and 
Terre  Bonne.  On  several  occasions,  as  per  index  of  names,  I have 
given  mules  in  exchange  to  the  poor  agriculturists,  in  order  not  to 
leave  them  without  means  of  tilling  the  soil. 

This  scarcity  of  serviceable  horses  I can  only  explain  by  the  following 
facts:  The  district  of  Louisiana  in  possession  of  the  United  States  forces 
is  not  a stock-raising  country.  On  the  large  plantations  mules  are  ex- 
clusively used  for  farming,  and  throughout  the  parish  of  Terre  Bonne 
and  others  the  poor  non-slaveholding  population  have  only  Texan  and 
Mexican  mustang  ponies,  which  are  all  unfit  for  cavalry  or  artillery 
purposes.  A few  race  horses  and  the  horses  used  by  the  planters  and 
overseers  for  their  personal  convenience  would  at  any  time  be  about 
the  only  animals  fit  for  military  purposes,  and  most  of  this  class  were 
driven  off  by  the  rebels,  and  the  few  remaining  have  been  already  taken 
by  the  first  United  States  forces  occupying  the  country. 

In  conclusion,  I may  add  that,  having  visited  nearly  every  spot  within 
our  lines,  I can  safely  say  that  no  further  dependence  should  be  placed 
on  providing  the  army  with  stock  from  the  rural  districts  of  Louisiana. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HARAI  ROBINSON, 

Major  and  Acting  Assistant  Quartermaster. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

No.  57.  ( New  Orleans , February  26,  1863. 

I.  Maj.  Gen.  Christopher  C.  Augur  will  proceed  without  delay  to 
Baton  Rouge  and  assume  command  of  the  forces  at  that  point.  He 
will  report  in  person  to  the  commanding  general  for  special  instruc- 
tions. 

####### 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks: 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  February  26,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commander-in-  Chief,  &c. : 

General  : Admiral  Farragut  has  determined  to  run  the  batteries 
at  Port  Hudson  with  his  fleet,  for  the  double  purpose  of  establishing 
communication  with  the  fleet  at  Vicksburg  and  destroying  boats  and 
batteries  between  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson.  This  is  likely  to  be 
accomplished  in  a few  days.  It  seems  probable  that  it  can  be  done 
without  great  risk.  The  land  forces  will  co-operate  with  him  by  a dem- 
onstration in  full  force  on  the  land  side  of  the  enemy’s  works  at  Port 
Hudson.  The  loss  of  the  Queen  of  the  West  and  the  reported  capture 
of  the  Conestoga  give  importance  to  this  movement.  . 

General  Emory’s  advance  upon  the  Atchafalaya  will  be  deferred,  but 


CflAr.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


1105 


not  abandoned.  Colonel  Paine’s  regiment,  of  Emory’s  division,  made  a 
reconnaissance  upon  the  Grosse  Tete,  west  of  the  Mississippi,  in  the 
direction  and  near  to  Eosedale,  the  position  lately  occupied  by  Sibley’s 
troops.  The  enemy  regarded  the  movement  of  so  much  importance  as 
to  send  2,400  men  across  the  river  from  Port  Hudson  to  intercept  them. 
In  this  they  failed.  We  lost  but  1 man  and  2 prisoners  upon  the  ex- 
pedition. . . ... 

Eumors  are  rife  in  the  highest  secession  circles  here  of  a possible 
attack  upon  the  gunboats  at  Baton  Kouge.  This  came  to  my  knowl- 
edge some  days  since,  but  it  is  now  renewed.  It  is  also  reported,  as  not 
improbable,  that  a concentration  of  a large  part  of  the  troops  now  at 
Port  Hudson  may  be  made  at  Alexandria  with  those  of  Generals  Taylor 
and  Mouton,  and  such  as  may  be  brought  from  Texas,  with  a view  to 
an  attack  on  New  Orleans,  in  the  event  of  the  city  being  left  with  a 
small  force  for  its  defense.  This  is  probably  suggested  by  our  move- 
ments in  the  direction  of  Eed  Eiver,  and  is  not  entitled  to  much  con- 
sideration. It  is,  however,  certain  that  both  these  projects  are  talked 
over  earnestly  in  the  circles  of  Confederate  sympathizers. 

Many  of  the  troops  are  suffering  from  sickness,  but  on  the  whole  are 
in  good  condition  and  spirits.  The  city  is  perfectly  quiet,  and  the  great 
mass  of  the  people  would  acquiesce  with  satisfaction  in  the  restoration 
of  the  Government.  The  possible  return  of  the  rebels  to  power  is  the 
only  restraint  upon  the  open  manifestation  of  this  sentiment.  Both 
within  and  beyond  our  lines  this  feeling  is  exhibited.  ^Beyond  our 
lines  there  is  the  greatest  scarcity  of  provisions.  Everything  is  con- 
sumed by  the  army.  I have  endeavored  to  prevent  supplies  of  any 
character  being  furnished  to  them,  and  have  met  with  general  success 
in  this  respect.  The  plans  of  the  Government  being  once  established, 
the  people  of  the  Southwest  will  make  no  resistance  to  its  policy,  in  my 
belief.  General  Grover  telegraphs  that  the  gun  factory  at  Clinton  was 
destroyed  by  fire  some  days  since. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major- General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La .,  February  28,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  Washington , D.  C. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  three  communica- 
tions, relating  to  military  operations  in  this  department,  received  sub- 
sequent to  the  date  of  my  dispatches  by  the  Columbia,  viz : 

(A.)  Statement  of  the  examination  of  the  prisoner  Benjamin  Dublieux, 
who  came  within  our  lines  at  Indian  Village. 

(B.)  Statement  of  the  examination  of  the  prisoner  Benito  Montfort, 
sent  within  General  Weitzel’s  lines  under  a flag  of  truce  from  the 
enemy. 

(C.)  General  Grover’s  dispatch  (No.  9),  dated  the  26th  instant,  and 
received  to-day. 

1 refer  especially  to  the  encouraging  dispatch  of  General  Grover  as 
confirming  my  own  views  of  the  correctness  of  the  operations  we  are 
about  to  undertake. 

My  dispatch  by  the  Columbia  will  have  informed  you  of  the  em- 
barrassing loss  of  the  gunboat  Kinsman,  equal  in  effect  to  the  destruc- 
70  R R— VOL  xy 


1106  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

tion  of  two  battalions  5 of  the  full  confirmation  of  the  impracticability 
of  operating  upon  the  Atchafalaya  from  the  Plaquemine,  and  that  the 
enemy  was  massing  his  forces  against  General  Weitzel  to  meet  his 
demonstration  upon  the  Teche.  Weitzel  has  now  concentrated  his 
brigade  (five  regiments  of  infantry),  with  three  light  batteries  of  the 
First  Division,  at  Brashear  City. 

Emory’s  command  returned  to  Carrollton  to  await  the  transportation 
necessary  to  carry  out  the  movement  upon  Atchafalaya  from  Berwick’s 
Bay.  But,  in  the  meanwhile,  the  capture  of  the  Queen  of  the  West, 
and  the  more  recently  reported  capture  of  the  De  Soto,  has  led  Admiral 
Farragut  to  the  conclusion  that  some  vigorous  movement  upon  his 
part  was  necessary  to  co-operate  with  the  gunboats  above,  in  endeavor- 
ing to  cut  off  the  enemy’s  communication  with  the  Bed  Biver  country, 
and  to  destroy  his  gunboats  in  those  waters.  Such  a movement,  the 
admiral  represented  to  me,  must  include  the  greater  portion  of  his  fleet, 
and  would  of  necessity  involve  the  co-operative  movement  of  the  land 
forces  upon  the  rear  of  Port  Hudson,  while  the  navy  should  be  engaged 
in  passing  the  enemy’s  batteries  on  the  river.  Such  co-operation  we 
could  only  render  with  efficiency,  and  a jirobability  of  success,  by  con- 
centrating our  whole  available  force  for  the  movement.  Allowing  Gen- 
eral Weitzel’s  movement  to  retain  its  original  character  of  a demonstra- 
tion, the  necessary  dispositions  have  been  taken  and  are  now  in  process 
of  execution  to  effect  this  concentration. 

During  the  course  of  to-morrow  the  artillery  of  Emory’s  division  and 
Mack’s  Eighteenth  New  York  Battery,  having  an  armament  of  six  20- 
pounder  Parrotts,  will  have  arrived  at  Baton  Bouge,  or  will  be  on  the 
way  there.  The  land  transportation  will  follow  it,  and  the  infantry  of 
Emory’s  division  will  move  last. 

That  our  delay  has  not  been  idly  or  unnecessarily  employed  is  attested 
by  the  complete  organization  of  the  entire  command,  the  equipment 
and  instruction  of  the  artillery,  the  organization  of  our  siege-train, 
the  increase  of  the  cavalry,  the  collection  of  our  land  and  water  trans- 
portation, even  yet  sadly  deficient,  and  the  employment  of  the  troops 
in  expeditions  and  minor  affairs  to  accustom  them  to  operations  and 
encountering  the  enemy. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  A.] 

New  Orleans,  La.,  February  25, 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  Bowen: 

General  : At  your  request,  I hand  you  what  information  I have 
received  from  time  to  time  in  conversing  with  Benjamin  Dublieux,  esq., 
late  under  my  charge.  In  speaking  of  the  United  States  forces  at 
Indian  Village  and  on  board  transports  at  Plaquemine,  Mr.  Dublieux 
remarked  that  their  object  was  well  known  to  the  Confederates,  which 
was  to  form  a junction  with  General  Weitzel  and  thus  capture  a small 
Confederate  force  at  that  time  stationed  in  Grosse  Tete  5 that  the  troops 
under  command  of  General  Emory  would  never  be  able  to  get  through 
Bayou  Plaquemine,  on  account  of  drift  and  high  water  5 that  the  gen- 
eral was  undoubtedly  acting  on  information  received  some  six  or  seven 
weeks  ago,  before  the  drift  had  formed  and  the  water  had  risen  to  its 
present  height,  at  which  time  their  object  might  have  been  accomplished  j 
also  that  the  forces  at  and  about  Plaquemine  would  undoubtedly  go, 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


1107 


by  way  of  Berwick’s  Bay,  to  the  Teche,  and,  in  connection  with  Gen- 
eral Weitzel’s  command,  endeavor  to  push  through  to  Red  River;  but, 
-in  his  opinion,  the  movement  would  be  a failure.  We  might  possibly 
get  as  far  as  Newtown,  but  no  farther,  with  a force  less  than  from  20,000 
to  25,000  men.  Toward  Newtown  the  Teche  is  quite  narrow,  with  high 
banks  and  timber  on  either  side,  which  can  be  easily  used  to  completely 
block  up  its  navigation ; also  that  the  wreck  of  the  steamer  Cotton  is 
sunk  a short  distance  up  the  bayou,  which  will  forbid  vessels  going 
farther ; that  in  that  part  of  the  State  we  will  be  fighting  Texas  in 


Louisiana. 

In  speaking  of  artillery,  he  says  there  are  six  batteries,  all  within 
striking  distance  of  Newtown,  and  among  them  are  some  of  the  best  in 
the  Confederate  service.  It  was  expected  that  Kirby  Smith  would  soon 
be  in  command  in  that  department.  He  says  we  have  no  idea  of  the 
number  of  troops  there  are  in  that  part  of  the  State ; that  the  great 
amount  of  supplies  brought  through  from  Texas  and  Matamoras  and 
their  great  value  to  the  Confederate  Government  will  make  all  move- 
ments on  our  part  in  that  direction  strongly  resisted.  Of  the  termina- 
tion of  the  war,  he  says  it  is  generally  believed  through  Texas  that  there 
will  be  a suspension  of  hostilities  by  May  1. 

The  above  is  all  of  importance  I remember  hearing  in  conversation 
with  Mr.  Dublieux. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

JAMES  C.  COOLEY, 

First  Lieutenant  One  hundred  and  thirty-third  New  York. 


p.  s. — in  addition  to  the  foregoing,  I would  say  that  Mr.  Dublieux 
met  on  his  way  from  Texas  to  Plaquemine  the  Confederate  crew  that 
were  to  take  charge  of  the  captured  steamer  Harriet  Lane,  and  that 
boarding  steamers  or  other  naval  vessels  was  the  mode  to  be  adopted 
by  the  Confederates,  and  that  before  many  weeks  we  should  most  cer- 
tainly hear  of  more  losses  of  the  same  kind. 


[Inclosure  B.] 

Office  of  the  Provost-Marshal-General, 

Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , La.,  February  23,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Colonel  : I submit  the  examination  of  the  prisoner  referred  to  in 
the  accompanying  paper : 

Benito  Montfort,  teacher  of  music,  left  Cadiz,  as  appears  by  his  pass- 
port, in  October,  1859 ; lived  in  New  Orleans  six  months;  then  went  to 
Attakapas,  Saint  Mary’s  Parish,  where  he  has  resided,  teaching  music, 
until  the  present  time.  Because  of  the  militia  law,  which  requires  res- 
idents to  enlist  for  one  year,  he  determined  to  make  his  escape.  The 
militia  law  has  not  yet  been  enforced,  but  it  is  contemplated  to  put  it  in 
force  soon.  Arrived  at  Brashear  City  February  21,  at  11  o’clock ; left 
Franklin  21st,  at  7 o’clock ; passed  Patterson ville  at  9 o’clock.  General 
Sibley  went  to  visit  Camp  Bisland  February  20,  on  a tour  of  inspection ; 
Colonel  Gregg  [Henry  Gray]  in  command;  800  men  there;  Twenty- 
eighth  Louisiana  armed  with  rifles ; some  cavalry,  400  to  500.  Near 
Pattersonville,  3 miles  above,  Montfort  saw  300  cavalry,  well  mounted ; 
came  from  Grosse  T6te  three  days  before ; heard  Sibley  say  he  would 
have  3,500  cavalry  from  Texas;  many  of  them  have  already  passed 


1108  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Opelousas;  all  soon  to  arrive;  heard  (but  from  no  reliable  source, 
through  four  officers)  that  Kirby  Smith  would  soon  arrive  with  two 
brigades  Louisiana  troops  from  Port  Hudson ; saw  two  new  batteries 
at  New  Iberia,  just  arrived  from  Alexandria  (brass  pieces,  six  in  each 
battery) ; the  regiments  mentioned  in  letter  comprising  in  all,  in  Saint 
Mary’s  Parish,  3,000  men,  exclusive  of  the  two  new  batteries.  The 
Hart,  a medium-sized  steamer,  is  at  New  Iberia;  saw  her  on  Monday, 
at  3 p.  m.;  no  one  at  work  on  her  then  ; her  machinery  exposed  to  view 
(the  front),  protected  by  railroad  iron ; country  destitute  of  provisions ; 
troops  will  starve  in  three  months. 

I also  submit  a sketch  drawn  by  the  prisoner  of  the  stations  of 
troops,  of  which  he  has  had  personal  cognizance,  except  at  Pausse 
Point  and  Butte-a-la-Rose,  and  of  those,  from  the  information  given 
him,  he  has  no  doubt  the  forces  stated  are  at  those  points.  I am  in- 
clined to  place  reliance  in  the  statements  he  has  made. 

The  accompanying  letter  in  reference  to  the  capture  of  the  Queen 
of  the  West*  was  among  other  papers  brought  by  him.  He  states 
that  he  heard  the  report  from  several,  and  he  believes  it  to  be  true. 

Yery  respectfully,  JAMBS  BOWEN, 

Brigadier- General  and  Provost-Marshal- General. 


[Inclosure  C.] 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Baton  Rouge , La .,  February  26,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Richard  B.  Irwin, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  with  the  exception  of  trans- 
portation, I consider  my  division  in  fit  condition  to  take  the  field.  If 
all  the  available  force  in  this  department  is  massed  here  at  an  early 
date,  I have  no  doubt  but  that  we  can  cut  off  the  enemy’s  force  at  Port 
Hudson.  If  their  supplies  from  the  Red  River  are  cut  off  the  navy, 
and  their  supplies  from  the  interior  by  a movement  of  the  army  to  their 
rear,  they  will  be  forced  to  meet  us  on  our  own  ground  or  to  surrender. 
They  have  not  now,  and  they  cannot  for  some  time,  I think,  have 
enough  force  to  do  that.  I think  their  force  at  Port  Hudson  has  been 
overestimated,  and  I do  not  think  that  much  reliance  can  be  placed 
upon  their  conscripts  at  present.  I am  informed  by  an  intelligent  man 
belonging  to  the  Twelfth  Maine  Volunteers,  and  who  recently  escaped 
from  Port  Hudson,  that  the  plan  of  building  a raft  in  the  river  to  enable 
them  to  cross,  if  found  necessary  to  evacuate  in  consequence  of  our  cut- 
ting off  their  supplies  and  their  retreat  inland,  has  been  discussed,  and 
it  is  quite  probable  that  an  attempt  may  be  made  to  do  it. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

0.  GROVER, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Washington,  D.  O.,  March  5,  1863. 

Major-General  Banks,  New  Orleans,  La. : 

General  : The  last  dispatches  received  from  you  to-day  are  dated 
February  23.*  Some  of  previous  dates  were  received  yesterday. 


Not  found. 


CHAr.  XXYII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


1109 


In  regard  to  Pensacola,  .your  views  are  fully  approved.  The  town 
itself  is  a matter  of  very  little  importance  to  us,  and  it  would  be  useless 
to  expose  anything  more  than  a police  force  there.  Such  a force  could 
be  withdrawn  in  case  of  any  danger.  On  consultation  with  the  Engineer 
Office,  I am  satisfied  that  your  line  of  defense  must  be  from  Fort  Bar- 
rancas to  the  redoubt;  of  course,  most  of  your  forces  should  be  con- 
centrated there. 

In  regard  to  the  Mississippi  Biver,  I have  very  serious  apprehensions 
of  the  results  of  the  capture  by  the  enemy  of  the  Queen  of  the  West  and 
the  Indianola.  They  can  do  no  great  harm  to  General  Grant  and  Admiral 
Porter,  but  may  to  you  and  Admiral  Earragut.  I have  urged  the  Navy 
Department  to  send  the  latter  more  vessels.  I believe  they  are  waiting 
for  further  dispatches  from  Admiral  Porter. 

Operations  at  Vicksburg  have  been  greatly  delayed,  but  from  last 
accounts  (February  27)  are  now  progressing  more  favorably. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  A.  C., 

No.  20.  ) New  Orleans , March  6,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  George  L.  Andrews  is  announced  as  chief  of  staff  at 
headquarters,  and  will  be  obeyed  and  respected  accordingly. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

BICH’D  B.  IBWIN, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Gulf, 

New  Orleans , Xa.,  March  7,  1863. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army : 

General  : The  movement  to  which  my  last  dispatch  referred  has 
been  delayed  by  an  accident  which  temporarily  disabled  two  steamers 
of  the  admiral’s  fleet.  They  are  now  nearly  repaired,  and  it  will  be 
executed  at  once.  This  movement  involves  important  considerations, 
both  of  advantage  and  risk.  If  the  batteries  are  run  successfully,  he 
can  leave,  in  conjunction  with  Admiral  Porter’s  vessels,  a force  above 
Port  Hudson  to  blockade  effectually  the  Bed  Biver  and  the  region  of 
supplies  for  both  of  the  rebel  posts  on  the  Mississippi.  If  any  serious 
disaster  befalls  him,  such  as  the  destruction  or  capture  of  his  vessels,  it 
perils  our  position  here.  Nevertheless,  he  thinks  it  imperative  to  make 

Bthe  attempt,  as  the  most  effectual  blow  that  can  be  struck  against  the 
Confederacy,  and  feels  very  deeply  the  necessity,  as  we  all  do,  of  en- 
countering any  risk  if  important  results  can,  by  any  chance,  be  accom- 
plished. The  capture  of  the  iron-clad  Indianola  has  greatly  strength- 
ened the  necessity  for  action  without  delay. 

I desire  to  repeat  what  I have  said  in  previous  dispatches  of  the 
inefficiency  of  the  naval  force  at  this  point.  There  are  many,  very 
many,  assailable  points  for  the  enemy,  and  many  vulnerable  points  of 
attack  upon  his  positions  for  us,  but  we  are  not  strong  enough  either 
in  naval  or  transport  vessels  for  the  necessary  duty  of  simultaneous 
attack  and  defense  anywhere.  The  movement  up  the  river  now  con- 
templated exposes  us  to  the  greatest  danger  from  this  weakness.  Under 


1110  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

other  circumstances  we  could,  without  a doubt,  capture  Mobile,  recap- 
ture Galveston,  break  up  that  most  damaging  contraband  trade  across 
the  Rio  Grande,  penetrate  the  Red  River  country,  by  means  of  the 
Teche  and  the  Atcliafalaya  Bayous  ; but  for  any  one  of  these  vitally 
important  movements  we  are  wholly  unprepared,  on  account  of  the 
deficiency  of  suitable  naval  and  transport  vessels.  We  are  especially 
in  need  of  vessels  of  light  draught  of  both  classes.  The  Government 
cannot  strengthen  its  cause  better  than  by  increasing  its  fleet  here — an 
increase  of  force  which  must  be  obtained  before  any  great  success  can 
be  obtained  here,  and  which  is  imperatively  demanded  to  maintain  our 
position. 

The  enemy  is  concentrating  its  naval  and  land  forces  in  this  quarter. 
There  is  the  most  imperative  necessity  for  this  on  the  part  of  the  Con- 
federate Government.  I am  sure,  perfectly  sure,  that  I do  not  under- 
estimate, from  personal  considerations,  the  importance  of  other  enter- 
prises or  over-appreciate  the  duty  with  which  I am  intrusted  when  I 
say  that  the  rebellion  is  ended  with  the  opening  of  the  Mississippi 
River.  I desire  the  Government  to  consider  the  suggestion,  which  I 
make  in  the  most  solemn  conviction,  that  its  control  in  either  hands  is 
decisive  of  the  great  conflict.  On  the  upper  river  we  are  strong,  and, 
with  time,  we  shall  succeed.  It  requires  time,  and,  with  Adequate  means 
here,  our  success  is  certain  ; it  is  beyond  a doubt,  but  it  requires  time 
here  also,  and  an  increase  of  our  forces.  We  are  isolated,  cut  off  from 
assistance  or  retreat,  assailable  on  all  sides,  and  should  be  strongly  sup- 
ported, as  the  possession  we  hold  is  vital. 

The  opening  of  the  trade  would,  in  a few  weeks,  give  me  all  the 
transports  I require,  because  trade  is  drawing  the  proper  class  of  vessels 
here  with  great  rapidity.  In  a month  or  two  we  shall  have  abundance. 
I am  amazed  that  the  Government  should  have  had  possession  of  this 
position  for  nearly  a year  and  find  only  twelve  or  thirteen  vessels,  in 
private  and  public  service,  adapted  to  its  navigation,  and  these,  in  great 
part,  decayed  and  unsafe. 

Information  was  received  on  Wednesday,  the  4th  instant,  that  sev- 
eral regiments  of  Virginia  and  Georgia  troops  had  recently  arrived  at 
Camp  Moore,  on  the  Jackson  road.  This  is  a position  from  which  they 
move  with  equal  facility  upon  Port  Hudson,  Baton  Rouge,  or  New  Or- 
leans, via  Pass  Manchac.  The  increase  of  pickets  of  the  enemy  on  the 
east  side  of  the  lake  (Pontchartrain)  and  on  the  railroad  has  indicated 
some  movement  in  that  direction,  and  the  capture  of  two  schooners 
about  2 miles  below  Pass  Manchac  (a  report  of  which  is  forwarded  here- 
with) strengthens  such  views.  The  report  is  common  among  the  sym- 
pathizers with  the  rebels  that  the  city  will  be  recaptured,  and  the  same 
rumors  are  circulated  in  some  of  the  parishes  in  the  direction  of  La 
Fourche.  We  are,  however,  as  well  prepared  for  them  as  possible. 
Many  guns  have  been  unspiked  and  set  up  since  my  arrival  here,  and 
fortifications  are  in  progress  at  important  points.  We  have  a close  ob- 
servation upon  all  the  avenues  in  the  direction  of  Camp  Moore  and 
Jackson,  of  the  Red  River,  and  also  upon  the  Mississippi. 

I have  cut  off  trade  with  the  enemy  entirely,  by  authority.  What- 
ever is  done  in  furnishing  them  supplies  is  done  against  orders.  I have 
authorized  the  parties  wAo  make  captures,  or  who  give  information 
leading  to  captures,  to  claim  and  receive  one-half  the  value  of  the  sup- 
plies so  captured. 

I have  declined  to  allow  any  supplies  to  be  sent  across  the  lines  as 
an  equivalent  for  cotton,  &e.  Cotton  that  comes  in  for  sale  here  is  not 
confiscated  or  disturbed. 


Chap.  XXVIL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


1111 


The  people  of  the  rebel  States  are  in  great  want,  and  their  suffering 
is  making  a strong  impression  upon  the  rebel  army  and  government, 
but  especially  upon  the  State  governments.  The  planters  are  going  to 
work  with  a good  heart.  The  negroes  return  to  their  plantations  will- 
ingly under  the  promise  of  protection  of  the  army  and  compensation 
for  their  labor,  which  is  almost  universally  assented  to  by  the  planters. 
The  Abolitionists,  the  negroes,  their  partisans  or  leaders,  and  the  plant- 
ers are  united  in  support  of  the  orders  I have  issued.  Large  crops  of 
sugar,  cotton,  and  corn  will  be  raised  this  year.  With  adequate  mili- 
tary and  naval  force,  the  condition  of  the  department  would  be  entirely 
satisfactory. 

I go  to  Baton  Bouge  to-night. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 


Special  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Dept,  op  the  Gulf,  19th  A.  C., 

No.  66.  J New  Orleans , March  7,  1863. 

####### 

II.  The  Commission  appointed  to  consider  the  general  subject  of  pub- 
lic charity,  and  the  present  necessities  of  the  destitute  poor,  and  also 
the  best  method  of  dispensing  relief,  report  that  the  Government  char- 
ity for  the  five  last  months  of  the  past  year  amounted,  at  army  prices, 
to  $196,000,  or  an  average  of  $1,441  per  day.  They  consisted  in  dona- 
tions of  provisions.  The  cash  expenditure  for  the  distribution  of  this 
charity  alone  for  the  month  of  December  was  $8,135.88.  It  is  ascer- 
tained” that  payments  have  been  made  to  owners  for  the  services  of 
persons  held  as  slaves  employed  in  this  distribution,  at  the  rate,  in  one 
instance,  of  $30  per  month. 

The  consideration  of  the  different  topics  embraced  in  the  report  sug- 
gests to  the  commanding  general  the  necessity  of  a careful  discrimina- 
tion in  the  dispensation  of  this  fund.  It  is  therefore  ordered  as  follows : 

1st.  The  Commission  will,  within  one  week  from  the  date  of  this  order, 
discontinue  the  issue  of  rations  under  their  present  system  of  division  of 
classes,  and  will  issue  them  only  to  destitute  poor,  and  to  the  families  of 
soldiers  enlisted  in  this  department  into  the  Army  of  the  United  States, 
and  to  the  latter  only  until  the  soldiers  shall  have  been  mustered  into 
service  and  received  their  bounty  or  advance  pay.  The  term  “ destitute 
poor”  is  intended  to  include  all  persons  having  no  means  of  support,  and 
who  themselves  are  unable  or  have  no  one  to  labor  for  their  support, 
and  to  exclude  able-bodied  persons  of  any  class  who  have  refused  em- 
ployment or  can  support  themselves  by  their  own  labor.  Rations  of 
groceries  will  not  be  issued  except  in  cases  of  invalids,  and  then  only  in 
lieu  of  meat  rations.  To  aid  in  determining  the  validity  of  the  claims 
of  soldiers’  families  to  rations  under  Special  Orders,  No.  209,  of  July  21, 
1862,  from  these  headquarters,  commanding  officers  of  all  such  regi- 
ments or  corps  as  have  been  enlisted  under  the  provisions  of  that  au- 
thority shall  make  out  complete  and  correct  rolls  of  such  enlisted  men 
of  their  respective  commands,  entering  carefully  all  payments  that  have 
been  made  to  them  and  all  desertions,  and  immediately  forward  these 
rolls  to  the  Commission.  All  future  payment  to  these  men  will  in  like 
manner  be  immediately  reported  by  their  respective  commanders  to  the 
Commission,  who  shall  then  at  once  recall  and  cancel  the  tickets  de- 
pendent upon  such  payments.  Deserters  shall  in  all  cases  be  at  once 


1112  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


reported  by  the  commanders  above  designated  to  the  Commission,  and 
their  families  shall  receive  no  aid  from  the  Commission. 

2d.  No  tickets  for  rations  shall  be  issued  until  a careful  investigation 
be  made  of  the  character  and  circumstances  of  the  persons  applying  for 
relief,  by  a trustworthy  canvasser,  appointed  for  that  purpose,  and  whose 
duty  shall  be  that  of  making  these  investigations ; and  in  no  case  shall 
the  Commission  furnish  rations  merely  upon  the  certificate  or  recom- 
mendation of  any  person  whatsoever,  but  shall  themselves  pass  upon  the 
propriety  of  granting  such  application.  All  ration  t ickets  now  outstand- ! 
ing  shall  be  recalled  and  canceled  by  the  Commission  within  the  present 
month,  and  hereafter  no  tickets  shall  be  issued  for  a longer  period  than 
thirty  days. 

III.  The  Commission  shall  keep  an  exact  record  of  the  name,  age, 
residence,  and  class  of  each  adult  or  child  to  or  for  whom  rations  are 
furnished. 

IV.  Transportation  for  commissary  stores  and  materials  for  the  Com- 
mission will  be  furnished  by  the  chief  quartermaster,  who  will  provide 
the  necessary  office  or  officers  and  stores  for  the  business  of  the  Com- 
mission, and  will  also,  upon  proper  requisitions,  furnish  the  Commission 
all  necessary  stationery  and  blank  books  reasonably  needed  for  its  use. 

V.  The  number  of  employes  at  the  two  markets  used  by  the  Com- 
mission shall  continue  the  same  as  at  present,  and  at  the  offices  of  the 
Commission  the  following  shall  be  the  only  employes : One  secretary,  at 
$90  per  month  ; two  clerks,  at  $75  per  month;  four  canvassers,  at  $75 
per  month  ; one  porter,  at  $30  per  month.  And  the  salaries  of  these,  as 
well  as  of  all  persons  connected  with  or  in  the  employ  of  the  Commis- 
sion, shall  be  paid  directly  to  each  individual  by  the  chief  quartermas- 
ter. The  Commission  will  give  particular  attention  to  the  character  of 
the  persons  selected  to  act  as  canvassers,  and  will  employ  none  who  are 
not  trustworthy  and  reliable. 

VI.  The  present  system  of  management  of  the  affairs  of  the  Com- 
mission, so  far  as  it  is  not  varied  by  this  order,  shall  continue  the  same, 
but  all  changes  made  necessary  by  its  provisions  shall  be  immediately 
enforced. 

******* 

XVI.  During  the  temporary  absence  of  the  commanding  general  from 
the  city,  Brig.  Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman,  commanding  the  Defenses  of  New 
Orleans,  is  authorized  and  directed  to  issue  and  approve  all  such  orders 
relative  to  military  affairs  as  the  necessities  of  the  department  may  re- 
quire, and  his  orders  and  acts  will  be  respected  and  obeyed  accordingly. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks: 

KICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Bivouac  at  Springfield  Cross-Roads , 
Fourteen  miles  from  Baton  Rouge , March  14,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleok, 

General-in-  Chief  \ Washington , J).  C. : 

Sir:  Admiral  Farragut  having  yesterday  notified  me  of  his  intention 
to  pass  up  in  the  afternoon  and  run  by  Port  Hudson  this  day  or  to- 
morrow, I immediately  put  my  troops,  which  had  been  in  readiness 
since  the  10th,  in  march,  Grover  leading,  Emory  following  his  march, 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


1113 


and  Augur  bringing  up  the  rear  this  morning.  We  have  so  far 
seen  nothing  of  the  enemy  except  small  parties  of  cavalry,  who  are 
easily  driven  in.  The  contrabands  who  have  been  examined  to-day 
say  the  enemy  will  make  no  fight  outside  of  his  works.  The  men  move 
well  and  are  in  good  spirits.  There  is  very  little  straggling.  The 
roads  are  in  good  condition,  except  where  the  bridges  are  destroyed  or 
out  of  repair.  1 shall  try  to  communicate  with  the  fleet  by  means  of 
signals.  We  move  on  the  Bayou  Sara  road,  with  detachments  on  the 
Clinton  road,  and  will  occupy  to-night  the  general  line  of  the  cross-road 
to  Ross’  Landing. 

I have  ordered  General  Sherman  to  hold  a brigade  of  his  division 
and  General  Weitzel  to  hold  his  brigade  in  readiness  to  join  us  at  a 
moment’s  notice  in  case  of  necessity,  or,  if  it  is  found  that  the  re-enforce- 
ments will  enable  us,  to  strike  a decisive  blow.  The  movement  of  the 
Navy  will  take  place  to-night.  The  admiral  was  delayed  by  the  break- 
ing down  of  the  engines  of  the  Winona  and  Essex  (iron-clad). 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

Camp  near  Baton  Rouge , March  15,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief  \ Washington , D.  C. : 

After  sending  my  dispatch  to  you  of  yesterday’s  date  by  telegraph, 
through  General  Sherman,  I received  a communication  from  Admiral 
Farragut,  forwarded  from  the  signal  station  at  Springfield  Landing,  in- 
forming me  that  the  fleet,  which  was  then  anchored  near  Profit’s  Island, 
would  move  at  8 o’clock  in  the  evening,  and  that  he  expected  to  have 
passed  the  batteries  by  midnight.  I immediately  directed  the  best  dis- 
position of  our  forces  that  circumstances  would  admit  of,  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  the  position  had  not  been  recon noitered,  and  that  the  hasty 
reconnaissances,  which  were  immediately  pushed  out  on  all  the  roads, 
showed  that  our  maps  were  in  many  important  respects  very  unrelia- 
ble. Of  the  enemy’s  position  we  had  not  the  information  necessary  to 
enable  us  to  approach  it  with  confidence,  and  had  no  time  to  obtain 
such  information. 

. Grover’s  division  was  placed  in  position  in  front  of  the  Ross  Landing 
cross-road,  his  left  upon  Bayou  Baton  Rouge,  with  detachments  on  the 
Clinton  road  and  the  cross-roads  on  the  right;  Paine’s  brigade,  of  Em- 
ory’s division,  and  two  batteries  of  the  same  division  on  Grover’s  left, 
across  the  bayou ; the  remainder  of  Emory’s  division  near  Alexander’s ; 
Augur’s  division  at  Vallandiugham’s. 

Our  cavalry  was  pushed  forward  to  the  forks  of  the  Nettles  and  Ross 
Landing  roads,  and  to  the  fork  of  the  Bayou  Sara  road,  near  the  open- 
ing of  what  is  marked  on  the  map  as  “ Open  Plains,”  and  succeeded  in 
gaining  and  holding  these  points.  I was  very  anxious  to  get  our  artil- 
lery before  nightfall  in  a favorable  position  to  keep  up  a fire  during  the 
night,  with  a view  of  drawing  off*  a portion  cf  the  enemy’s  attention 
from  the  fleet.  A small  bridge  on  the  Ross  Landing  road  was  found 
broken  down,  so  as  to  be  impassable  for  artillery,  and  could  not  be 
repaired  in  time  to  enable  me  to  carry  out  this  object,  and  even  had  it 
been  otherwise,  our  uncertainty  as  to  the  precise  position  of  the  enemy 
would  have  rendered  this  fire  of  but  little  effect.  We  heard  nothing 


1114  W FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVIL 

further  from  the  fleet  until  about  11.30  p.  m.,  when  the  sound  of  the 
mortars,  followed  almost  immediately  after  by  a heavy  cannonade,  an- 
nounced that  the  Navy  were  engaged.  The  cannonade  continued  to  be 
heard  at  times  very  indistinctly  until  after  2 a.  m.,  the  sound  creeping 
slowly  from  left  to  right  until  that  hour,  when  it  apparently  ceased. 
Between  2.30  and  3 o’clock  a bright  light  was  seen  above  the  river  at 
about  the  points  which  the  shells  marked  as  the  position  of  our  mortar 
boats ; the  light  seemed  to  come  from  a burning  vessel,  which  appar- 
ently drifted  down  the  stream.  Yery  frequent  explosions  were  heard, 
as  if  proceeding  from  the  burning  craft,  until  shortly  after  5 o’clock, 
when  a terrific  explosion,  as  of  a large  magazine,  told  that  her  destruc- 
tion was  completed.  The  course  followed  by  the  sound  of  the  firing 
satisfied  me  that  at  least  a portion  of  the  fleet  had  succeeded  in  pass- 
ing Port  Hudson,  but  some  fears  were  aroused  for  the  safety  of  the 
larger  vessels,  especially  lest  the  burning  craft  should  have  been  the 
Hartford. 

At  about  7.30  a.  m.  to-day  I received  a dispatch,*  of  which  a copy  is 
inclosed,  from  the  signal  officer  stationed  at  Springfield  Landing,  con- 
veying definite  information  of  the  result  of  the  engagement.  The  ob- 
ject of  the  expedition  to  create  a diversion  in  favor  of  the  Navy  having 
now  been  obtained,  not  indeed  so  completely  as  I wished,  but  quite  as 
much  so  as  was  possible  under  the  circumstances,  and  an  assault  upon 
the  enemy’s  works  being,  in  view  of  our  relative  numbers,  out  of  the 
question,  I gave  orders  for  the  troops  to  move  in  and  occupy  the  line  of 
the  Bayou  Monte  Serro,  extending  across  the  Bayou  Sara,  Clinton,  and 
Greensburg  roads.  After  seeing  these  orders  in  process  of  execution,  I 
moved  my  headquarters,  and  went  into  camp  at  the  fork  of  the  Bayou 
Sara  and  Clinton  roads,  where  I shall  remain  for  the  present. 

I had  made  all  the  necessary  arrangements  to  establish  signal  com- 
munication with  the  admiral  on  the  west  bank  of  the  river,  when  I was 
reliably  informed  that  the  Hartford  and  Albatross  had  passed  up  the 
river,  out  of  sight. 

Colonel  Clark,  of  my  staff,  was,  I regret  to  state,  severely,  but  not 
dangerously,  wounded  while  reconnoitering  the  enemy  in  front  of  our 
lines. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Baton  Rouge , March  15,  1863 — 12.15  p.  m. 

Lieut.  Col.  Bichard  B.  Irwin, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  the  Iberville,  dispatched  this 
morning  to  collect  the  survivors  of  the  Mississippi,  has  but  a short  time 
since  returned,  bringing  40  of  the  crew  of  the  latter  vessel,  who  confirm 
the  reports  previously  forwarded  to  you.  They  state  that  five  vessels 
of  the  fleet  are  above  Port  Hudson  and  the  remainder  below ; that 
the  Mississippi  was  slowly  following  the  course  of  the  fleet  when  she 
grounded  ; that,  on  account  of  her  precarious  condition,  she  was  finally 
fired  and  abandoned.  Thirty  of  the  crew  are  reported  lost ; 3 lieuten- 
ants wounded,  one  of  whom  had  both  legs  shot  away.  Captain  Smith, 


See  p.  262. 


CHAP.  XXVII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


1115 


Executive  Officer  Dewey,  Lieutenant  Chase,  and  Captain  King  are 
reported  safe  on  board  the  Essex.  If  further  information  is  received 
I will  communicate  with  you. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ T.  E.  CHICKERING, 

Colonel , Commanding  Post. 


Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Baton  Rouge , La .,  March  16, 1863. 

Brigadier-General  Andrews, 

Chief  of  Staff,  •, Department  of  the  Gulf : 

General  : I have  the  honor  herewith  to  transmit  the  report  of  Capt. 
G.  W.  Rogers,  commanding  detachment  sent  to  Lobdell’s  Landing,  to 

destroy  signal  station  near  that  point. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 

S6rVant’  T.  E.  CHICKERING, 

Colonel , Commanding  Post. 


[Inclosure.] 

Baton  Rouge,  La.,  March  16, 1863. 

Col.  T.  E.  Chickering, 

Forty -first  Massachusetts  Vols.,  Comdg.  Post,  Baton  Rouge  : 

Colonel  : In  compliance  with  order  of  March  14,  with  my  command 
embarked  on  board  steamer  Saint  Maurice,  and  proceeded  to  a point 
north  of  the  crevasse ; succeeded  in  breaking  up  signal  party  at  that 
place,  who  escaped  with  their  rockets  a few  minutes  before  my  arrival. 
Found  on  plantation,  owned  by  Dr.  Allen,  57  hogsheads  of  sugar  and 
200  bushels  of  corn ; on  Bullard’s  plantation,  50  hogsheads  of  sugar  and 
1 000  bushels  of  corn  ; on  the  widow  Clark’s  plantation,  50  hogsheads 
of  sugar  and  3,000  bushels  of  corn,  also  100  barrels  of  molasses.  About 
3 o’clock  Sunday  morning,  the  steamer  Mississippi  was  observed  coming 
down  the  river,  and  blew  up  a short  distance  below  my  camp.  A short 
time  after,  30  of  the  sailors  were  brought  in,  when  I immediately  sent 
two  of  them  in  a small  boat  in  charge  of  one  of  my  sergeants  to  report 
to  you.  Subsequently  several  others  came  in,  and  sent  them  to  this 
place  on  board  steamer  Saint  Maurice.  At  a later  hour  eight  more, 
who  had  been  wandering  in  the  swamps  all  night  were  brought  in,  and 
embarked  on  steamer  Iberville  with  my  command  this  a.  m.  I have 
also  two  male  slaves,  who  had  escaped  from  Piney  Woods. 

G.  W.  ROGERS, 

Capt.  Company  A,  One  hundred  and  seventy -third  New  York  Vols. 


General  Orders,  l Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  A.  C., 

Ko.  23.  ) Camp  near  Baton  Rouge,  March  20,  1863. 

All  officers  and  soldiers,  and  all  followers  of  the  army,  of  whatever 
character,  in  this  department  are  forbidden  to  engage,  in  any  manner 
whatever,  directly  or  indirectly,  in  the  purchase  or  sale  of  the  products 
of  the  country,  or  to  use  the  troops,  transportation,  or  material  of  the 
army  for  the  purpose  of  speculation,  or  to  assist  those  who  are  so  en- 
gaged, under  penalty  of  dishonorable  dismissal  and  severe  punishment. 


1116  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVTL 


Commanders  of  divisions,  brigades,  regiments,  and  posts  will  report 
any  violation  of  this  order,  and  take  every  possible  precaution  to  en- 
force its  strict  observance.  Pillage  and  depredations  will  be  sup- 
pressed. The  appropriation  of  the  property  of  the  country  to  private 
use  or  personal  emolument  demoralizes  the  army  and  dishonors  the 
service. 

Commanding  officers  will  be  held  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  their 
men,  and  for  the  summary  punishment  of  offenses.  A man  who  aban- 
dons his  flag  and  his  comrades,  in  the  face  of  the  enemy,  to  pillage  and 
plunder  women  and  children,  or  unprotected  people,  deserves  and  should 
receive  the  summary  infliction  of  the  penalty  of  death  denounced  by 
the  Articles  of  War  for  his  crime.  # 

It  is  the  legitimate  right  of  an  army  to  obtain  its  supplies  from  the 
country  it  occupies.  This  right  will  be  exercised  to  its  fullest  extent, 
and  the  Government  will  answer  to  the  enemy  and  to  the  country  for 
that  which  it  applies  to  its  use  or  leaves  to  the  people ; but  all  seizures 
must  be  made  by  authorized  officers,  accounted  for  to  the  chiefs  of  the 
proper  staff  departments,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  property,  and 
scrupulously  applied  to  the  use  and  benefit  of  the  Government. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

RICH’D  B.  IRWIN, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Washington,  April  3, 1863. 

Major-General  Banks,  Neiv  Orleans : 

General  : Your  dispatch  of  March  21*  is  received,  and  has  been 
shown  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

In  regard  to  cotton  trade,  you  will  see  from  the  orders  of  the  War  De- 
partment and  the  regulations  of  the  Treasury  Department  (just  printed) 
that  the  whole  question  is  now  definitely  arranged. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  we  cannot  at  present  send  to  New  Orleans 
more  troops  or  gunboats  without  taking  them  from  General  Hunter’s 
department.  The  unexpected  delays  there  have  resulted  from  the  want 
of  preparation  in  the  Navy.  Whether  the  operations  there  are  success- 
ful or  not,  I hope  that  as  soon  as  they  are  terminated  a portion  of  the 
land  and  naval  forces  in  the  Department  of  the  South  may  be  sent  to 
the  Gulf. 

It  is  unfortunate  that  the  Government,  yielding  to  outside  pressure 
and  the  impatience  of  the  people,  bas  undertaken  too  many  things  at 
the  same  time.  But  this  has  been  the  result  of  circumstances  which 
neither  you  nor  I could  control.  We  are  only  responsible  for  doing  our 
best  with  the  means  at  our  command. 

Your  great  object,  to  be  kept  continually  in  view,  must  be  to  connect 
with  General  Grant.  He  has  been  written  to  to  do  all  in  his  power  to 
connect  with  you.  It  would  seem  from  this  distance  that  the  Atchafa- 
laya  offers  the  best  means  of  effecting  this  object ; but  you  and  General 
Grant  can  judge  best,  being  on  the  spot. 

I hope  that  the  weather  will  soon  permit  some  of  our  armies  to  move. 
A successful  operation  would  greatly  relieve  the  Government. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


See  p.  251. 


Chap.  XXVII.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


1117 


Washington,  D.  C.,  April  29, 1863. 

Major-General  Banks, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Gulf : 

General  : I have  just  received  your  dispatches  Nos.  9 and  10,*  and 
congratulate  you  on  the  success  of  your  operations.  I only  regret  that 
we  cannot  yet  send  you  more  troops  to  assist  in  your  enterprises ; but 
operations  in  other  departments  are  such  that  none  can  at  present  be 

spared. 

It  is  hoped,  however,  that  General  Grant  will  very  soon  be  able  to 
open  communication^  with  you.  His  last  dispatches  are  very  encourag- 
ing. A number  of  his  boats  had  run  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg,  and  a 
portion  of  his  troops  were  at  New  Carthage.  By  this  time  he  is  probably 
in  possession  of  Grand  Gulf. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

- F H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-Chief 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  Nineteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Orleans , April  29,  1863. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commanding  the  Army  of  the  United  States : 

General  : Pending  our  efforts  to  open  communication  with  General 
Grant,  I visited  New  Orleans  for  one  day.  I desire  to  reduce  the  troops 
at  this  point  to  the  lowest  possible  number  consistent  with  the  safety  of 
the  city,  and  I have  also  ordered  one  regiment  from  Key  West  to  join 
my  command  in  the  Teche  country.  This  will  probably  increase  my 
force  three  regiments,  which  does  not  now  exceed  altogether  10,000  or 
12,000  men.  I have  received  a dispatch  from  Admiral  Farragut,  dated 
the  24th,  a copy  of  which  is  inclosed,  and  hope  to  open  communication 
with  him  immediately,  and,  through  him,  with  General  Grant.  Con- 
trary to  the  tenor  of  my  dispatch  sent  by  the  last  mail,  I believe,  if 
General  Grant  can  join  us  with  one  corps,  as  he  promised,  on  the  Bed 
River,  our  movement  across  the  Mississippi  on  Port  Hudson  by  the 
Bayou  Sara  to  be  the  most  expeditious  and  certain.  Our  supplies, 
both  Of  provisions  and  ammunition,  which  was  the  chief  difficulty  in 
my  mind  at  the  date  of  my  last  dispatch,  can  be  furnished  from  Baton 
Rouge  directly  to  the  rear  of  Port  Hudson.  Landing  at  Bayou  Sara, 
Grant’s  forces  and  my  own  can  easily  maintain  this  line  of  communi- 
cation, and  more  directly  to  the  rear  of  that  post.  I think  you  may 
be  assured  that  the  force  at  Port  Hudson  cannot  maintain  itself  if 
this  junction  with  Grant  can  be  effected,  and  I doubt  very  much  if 
it  can  be  very  long  maintained  against  the  movements  of  my  own 
column.  My  advance  brigade,  under  General  Dwight,  is  now  on  the 
Alexandria  road,  25  miles  above  Washington.  We  shall  move  for- 
ward as  soon  as  communication  can  be  opened  and  arrangements 
effected  with  the  admiral  and  General  Grant.  I have  the  pleasure  of 
informing  you  that  the  Atchafalaya  is  entirely  at  our  disposal,  and 
that  the  whole  country  to  Alexandria  is  open  to  us.  The  most  re- 
liable information  I have  of  Kirby  Smith  is  that  he  was  at  Arka- 
delphia,  Ark.,  with  5,000  to  6,000  men,  badly  armed,  and  with  little 


See  pp.  294-298. 


1118  W.  FLA.,  8.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXYTL 

or  no  artillery.  Arkadelphia  is  on  the  Washita  River,  at  the  head 
of  navigation.  From  there  to  Camden,  on  the  Washita,  is  50  miles, 
where  he  will  find  plenty  of  water,  and  four  or  five  transport  steamers, 
by  which  he  could  take  his  command  from  Camden  to  Monroe,  La.,  and 
march  across  to  Alexandria,  or  he  could  continue  down  the  Washita 
to  Black  and  Red  Rivers.  In  this,  however,  he  will  be  anticipated  by 
Grant.  There  are  reports  in  secession  circles  in  this  city  that  Smith 
is  on  the  Washita,  intending  to  join  General  Taylor.  There  is  always 
a plenty  of  water  in  this  river  to  Camden,  up  to  the  middle  of  June. 
This  information  is  derived  from  a Southern  man,  who  was  at  New  Iberia 
two  weeks  since.  The  products  of  the  country,  and  supplies  for  the 
army,  which  belonged  legitimately  to  the  Government,  obtained  by 
this  expedition,  may  amount  to  from  $2,000,000  to  $5,000,000.  Not  less 
than  20,000  beeves,  mules,  and  horses  will  be  obtained  if  we  occupy 
this  country  a sufficient  time  to  gather  them  in.  Indefinite  quanti- 
ties of  lumber  of  the  best  quality,  suitable  for  all  Government  pur- 
poses, we  have  found  on  the  waters  of  the  country  we  occupy.  I have 
directed  the  opening  of  the  Plaquemine  Bayou  and  the  Grand  River, 
which  have  been  closed  by  drift-wood  for  nearly  two  years.  This  will 
be  accomplished  within  two  weeks,  and  will  open  an  immediate  and 
safe  communication  with  the  Atchafalaya,  between  the  Mississippi 
and  the  Red  River,  and  also  by  the  Tensas  and  Black  Rivers  to  the 
Mississippi  above  Vicksburg.  I think  I may  say  that  this  communica- 
tion is  permanently  open,  and  that  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  con- 
ceive the  full  advantage  of  this  great  water  communication  to  the  pur- 
poses of  the  army  and  the  Government.  I am  surprised  to  find,  upon 
examination,  the  amount  of  material  which  exists  in  this  department 
for  the  construction  of  river  steamers.  Turning  my  attention  to  this 
subject  within  the  last  two  months,  I have  found  that  there  are  here  at 
least  twenty  engines  in  good  condition,  and  which  can  easily  be  adapted 
to  steamboat  navigation.  The  opening  of  the  Teche  country  gives  all 
the  lumber  requisite  for  the  construction  of  a great  number  of  vessels. 
We  have  mechanics  both  in  the  army  and  out  of  the  army,  whose  em- 
ployment will  be  beneficial  to  the  Government  in  ship-building.  Until 
now  I have  not  had  funds  which  could  be  applied  to  a purpose  of  this 
kind  without  intrenching  upon  the  appropriations  of  Congress  for  the 
support  of  the  war.  It  gives  me  pleasure  now  to  say  that  I can  within 
three  months  construct  and  equip  twenty  steamers,  at  comparatively 
trifling  expense,  for  light  water  navigation,  a portion  of  which  will  be 
suitable  for  war  as  well  as  transport  duty.  I beg  to  say  to  you  that 
the  expense  of  this  work  will  be  merely  nominal,  and  that  these  vessels 
are  needed  beyond  any  representations  that  I can  possibly  make.  Had 
I this  transportation  open  when  entering  upon  duty  in  this  department, 
the  delay  which  has  been  experienced  in  army  movements  would  have 
been  avoided  altogether ; but  I knew  nothing  of  the  existence  of  the 
materials,  and  found  nothing  necessary  for  the  movements  until  up  to 
this  date.  I beg  to  call  the  earnest  attention  of  the  Government  to  this 
subject,  and  ask  permission  to  construct  from  the  funds  in  my  posses- 
sion as  many  of  these  vessels  as  may  be  needed  by  the  Government. 
I cannot  urge  too  strongly  this  subject  upon  your  important  attention. 

My  official  report  of  the  campaign  just  closed  will  be  made  to  you 
immediately  upon  my  return  to  Opelousas. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  P.  BANKS, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Chap.  XXVIL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 
[In  closure.] 


1119 


General  Banks  : 


Ship  Hartford, 
Above  Port  Hudson , April  24,  1863. 


I am  glad  to  hear  of  your  successes.  I can  hear  nothing  from  Grant 
until  the  five  gunboats  from  Vicksburg  arrive ; till  then  I have  none 
that  can  pass  Fort  He  Russy,  at  Gordon’s  Landing.  Port  Hudson  is 
on  half  rations  ; troops  discontented.  The  enemy  has  sent  to  Arkansas 
for  troops  for  Taylor.  There  is  nothing  to  impede  communication  with 
me  in  the  Atchafalaya. 

D.  G.  FARRAGUT, 

Rear-Admiral. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Bept.  of  the  Gulf,  19th  A.  C., 

No.  106.  j Opelousas , Xa.,  May  2, 1863. 

* # # * # * * 

TV.  The  action  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  Dwight,  commanding  First 
Brigade,  Fourth  Division,  in  causing  Private  Henry  Hamill,  Company 
D,  One  hundred  and  thirty-first  New  York  Volunteers,  to  be  shot  to 
death  in  front  of  the  brigade,  at  sunset  on  the  25th  of  April,  for  quitting 
his  colors  to  plunder  and  pillage,  while  the  brigade  was  on  detached 
service  in  an  exposed  position  and  in  presence  of  the  enemy,  is  fully 
approved  by  the  general  commanding  this  army. 

The  last  warning  against  straggling  and  pillage  has  been  exhausted. 
It  has  become  necessary,  to  prevent  demoralization,  that  the  fate  of  this 
wretched  man  should  be  measured  out  to  all  who  follow"  his  example. 
The  safety  of  this  army  is  more  important  than  the  life  of  any  man  in 
it,  from  the  humblest  private  to  the  commanding  general. 

# # * * * # 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

[RICH’D  B.  IRWIN,] 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Gulf,  19th  A.  0., 

No.  108.  1 Opelousas , La .,  May  4,  1863. 

# # # # #•*  * 

XII.  Brigadier-General  Dwight  will  cause  all  white  males,  to  the 
number  of  100,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  scene  of  the  murder  to-day  to  be 
immediately  arrested,  and  sent  under  strong  guard  to  New  Orleans, 
where  they  will  be  kept  in  close  confinement  till  further  orders,  as  hos- 
tages for  the  delivery  of  the  murderers  into  the  hands  of  the  military 
authorities  of  the  United  States. 

* * * # # # * 

By  command  of  Major-General  Banks : 

[RICH’D  B.  IRWIN,] 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


1120 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX. 


[Chap.  XXVII 


CONFEDERATE  CORRE6PONDEN CE,  ETC. 

Special  Orders,  \ Headquarters  Western  Department, 

No. . • J Tupelo , Miss.,  June  18,  1862. 

Breckinridge’s  division,  Army  of  the  Mississippi,  will  be  prepared 
to  move  in  light  marching  order  with  all  possible  celerity,  with  six  days’ 
subsistence,  100  rounds  of  ammunition  for  small-arms,  and  the  current 
supply  for  field  batteries.  Brigadier-General  Preston  will  report  at 
once  to  the  commander  of  the  forces  for  special  instructions. 


By  command  of  General  Bragg : 


GEORGE.  WM.  BRENT, 

Acting  Chief  of  Staff. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Special  Department, 

No.  16.  1 Grenada , Miss.,  June  23, 1862. 

I.  The  commanding  officer  of  General  Breckinridge’s  corps  will  send 
forward  immediately  by  railroad,  as  fast  as  transportation  is  furnished, 
the  brigades  constituting  that  corps  to  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  with  ten  days’ 
rations  and  a complement  of  ammunition.  The  senior  officer  present 
with  these  detachments  will  report  to  Major-General  Van  Dorn  until  the 
arrival  of  the  corps  commander  or  the  commanding  general  of  the  troops 
of  this  special  department. 

II.  As  soon  as  Breckinridge’s  corps  shall  have  moved,  Brigadier- 
General  Villepigue  will  move  forward  with  his  brigade,  as  rapidly  as 
transportation  can  be  furnished  him,  to  Vicksburg,  provided  with  a 
complement  of  ammunition  and  ten  days’  rations  for  his  troops,  and,  on 
arriving,  report  to  the  commanding  general  of  this  special  department, 
or,  in  his  absence,  to  Major-General  Van  Dorn,  for  orders  and  instruc- 
tions. 

III.  The  quartermaster,  subsistence,  and  medical  departments  are 
charged  with  the  prompt  execution  of  the  duties  incumbent  on  them, 

respectively.  „ ' , . . . . 

IV.  Colonel  [W.  H.]  Jackson,  in  command,  with  his  cavalry  regiment 
and  additional  companies,  will  continue  to  cover  our  northern  border, 
and  Colonel  [W.  B.]  Shelby,  with  his  regiment,  will  remain  under  his 
command  with  the  advance,  and  the  armed  companies  of  General 
Thompson  will  remain  at  Grenada  to  join  the  remainder  of  that  force. 
General  Thompson  will  command  along  the  line  of  the  Memphis  and 
Tennessee  Railroad,  retaining  the  present  armed  force  there,  and  he  will 
carry  into  execution  the  special  instructions  communicated  to  him. 

V.  Col.  B.  Desha  Harman  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  post 

of  Grenada,  and  will  send  all  unarmed  troops  forward  as  rapidly  as 
possible  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  and  carry  into  execution  all  special  instruc- 
tions. ^ 

By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Ruggles : 

J L.  D.  SANDIDGE, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  C.  S.  Army. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  June  24, 1862. 

General  Daniel  Ruggles  : 

Can  you  send  messenger  to  the  commander  of  the  ram  Arkansas,  and 
suggest  to  him  to  come  out,  run  the  fleet,  and  get  behind  them  and  sink 


Ohai\  XXVIl.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1121 


transports  * If  he  is  fast  enough  he  can  do  this  easily.  He  could  clear 
the  river  below.  It  is  better  to  die  game  and  do  some  execution  than 
to  lie  by  and  be  burned  up  in  the  Yazoo. 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major-  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

No.  3.  ) Jackson , Ik,  June  26,  1862. 

I.  The  major-general  commanding  announces  the  following-named 
officers  as  members  of  his  staff.  They  will  be  respected  and  obeyed 
accordingly:  Ool.  Philip  Stockton,  chief  of  ordnance ; Maj.  A.  M. 
Haskell,  inspector-general ; Maj.  J.  D.  Balfour,  inspector-general ; Maj. 
Edward  Dillon,  chief  commissary ; Maj.  Claud  McGivern,  chief  quarter- 
master; Maj.  M.  M.  Kimmel,  assistant  adjutant-general;  Surg.  John 
M.  Haden,  medical  director;  Asst.  Surg.  Howard  Smith,  medical  pur- 
veyor; Lieut.  Clement  Sulivane,  and  Rufus  Shoemaker,  aides-de-camp. 
All  persons  having  communications  with  any  of  the  staff  departments 
will  address  them  to  the  respective  heads  of  the  departments. 

II.  Ool.  Fred.  Tate  is  hereby  announced  as  provost-marshal-general 
for  this  department.  He  will  be  obeyed  and  respected  accordingly. 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major-General. 


General  Orders,  } Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

No.  5.  i Vicksburg , June  29,  1862. 

The  general  commanding  regrets  that  it  has  become  necessary  to  call 
the  attention  of  the  troops  encamped  in  this  vicinity  to  the  Articles  of 
War  in  regard  to  the  destruction  of  private  property.  It  was  hoped 
that  respect  for  the  heroic  people  who  have  given  up  all  to  bombard- 
ment in  such  a glorious  cause  would  have  checked  anything  like  ma- 
rauding or  wanton  destruction  of  their  property.  For  the  sake  of  your 
honor,  let  it  not  be  said  that  you  have  damaged  this  city  more  than  the 
enemy’s  guns.  Officers  of  regiments  encamped  near  private  property 
will  be  held  responsible  for  its  safety.  Injuries  done  will  be  assessed, 
and  the  regimental  officers  will  be  required  to  pay  for  it  in  proportion 
to  the  amount  of  their  pay. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn : 

M.  M.  KIMMEL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Breckinridge’s  Division, 

No.  2.  f Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  10,  1862. 

Hereafter  the  several  brigades  composing  this  division  will  be  num- 
bered as  follows : First  Brigade,  Brigadier-General  Bowen ; Second 
Brigade,  Brigadier-General  Helm ; Third  Brigade,  Brig.  Gen.  William 
Preston,  and  Fourth  Brigade,  Ool.  W.  S.  Statham. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Breckinridge : 

JOHN  T.  PICKETT, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

* See  Ruggles  to  Van  Dorn,  p.  765. 

71  R R — VOL  XV 


1122 


W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVH 

% 


Camp  of  the  Hudson  Battery, 

Near  Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  16,  1862. 

Capt.  G.  W.  McCauley, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Brigade , Breckinridge? s Division  : 

Sir  : I received  a circular  of  date  July  15,  calling  for  volunteers  to 
go  on  board  the  Arkansas,  to  attack  the  fleet  below  ; said  volunteers 
to  be  seamen  or  artillerists,  and  to  report  immediately  to  brigade  head- 
quarters. The  circular  was  immediately  published  to  the  company, 
and  13  (all  artillerists)  volunteered.  I immediately  reported  to  brigade; 
headquarters,  and  was  referred  to  General  Van  Dorn,  who  referred  me 
to  General  Breckinridge  and  Lieutenant  Brown.  I dispatched  a man 
to  General  Breckinridge’s  headquarters,  and  was  there  referred  to 
Lieutenant  Brown.  He  did  not  see  General  Breckinridge.  I then  at- 
tempted to  go  to  the  river,  but,  having  no  passport,  I did  not  succeed  in 
passing  through  the  lines,  and  was  obliged  to  return  to  camp  with  my 
men  without  accomplishing  anything. 

K6Sp6ctf  ully  ^ 

JAMES  L.  HOOLE, 

Captain  Hudson  Battery. 


[Indorsement.] 


As  will  be  seen  by  the  above,  I had  a detail  here  last  night,  but  they 
could  not  get  to  the  boat.  The  commanding  officer  returned  this  morn- 
ing to  make  further  efforts  to  get  on  the  boat.  He  obtained  a pass  from 
this  officer  this  morning  to  visit  the  boat  to  see  Lieutenant  Brown,  in 
order  to  get  him  to  accept  his  detail,  and  seemed  exceedingly  anxious  on 
the  subject.  So  the  men  who  went'  on  the  Arkansas  last  evening  and 
came  ashore  this  morning  cannot  be  the  detail  made  from  this  com- 
mand. 

Respectfully,  B H HBLM) 

Commanding  Second  Brigade 

Col.  John  T.  Pickett, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


I 


Hdqrs.  Fourth  Brigade,  Breckinridge’s  Division, 

July  17,  1862. 

Major  Pickett,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir  : After  making  examination,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the 
lieutenant  and  men  who  volunteered  and  went  on  board  the  Arkansas 
are  there  yet,  and  have  not  been  on  shore  with  the  purpose  of  leaving 
the  boat.  The  lieutenant  is  distressed  that  such  a report  concerning 
him  should  have  been  made.  Directions  will  be  given  to  them  to  re- 
main until  otherwise  ordered  from  your  headquarters  or  by  Captain 
Brown.  If  any  of  the  men  should  leave  without  orders,  to  avoid  the 
service,  they  will  be  arrested  and  punished  and  others  sent  in  their 
stead. 

I make  this  report  at  the  request  of  Colonel  [W.  S.]  Statham,  who  has 
now  a hot  fever. 

The  six  volunteer  firemen  called  for  on  yesterday  were  sent  to  the 
Arkansas  last  evening. 

I remain,  respectfully, 

’ HARRY  I.  THORNTON, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Cbap.  xxvn.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1123 


Hdqrs.  Third  Brigade,  Breckinridge’s  Division, 

Near  Vicksburg , July  18,  1862. 

Maj.  John  T.  Pickett, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Major  : In  conformity  with  your  order,  I made  the  requisite  inquiry 
in  relation  to  the  volunteers  in  my  command  who  are  alleged  to  have 
left  the  ram  Arkansas  on  the  16th  instant  without  authority. 

Lieutenant  Mathews,  a gallant  and  meritorious  officer,  volunteered 
as  a private  for  the  service,  took  charge  of  the  detail,  and  served  with 
it  on  board  the  vessel  during  the  engagement.  He  left  the  vessel  with 
permission  of  Captain  Brown,  and  with  thanks  for  the  service  he  had 
rendered.  I inclose  Lieutenant  Mathews’  note  as  a part  of  this  report. 

I trust  and  believe  that  there  is  no  ground  for  the  charge  on  which 
your  order  is  based.  In  making  the  inquiry,  I find  no  cause  to  arrest 
or  reprimand  Lieutenant  Mathews,  but,  on  the  contrary,  deem  that  he 
deserves  thanks  for  his  gallantry  and  service. 

I remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  PRESTON, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Gracey’s  [Cobb’s]  Battery, 

July  17,  1862. 

[Brig.  Gen.  W.  Preston  :} 

General  : In  reply  to  your  inquiries  concerning  the  volunteers  from 
our  battery  “ to  assist  in  fighting  the  ram  Arkansas  ” against  the  lower 
fleet,  I report  as  follows : On  the  15th  instant,  about  4 p.  m.,  Lieutenant 
[H.  P.]  Wallace,  of  your  staff,  came  to  our  battery  and  stated  that  you 
desired  12  volunteers  from  your  brigade  to  fill  the  place  of  the  wounded 
and  dead  in  the  crew  of  the  ram.  Twelve  members  of  the  battery,  be- 
sides myself,  immediately  volunteered  to  go,  but  our  commanding  officer 
refusing  to  permit  so  many  of  us  to  leave,  as  it  would  reduce  the  strength 
of  his  battery,  resorted  to  a ballot  to  see  who  the  lucky  ones  might  be, 
which  resulted  as  follows : Sergt.  James  Brindley,  Corpl.  John  Leonard, 
Privates  Benjamin  [G.]  Moore,  Daniel  Black,  and  Charley  Thornton,  and 
Sergt.  T.  Watts.  As  soon  as  the  volunteers  were  ready  to  move,  which 
was  about)  five  minutes  after,  I took  the  men  and  reported  myself  and 
command  to  Captain  Brown,  of  the  ram,  as  being  a portion  of  the  num- 
ber required  of  your  brigade.  Captain  Brown  immediately  assigned  us 
to  a gun.  I stated  to  Captain  Brown  that  we  had  come  to  assist  him 
to  fight  the  lower  fleet  that  evening,  and  that  as  my  whole  experience 
in  artillery  was  confined  to  light  field  pieces,  except  what  1 had  learned 
from  the  morning  engagement  with  the  enemy’s  boats,  would  prefer  that 
he  would  place  some  officer  in  charge  that  had  more  experience,  and  I 
would  fight  as  a private,  which  was  done,  as  he  placed  Midshipman  [D. 
M.]  Scales  in  charge.  We  worked  the  gun  throughout  the  engagement 
to  the  best  of  our  abilities.  After  the  engagement  was  over,  I asked 
the  first  lieutenant  if  they  needed  our  services  any  more.  He  conducted 
me  to  Captain  Brown,  who  stated  that  he  had  no  further  use  for  us,  and 
that  he  was  very  grateful  for  our  services,  and  that  we  could  return  to 
our  camp.  I asked  him  then  for  the  countersign ; he  did  not  have  it. 
I asked  General  Breckinridge’s  son  for  it,  who  was  standing  by  during 
my  conversation  with  Captain  Brown  ; he  not  having  it,  was  compelled 
to  remain  in  town  until  morning,  when  we  returned  to  our  battery. 
These  are  all  the  circumstances  connected  with  our  aquatic  expedition, 


1124  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA  , S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Ohai>.  xxvn 

and  trust  that  they  are  of  such  a character  as  will  relieve  your  mind  o 
any  impression  you  may  have  received  of  myself  or  any  of  those  unde] 
my  command  acting  in  any  way  except  as  Kentuckians  have  always 
and  will  continue  to  act  before  the  enemy,  whether  on  land  or  water. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

R.  B.  MATHEWS, 

First  Lieutenant  CoWs  Battery. 


Camp  Moore,  July  30, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn  : 

Did  not  find  rations  for  more  than  five  days.  Have  telegrapher 
repeatedly  to  Jackson  for  ten  days’  more.  Get  no  answer.  Will  yoi 
order  them?  Country  exhausted  toward  the  river.  Flooding  raim 
made  movement  impossible  yesterday  from  exposure.  Sick-list  increas 
ing  terribly.  Total  effective  force,  3,600,  including  Buggies.  I mov( 
half  the  force ; the  rest  in  a few  hours.  If  I can  gather  subsistence  anc 
some  more  transportation,  shall  not  wait  for  rations  from  Jackson,  bui 
take  the  chances. 

This  moment  received  a dispatch  that  I can  get  the  rations  from  Jack 
son.  I may  not  be  able  to  execute  the  orders  in  your  dispatch  of  yester 
day,  as  the  climate  and  exposure  are  reducing  regiments  to  companies 
and  it  is  impossible  to  get  adequate  transportation  while  the  country 
has  no  supplies.  Will  drive  them  to  the  river,  and,  if  possible,  do  more 

JOHN  C.  BRECKINRIDGE, 

Major - General. 


Ponchatoula,  La.,  August  11,  1862 — 6 a.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  C.  Breckinridge,  C.  S.  Army, 

Camp  near  Baton  Rouge : 

General:  Nothing  of  importance  has  occurred  on  this  line.  I havt 
been  making  the  proper  inquiries  to  find  out  the  topography  of  th( 
country  and  habits  of  the  enemy,  and  find  that  secret  cunning,  instead  oi 
bold  dash,  will  have  to  be  the  tactics  on  this  border.  It  is  impossible  tc 
approach  him,  and  we  have  to  await  his  movements.  There  was  n( 
damage  done  at  Covington,  and  the  affair  at  Madisonville  seems  to  havt 
been  simply  a little  shelling,  which  drove  most  of  the  people  away,  bui 
did  not  injure  the  town  more  than  $20.  The  flag  story  was  the  finding 
in  a citizen’s  house  an  old  flag,  rather  a child’s  plaything,  which  thej 
stuck  up  on  the  column  of  the  porch,  and  which  blew  down  the  first 
wind. 

A Capt.  H.  L.  Daigre  came  in  during  the  night  with  10  prisoners,  cap! 
tured  near  New  River.  He  reports  Donaldsonville  as  burned  on  Fridaj 
at  11  o’clock ; an  insurrection  among  the  negroes  in  Ascension  Parish 
and  the  killing  of  40  or  50  of  them  ; that  since  Friday  the  boats  havf 
taken  down  more  troops  than  were  brought  up  ; that  the  Weightmau 
loaded  with  the  dead  and  wounded  from  Baton  Rouge,  was  run  into  bys 
gunboat  (accidentally)  and  sunk,  with  all  on  board,  and  several  othei 
items  of  interest,  which  I hope  will  reach  you  in  reliable  shape.  Cap 
tain  Daigre  takes  his  prisoners  to  Camp  Moore.  They  were  the  crews  oi 
schooners  which  he  captured  and  burned.  He  also  captured  a steam 
boat,  which  showed  French  papers,  and  was  released.  He  desires  iu 
structions  in  regard  to  her  if  again  caught.  I am  not  aware  whether 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1125 


such  reports  as  this  should  be  made  to  yourself,  to  General  Buggies,  as 
commandant  of  the  sub-department,  or  direct  to  General  Van  Dorn,  but, 
as  my  orders  are  from  you,  I will  continue  to  write  to  you,  and  you  can 
act  in  the  matters  reported  as  may  be  pleasant  to  yourself. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 

Missouri  State  Guard , Brigadier  General , 

on  Special  Service , G.  S.  Army. 


Hdqrs.  Medical  Dept.,  First  Brio.,  Second  Div., 

Gamp  on  Comite  River , La .,  August  11,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  0.  Breckinridge, 

Commanding  Forces  in  the  Field : 

General  : The  health  of  this  brigade,  as  you  are  aware,  is  very  bad, 
and  has  been  so  ever  since  its  arrival  at  Vicksburg.  It  is  my  opinion 
that  this  climate  is  the  cause  of  the  peculiar  diseases  which  are  so 
enervating,  and  which  affect  the  many  so  as  nearly  to  ruin  our  army. 
When  this  brigade  arrived  at  Vicksburg  they  were  in  as  good  health 
as  they  had  ever  been  since  they  entered  the  service,  and  better  than 
they  had  been  for  six  months  previous  to  that  time.  We  had  been  at 
Vicksburg  but  a short  time  before  the  malarious  atmosphere  began  its 
work,  and  the  numbers  that  fell  before  it  fully  testify  its  virulent  power. 
We  have  been  almost  ruined  by  it,  and  the  indications  are  that  our  con- 
dition will  be  made  worse  daily  if  an  effort  is  not  made  to  counteract  it. 
The  only  remedy  I can  suggest,  after  many  days  of  reflection,  viewing 
the  cause  of  it  as  I do,  is  to  have  this  command  removed  to  some  point 
north  of  this,  to  which  they  are  acclimated.  I believe  that  it  is  a point 
generally  conceded  by  leading  medical  men  that  when  a climate  disa 
grees  with  a person  or  persons  it  requires  one  season  for  them  to  become 
acclimated.  This  being  the  case,  I do  not  think  the  health  of  this  com- 
mand can  be  improved  in  this  climate  until  after  frost  comes  and  de- 
stroys to  a great  extent  the  malaria.  1 suppose  the  enemy  are  suffering 
as  much,  if  not  more,  than  we  are,  and  that  is  some  consolation.  The 
following  statistics  show  the  strength  of  this  command  at  different 
periods  during  six  or  eight  weeks : 


Command. 

Number  of  men 
for  duty  ar- 
rived at  Vicks- 
burg. 

Number  of  men 
for  duty  left 
Vicksburg. 

Number  of  men 
for  duty  at 
present  date. 

34  Kentucky  Regiment  _ _ 

520 

275 

122 

6th  Kentucky  Regiment .......... .......... 

390 

301 

151 

7 tli  Kentucky  Regiment  n.  TT i .......... 

340 

275 

119 

35th  Alabama  Regiment  ..  ...  ....... ............ ..... 

375 

252 

150 

Onlih’a  Imttory  ... 

117 

97 

36 

Company  of  siVifl.rpnVinot,#vrs  . ... 

80 

52 

6 

Total  . . ..  

1,822 

1, 252 

584 



Note. — Take  out  Cobb’s  battery,  leaves  effective  strength  of  brigade  up  to  this  morning,  548.  Reduc- 
tion in  effective  strength  of  brigade,  by  sickness,  while  at  Vicksburg,  one  month,  567.  Since  leaving 
Vicksburg,  reduced  by  sickness  to  date,  671.  Reduction  by  sickness  from  time  of  arrival  at  Vicks- 
burg, to  date,  1,238.  This  table  shows  only  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates. 

In  ^period  of  six  or  eight  weeks  the  effective  strength  of  this  com- 
mand has  been  reduced  more  than  two-thirds.  I am  aware  that  Cobb’s 
battery  is  not  in  this  brigade  at  this  juncture,  but  it  has  been  with  us 


1126  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

from  the  time  of  its  formation  to  the  time  of  oar  arrival  at  Gamp  Moore. 
I therefore  include  it  in  this  report.  I have  given  it  as  my  opinion  at  the 
outset  that  this  climate  is  the  great  cause  of  the  diseases  now  prevalent  in 
this  brigade,  connected  with  my  reasons  for  so  believing,  in  a few  words. 

I hope  you  will  not  consider  that  I have  acted  improperly  in  forward- 
ing this  report  to  you. 

I have  witnessed  with  sadness,  for  the  past  six  or  eight  weeks,  the 
speedy  weakening  of  the  strength  Of  this  command,  and  I feel  it  my 
duty  as  brigade  surgeon  to  give  you  my  opinion  as  to  the  cause,  effect, 
and  remedy.  It  is  my  candid  ©pinion,  judging  the  future  by  the  past 
and  present,  that  the  health  of  this  command  will  not  improve  in  this 
climate  before  the  last  of  November. 

I know  no  reason  why  this  brigade  should  not  regain  its  former  health 
and  strength  if  taken  to  some  point  north  of  this,  to  which  it  is  accli- 
mated. 

This  report  embraces  only  the  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates. 
The  sickness  among  our  commissioned  officers  is  much  larger  in  pro- 
portion. This  brigade  will  not  average  a commissioned  officer  to  the 
company.  There  are  only  two  field  officers  in  this  brigade,  and  both  of 
them  indisposed. 

I believe  this  army  is  here  in  obedience  to  orders  of  superior  officers, 
not  by  any  request  of  yours ; and  hoping  for  the  good  of  the  sick  and 
suffering  Kentuckians  and  Alabamians  and  others  in  your  command, 
you  will  endeavor  to  have  us  moved  to  some  point  north  of  this,  for 
which  I believe  you  will  use  your  best  exertion, 

I remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  THOMPSON, 
Surgeon  First  Brigade , Second  Division , 


Secret.]  Headquarters  of  the  Military  Commandancy 

of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas. 

The  military  command  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas , War  Dept. : 

In  order  to  carry  out  strictly  the  commands  of  the  orders  dated  the 
25th  instant,  and  also  to  obtain  the  purposes  sought,  this  commandancy, 
by  extinguishing  the  germs  of  the  organizations  still  existing  in  this 
State,  with  a view  to  commence  hostilities  against  Texas,  has  decreed 
that  the  military  authorities  of  the  frontier  proceed  in  accordance  with 
the  following  instructions : 

1st.  They  will  apprehend  all  whom  the  public  accuses  of  belonging  to 
the  suspicious  band  of  Zapata,  and  those  who  have  the  reputation  of 
being  vagabonds  or  who  live  by  stealing. 

2d.  The  Mexican  troops  and  those  of  the  State  of  Texas  will  assist 
one  another  in  the  pursuit  of  those  who  intend  to  pass  from  one  side  of 
the  Bravo  to  the  other.  The  respective  commanders  will  exchange  such 
communications  as  they  deem  necessary  for  their  purposes,  and  in  case 
the  forces  of  one  of  the  States  are  insufficient  to  achieve  the  required 
result  of  the  prosecution,  they  shall  be  re-enforced  by  the  other  nation, 
and  should  it  be  indispensable  for  the  troops  of  one  or  the  other  gov- 
ernment to  cross  the  Bio  Bravo  without  loss  of  time  in  order  to  follow 
the  malefactors  or  savages,  the  corresponding  notice  will  be  given  to 
the  nearest  military  authority. 

3d.  Consequently,  if  the  Mexican  forces  are  insufficient  to  prosecute 
the  crimiuals  who  organized  on  this  frontier  for  the  purpose  of  com- 
mencing hostilities  against  Texas,  they  will  ask  the  necessary  assistance 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1127 


of  the  authorities  of  Texas,  and  in  case  it  should  be  necessary  for  the 
troops  of  Texas  to  cross  without  delay  in  pursuing  the  offenders  or  sav- 
ages the  authorities  of  the  frontier  will  not  oppose  their  passage,  ot  the 
effect  of  which  corresponding  notice  will  be  given  at  the  earliest  time 
possible.  Likewise,  in  case  the  Mexican  territory  should  be  threatened 
or  invaded  by  malefactors  or  savages,  the  authorities  of  the  frontier 
will  observe  the  same  rules  as  are  laid  down  in  regard  to  Texas. 

4th.  If  the  persons  who  in  passing  from  the  State  of  Texas  into  that 
of  Tamaulipas  should  not  have  a passport,  as  ordered  in  Paragraph  II 
of  the  orders  of  the  25th  instant,  he  will  be  detained,  if  he  is  not  known, 
until  found  out  who  he  is  and  what  occupation  he  has;  and  should  the 
result  of  the  investigation  show  that  his  object  is  to  disturb  the  peace 
in  either  of  the  two  States,  or  to  interfere  with  the  actions  of  their  au- 
thorities, it  will  be  immediately  reported  to  the  military  commandancy, 
to  enable  them  to  give  such  orders  as  they  may  see  proper. 

5th.  The  persons  who  may  be  arrested  with  stolen  stock,  whether  it 
be  from  Texas  or  Tamaulipas,  will  be  taken  up  and  sent  to  this  city, 

with  all  antecedents.  ‘ 

6th.  From  hence  the  military  authorities  will  proceed  to  the  investi- 
gation of  the  place  of  concealment  of  the  effects  stolen  from  the  Con- 
federate train  -last  year.  In  order  to  obtain  the  best  possible  results, 
they  will  hold  counsel  with  the  authorities  of  the  frontier  of  Texas,  to 
whom  all  the  stolen  goods  which  may  be  recovered  will  be  returned. 
The  persons  in  whose  houses  said  effects  are  found  will  be  arrested  and 

sent  to  this  place.  ......  , , 

7th.  The  military  authorities  will  watch  over  the  judicial  employes, 
and  see  that  they  perform  faithfully  their  corresponding  parts  of  the 
dispositions  contained  in  the  decree  of  the  25th  instant ; and  should 
they  be  neglectful,  they  will  be  reported  to  the  military  commandancy 
of  the  State,  to  be  dealt  with  as  may  be  thought  proper,  and,  if  their 
negligence  should  arise  from  complicity,  they  will  be  arrested  and 
sent  to  this  city,  with  all  the  antecedents.  The  communication  of 
these  instructions  to  the  military  authorities  will  be  made  officially  to 
the  chief  authorities  and  military  commands  of  this  frontier  under  their 
charge,  and  the  secret  agreement  must  be  read  to  all  commanders  of 
picket  guards  and  detachments  of  troops  and  to  those  who  act  as  mili- 
tary commanders  of  towns  on  the  frontier,  in  order  to  enable  them  to 
proceed  in  regular  order  with  their  execution. 

The  secret  agreement  will  also  be  transcribed  in  this  office,  and  lor  the 
civil  authorities  of  the  frontier,  advising  them  at  the  same  time  to  lend 
their  co-operation  to  the  military  authorities  in  everything  they  may 
require  to  enable  them  to  carry  out  the  orders  of  this  commandancy 
more  effectually. 

Liberty  and  reform. 

J ALBINO  LOPEZ, 

Political  Chief  and  Mil  Commander  of  the  Dept,  of  the  North. 
MatamorAS,  February  28,  1863. 


Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , March  10,  1863. 

To  His  Excellency  Don  Albino  Lopez, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas : 

Sir:  It  has  become  my  duty  earnestly  to  invite  Your  Excellency’s 
special  attention  to  the  conduct  of  the  consul  of  the  United  States  res- 


1128  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

ident  in  Matamoras,  in  its  bearing  on  the  declared  neutrality  of  Mexico 
in  the  war  pending  between  the  Confederate  States  and  the  United 
States. 

Some  months  since  he  appointed  commissioners  to  raise  recruits  for 
the  Army  of  the  United  States,  within  the  Mexican  territory,  and,  hav- 
ing furnished  the  forces  thus  raised  means  and  covered  them  with  the 
flag  of  his  Government,  incited  them  to  commit  rapine  and  murder  on 
this  side  of  the  border,  when,  as  Your  Excellency  is  well  aware,  much 
injury  and  mischief  was  done  to  the  Confederate  States  and  its  loyal 
citizens. 

More  recently  he  has  been  actively  engaged  in  endeavors  to  seduce 
from  their  allegiance  soldiers  under  ray  command,  and  has  caused  the 
desertion  of  many,  whom  he  is  harboring  in  Matamoras,  with  the  design 
of  shipping  them  or  employing  them  on  this  frontier  as  soldiers  in  the 
service  of  the  United  States. 

It  is  gratifying  to  believe  that  these  grievances,  so  far  as  Mexican 
citizens  are  concerned,  have  been  suppressed  through  appropriate  or- 
ders promptly  issued  by  Your  Excellency  ; but  this  tampering  with  my 
troops  is  an  existing  evil  already  great  and  threatening  to  increase.  It 
is  carried  on  by  this  consul  through  facilities  of  official  position,  and  on 
Mexican  soil,  in  derogation  of  that  neutrality  which  he  is  bound  to  re- 
spect. Your  Excellency  will,  I trust,  see  the  propriety  of  informing 
yourself  of  the  facts  (transpiring  under  the  eyes  of  your  own  police),  ; 
and  of  correcting  the  wrong  without  delay. 

With  a view  to  remedy  this  evil  as  far  as  possible,  and  to  preserve 
peace  and  harmony  on  this  frontier,  I have  the  honor  to  request  that 
such  of  the  refugees  from  the  Confederate  States  now  in  Matamoras  as 
shall  appear  to  have  virtually  enlisted  in  the  Army  of  the  United  States 
shall  be  refused  shipment  to  any  foreign  port,  and  that  they  be  sent 
into  the  interior  of  Mexico,  and  be  constrained  to  reside  at  a distance 
not  less  than  30  leagues  from  the  frontier  of  Texas. 

I have  also  to  request  that  Your  Excellency  will  cause  all  citizens  of 
the  Confederate  States  and  others  who  may  have  crossed  the  Rio  Grande 
since  the  28th  ultimo,  and  now  in  Matamoras,  without  permits  from  the 
proper  authority,  to  be  returned  to  this  side  of  the  river  for  examina- 
tion. 

With  sentiments  of  high  consideration,  I am,  Your  Excellency’s  obedi- 
ent servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier - General , Provisional  A rmy. 


Military  Commandancy  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas, 

War  Department. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee, 

Commanding  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas , Fort  Brown : 

General  : Acts  of  great  importance  to  the  security  and  good  har- 
mony of  both  frontiers  have  transpired  lately,  and  compel  me  to  address 
you. 

Day  before  yesterday  some  individuals  belonging  to  the  forces  under 
your  command  threatened  a Mexican  lighter  ; threatening  to  fire  on  the 
captain  if  he  did  not  come  ashore;  and  having  done  so,  a person  named 
Maddock  [Maddox]  was  forcibly  taken  out  of  it,  and  is  still  a prisoner 
at  the  mouth  of  the  river.  One  of  the  soldiers  belonging  to  Capt.  San- 
tos Benavides’  company  having  crossed  to  the  village  of  Laredo  and 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.. 


1129 


committed  some  disturbances,  the  Mexican  authorities,  in  use  of  the 
perfect  right  which  they  have,  ordered  his  arrest,  and,  as  he  resisted 
said  orders  with  his  arms,  he  was  killed.  In  consequence  of  this,  Don 
Santos  Benavides  crossed  with  a force  of  60  men,  trampling  on  the  civil 
and  military  authorities,  and  committing  other  outrages.  Finally,  to- 
day at  4 a.  m.,  a force  of  those  that  are  under  your  command  crossed 
from  that  bank  to  this,  and  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  seized  Colonel 
[E.  J.]  Davis,  of  the  Northern  States,  and  some  other  individuals. 

After  the  conferences  that  have  taken  place  between  the  authorities 
of  both  sides,  I cannot  doubt  that  the  commanders  who  have  com- 
mitted such  acts  have  done  so  without  your  orders ; that,  therefore,  the 
acts  of  which  they  have  become  culpable,  and  which  constitute  one  of 
the  most  serious  crimes  against  international  law,  will  meet  with  your 
censure,  and  that,  justly  provoked  against  these  proceedings,  you  will 
order  that  those  guilty  of  it  be  punished. 

Mexico  is  a neutral  territory,  in  which  foreigners  enjoy  equal  guaran- 
tees, without  reference  to  the  political  parties  they  may  belong  to,  and, 
so  long  as  they  do  not  violate  the  laws  of  the  republic,  they  will  enjoy 
equal  protection,  be  they  called  Confederates  or  Federals.  I trust, 
therefore,  that  you  will  immediately  issue  your  orders  to  have  Colonel 
Davis  and  the  other  individuals  taken  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  set  at 
liberty,  as  likewise  that  the  commanders  who  committed  the  said  crime 
be  punished. 

The  nature  of  the  events  that  have  transpired  obliges  me  to  request 
that  you  will  give  me  an  answer  at  your  earliest  convenience,  and  that 
you  accept  the  assurance  of  my  consideration  and  esteem. 

Libertv  and  reform. 

ALBINO  LOPEZ. 

Matamoras,  March  15,  1863. 


Hdqrs.  Western  Sub-Military  Dist.  of  Texas, 

• Fort  Brown , March  16,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Albino  Lopez, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas , Matamoras : 

Sir  : I had  the  honor  to  receive  at  7 o’clock  last  evening  your  com- 
munication of  that  date,  and  hasten  to  assure  you  of  my  great  regret 
that  the  events  of  which  you  informed  me  should  have  occurred.  The 
arrest  of  the  person  you  call  Maddock  [Maddox]  was  when  I was  per- 
sonally present  at  the  Boca  del  Kio,  and  under  circumstances  that  I 
thought  gave  me  the  right  to  make  the  arrest.  The  boat  was  within  a 
few  feet  of  the  left  bank  of  the  river,  and  within  what  I deemed  to  be 
the  jurisdiction  of  Texas. 

I will,  with  the  permission  of  Your  Excellency,  take  a little  more  time 
to  examine  the  question  involved,  and  inform  you  of  my  determination. 
It  is  proper,  however,  to  state  that  the  person  arrested  claims  to  be  a 
citizen  of  the  Confederate  States,  and  has  a passport  from  those  authori- 
ties, and  I am  at  a loss  to  see  in  what  way  he  claims  any  other  protection. 

The  conduct  of  Capt.  Santos  Benavides  at  Nuevo  Laredo  will  be 
officially  inquired  into  so  soon  as  I receive  his  report.  Your  note  con- 
veyed to  me  the  only  information  I have  on  that  subject.  As  to  the  un- 
fortunate occurrence  at  the  Boca  del  Rio  yesterday,  I have  the  honor 
to  assure  Your  Excellency  that  neither  as  commanding  general  nor  as  an 
individual  did  I know  anything  about  the  affair  until  after  it  occurred ; 
that  I disavow  the  act  as  a military  movement  by  the  soldiers  of  the 


1130  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [CHAr.  XXVIX 


Confederate  States,  and  tender  to  you,  as  the  representative  of  the  au- 
thorities of  Mexico,  my  regret  at  its  occurrence  and  my  disavowal  of  all 
intent  on  the  part  of  the  authority  that  I represent  to  offer  an  indignity 
to  the  Mexican  Government,  and  I also  assure  Your  Excellency  that  1 
will  use  every  means  in  my  power  to  punish  the  offenders. 

The  occurrence  may  be  considered  the  legitimate  result  of  the  scan- 
dalous conduct  of  the  consul  of  the  United  States  in  openly  enlisting 
soldiers  for  the  military  service  of  that  Government  in  the  streets  of 
Matamoras,  in  defiance  and  contempt  of  the  neutrality  of  Mexico.  It 
was  a collision  that  might  have  been  expected  to  occur  at  any  moment, 
where  only  a narrow  river  divided  two  bodies  of  men,  both  essentially 
military  in  their  organization,  and  embittered  by  the  sanguinary  nature 
of  the  struggle  between  their  nationalities,  as  I had  the  honor  to  warn 
Your  Excellency  in  a personal  interview  as  most  likely  to  ensue,  yet  so 
determined  was  I that  no  conflict  should  arise,  that  upon  the  appear- 
ance of  the  Federal  transport  off  the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  the  conse- 
quent necessity  on  my  part  to  strengthen  the  picket  at  that  place,  I 
went  there  in  person,  in  hopes  that  the  obnoxious  party  would  embark 
for  their  destination,  and  that  thus  all  danger  of  a collision  would  be 
avoided.  The  weather,  unfortunately,  prevented  this  consummation,  and 
my  public  duties  called  me  to  Point  Isabel,  where  I was  at  the  time  of  the 
occurrence.  It  is  due  to  myself  to  state  that,  although  the  conduct  of 
the  soldiers  of  the  United  States  on  the  Mexican  side  of  the  river  was 
calculated  to  incense  and  enrage  my  troops,  all  sorts  of  insulting  mes- 
sages and  epithets  being  sent  across  the  river,  yet  my  orders  were  most 
positive  to  prevent  all  illegal  crossing,  and  my  troops  were  urged  to 
bear  with  calmness,  for  the  honor  of  their  country,  all  these  outrages. 

I have  ordered  a military  commission  at  once  to  examine  all  the  facts 
connected  with  this  affair,  and  to  endeavor  to  ascertain  who  were  con- 
cerned in  it,  for  up  to  this  time  I have  failed  to  obtain  any  official  knowl- 
edge on  these  points. 

' The  action  being  without  orders,  the  participants,  for  their  own  safety, 
seek  all  possible  concealment,  and  only  by  a military  investigation  can 
the  truth  be  elicited.  The  prisoners  spoken  of  by  you  are  not  in  my 
possession,  but  are  evidently  concealed  by  those  who  captured  them. 
Proper  steps  are  being  taken  to  ascertain  where  they  are,  and  when 
that  shall  be  ascertained,  Your  Excellency  will  be  informed  of  my  de- 
termination. 

I have  deemed  it  proper  to  make  this  hurried  statement,  without  wait- 
ing for  the  official  facts,  in  deference  to  Your  Excellency’s  urgent  request 
for  a speedy  answer,  and  that  no  time  might  be  lost  in  tendering  my 
official  disavowal  of  the  proceeding. 

With  great  respect,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier-  General , Provisional  Army. 


Military  Commandancy  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas, 

War  Department. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communi- 
cation of  the  16th  instant.  It  gives  me  pleasure  to  hear  of  your  dis- 
approval of  the  recent  indignity  offered  to  the  Mexican  Republic,  and 
to  know  that  you  have  taken  the  necessary  steps  to  investigate  the 
truth  regarding  the  persons  implicated  in  the  transgression.  In  this 


Chap.  XXVII.  1 CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  1131 

investigation  I offer  you  some  information  which  may  be  of  use,  and 
you  can  rely  on  its  correctness,  as  it  was  given  to  me  by  persons  who 
were  present,  and,  being  anxious  to  have  the  facts  discovered,  I com- 
municate it  to  you. 

At  4 o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  15th  instant,  a force  of  more  than 
100  men  crossed  over  to  the  Mexican  side,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Bio 
Grande,  and  surrounded  the  custom-house.  They  were  under  the  com- 
mand of  Colonel  Chilton,  who  was  accompanied  by  Dr.  McKnight  and 
Captain  Brewin.  They  asked  several  persons  for  Colonel  Davis,  and 
not  getting  a satisfactory  answer,  they  went  into  the  office,  where  the 
latter  was  found  and  arrested. 

After  this  they  divided  their  forces  into  small  parties,  seeking  the 
arrest  of  the  refugees  who  were  there,  and,  having  succeeded  in  captur- 
ing several  of  them,  at  6 o’clock  in  the  morning  Colonel  Chilton  with- 
drew his  forces  to  the  Texas  side  of  the  river. 

I have  no  doubt  that  these  items  will  be  of  service  to  you  in  proceed- 
ing with  the  investigation  of  the  events  and  discovery  of  the  guilty 
persons.  I am  also  satisfied  that  you  will  order  fche  delivery  of  Colonel 
Davis  and  the  others,  as  soon  as  they  come  into  your  possession,  to  the 
Mexican  authorities. 

The  occurrences  at  Laredo  deserve  particular  attention,  because  the 
repetition  of  such  acts  will,  I am  sorry  to  say,  in  spite  of  your  efforts 
and  those  of  the  Mexican  authorities,  produce  direful  results,  whose 
consequences  could  not  be  calculated,  but  might  be  easily  avoided  as 
yet.  You  are  aware  that  a sudden  gust  of  passion  does  not  stop  to 
consider  consequences,  and  that  attacks  like  those  made  by  Santos 
Benavides  will  produce  bitter  feelings ; the  slightest  motive  may  render 
fruitless  all  efforts  of  the  chief  authorities  to  settle  the  existing  differ- 
ences. The  good  faith  which  you  have  shown  to  me  by  your  acts,  and 
the  reciprocity  manifested-by  me,  will  be  useless  if  your  subordinates 
do  not  act  with  more  prudence,  or  if  mine  do  not  obey  my  orders. 

Before  closing  this  communication,  it  is  my  duty,  for  the  honor  of  the 
Mexican  authorities,  to  deny  that  they  tolerate  the  acts  to  which  you 
allude  in  the  conduct  of  the  United  States  consul. 

At  the  private  conference  which  I have  had  with  you,  and  in  my  pre- 
vious correspondence  with  the  military  authorities  of  Fort  Brown,  I 
have  always  expressed  my  firm  determination  to  cause  the  neutrality 
of  the  Mexican  territory  to  be  respected,  and  to  check  all  hostile  pro- 
ceedings against  Texas  from  persons  residing  in  Tamaulipas.  I have 
equally  answered  the  reclamations  made  against  the  United  States  consul 
residing  in  Matamoras.  My  conduct  must  be  incontrovertible,  in  order 
to  avoid  inconsistency  in  my  measures,  and  to  be  able  to  sustain  them 
by  well-founded  reasons. 

I can  now  only  repeat  what  I had  the  honor  to  state  to  you  previously, 
that  the  want  of  correct  information  and  contradictory  reports  prevent 
me  from  forming  a settled  opinion. 

What  appears  to  you  indisputable  is  not  clear  to  me,  and  what  the 
authorities  of  Texas  conceive  to  be  an  imposition  on  the  part  of  the 
North  is  represented  by  others  as  the  protection  which  a consul  extends 
to  his  fellow-citizens,  and  the  fulfillment  of  his  duty  in  facilitating  their 
passage  to  their  country. 

This  variety  of  opinions,  mutually  contradicted  and  sustained,  but 
without  being  founded  on  clear  proofs  and  evidences,  excuses  me  from 
deciding  difficulties  which  originated  by  reason  of  the  presence  of  the 
consul  of  the  United  States  in  this  city ; but  I assure  you  that,  comply- 


1132  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  [Chap.  XXVII. 

ing  with  the  orders  I have  received  from  the  Supreme  Government  of 
the  Republic,  I will  continue  to  regulate  my  policy  according  to  the 
principle  of  strict  neutrality. 

Accept  the  assurances  of  my  regard  and  consideration. 

Liberty  and  reform. 

ALBINO  LOPEZ. 

Matamoras,  March  17, 1868. 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , March  18,  1 863. 

His  Excellency  Albino  Lopez, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas  : 

Sir:  Referring  to  my  letter  of  the  16th  instant,  I have  the  honor  to 
inform  you  that  three  men,  purporting  to  be  persons  abducted  from  the 
right  bank  of  the  river  on  Sunday  last,  were  delivered  to  the  main 
guard  at  Fort  Brown  by  parties  to  me  as  yet  unknown.  Their  release 
and  return  to  the  right  bank  of  the  river  was  immediately  ordered. 

Having  discovered  last  evening  that  E.  J.  Davis  was  secreted  at  a 
distance  of  9 leagues  from  this  place,  I immediately  dispatched  a force 
for  him,  and  have  caused  him  also  to  be  sent  to  the  right  bank  of  the 
river.  The  persons  are  thus  returned  to  the  territory  of  Mexico,  at  the 
request  of  Your  Excellency,  to  whom  it  gives  me  pleasure  to  show  this 
mark  of  personal  regard.  Were  I to  consider  the  many  instances  in 
which  the  dignity  of  my  country  has  been  outraged,  and  the  lives  and 
property  of  my  fellow-citizens  sacrificed,  by  persons  operating  under 
the  advice  and  control  of  this  same  E.  J.  Davis,  while  harbored  on  the 
neutral  soil  of  Mexico,  I might  perhaps  be  justly  led  to  a different  de- 
termination. 

Trusting  that  the  affair,  otherwise  so  much  to  be  regretted,  may  serve 
to  warn  the  residents  of  both  sides  of  the  river  against  the  repetition 
of  acts  or  language  tending  to  cause  such  unhappy  occurrences,  I have 
the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier-  General , Provisional  Army. 


Military  Department  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee, 

Commanding  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas , Fort  Brown : 

I have  had  the  honor  of  receiving  your  communication  of  this  date, 
informing  me  that,  in  consequence  of  your  investigations,  Colonel  Davis 
has  been  found,  and  that  you  returned  him,  with  three  other  individuals 
of  those  apprehended  at  the  mouth  of  the  river.  I have  the  pleasure 
to  say  to  you,  in  answer,  that  the  said  persons  have  arrived  in  this  city. 
I have  been  informed  that  Captain  Montgomery,  who  is  one  of  those 
apprehended,  is  still  alive,  although  it  was  rumored  that  he  was  killed 
after  his  apprehension.  According  to  the  statements  which  circulated 
at  that  time,  he  was  hung,  while  passing  the  rancho  San  Martin  $ but 
later  advices  inform  me  that  it  was  not  so,  because  he  passed  by  places 
which  are  two  or  more  leagues  above  said  rancho.  It  is  to  be  supposed 
that  he  likewise  has  been  secreted,  and  that  if  you  use  your  power  and 
influence  he  can  be  found.  I will  also  be  obliged  to  you  if  you  will 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  1133 

issue  your  orders  for  the  return  of  the  arms  that  were  taken  from  those 
who  were  apprehended. 

The  last  part  of  the  communication  which  I have  the  honor  oi  answer- 
ing contains  an  opinion  on  the  subject  of  which  I have  already  given 
you  my  views.  Without  a doubt  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Mexican  authorities 
not  to  allow  acts  which  violate  the  neutrality  of  Mexico,  and,  taking 
that  view,  will  not  tolerate  the  proceedings  of  which  Colonel  Davis  is 
accused.  They  act  accordingly,  and  are  using  every  means  in  their  power 
to  ferret  out  the  reality;  but  the  culpability  that  may  be  attached  to 
him  cannot  be  redressed  in  Texas  unless  the  Confederate  authorities 
possess  themselves  of  him  by  some  means  consistent  with  international 
law.  Your  clear  judgment  will  show  you  that  these  considerations  are 
the  results  of  your  loyal  proceedings. 

Please  accept  the  assurances  of  my  esteem  and  consideration. 

Liberty  and  reform.  ALBINO  LOPEZ. 

Matamoras,  March  18,  1863. 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , March  19, 1863. 

Governor  Lopez  : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  I have  received  information 
that  Jos6  Dias  and  Zapata  arrived  at  the  Boca  del  Bio,  on  board  of  the 
United  States  steamer  Honduras,  with  a considerable  number  of  arms 
destined  for  the  use  of  the  Zapata  outlaws,  they  having  been  sent  to 
New  Orleans  for  that  purpose ; that  the  stormy  weather  prevented  the 
landing  of  the  arms;  but  as  the  same  vessel  is  expected  to  return  very 
soon,  I hasten  to  give  you  this  information,  that  you  may  be  pleased  to 
take  such  measures  as  may  seem  to  you  proper  to  prevent  the  violation 
of  the  neutrality  of  Mexico. 

I am  informed  that  Dias  returned  on  board  of  the  vessel  to  New 
Orleans,  but  I am  positive  that  Zapata  is  now  at  the  Boca  del  Bio.  They 
were  both  in  the  late  organization  of  Zapata. 

With  great  respect, 

6 ’ H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier- General^  Provisional  Army . 


Military  Commandanoy  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas, 

War  Department. 

General:  As  soon  as  I received  your  favor  of  the  19th  instant,  I 
dispatched  the  necessary  orders  for  the  detention  of  the  arms  should 
they  be  unloaded,  and  I can  assure  you  that  under  no  consideration 
shall  they  be  used  for  the  purpose  they  appear  to  be  intended  for. 

After  my  communication  to  you,  in  answer  to  yours  of  the  10th  instant, 
I have  dispatched  orders  for  the  arrest  of  Zapata.  To-day  they  were 
repeated.  I am,  however,  informed  that  he  is  not  at  the  mouth  of  the 
river,  but  should  he  be  there  or  return  to  that  place,  he  will  be  arrested 
and  tried  according  to  law. 

Accept  the  assurances  of  my  regard. 

Liberty  and  reform.  _ 

ALBINO  LOPEZ. 


Matamoras,  March  20,  1863. 


1134  W.  FLA.,  S.  ALA.,  S.  MISS.,  LA.,  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  IChap.  XXVII. 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  of  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , March  22, 1863. 

His  Excellency  Albino  Lopez, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  Tamaulipas  : 


Sir:  In  further  reply  to  your  communication  of  the  20th  instant,  I 
see,  with  regret,  that  you  anticipate  great  evils  for  the  frontier  from  the 
present  indications  of  feeling  on  this  (the  Confederate)  side  of  the  Eio 
Grande,  and  allude,  first,  to  the  capture  of  the  schooner  C.  C.  Pinckney, 
and,  secondly,  to  the  threats  made  by  my  troops  at  the  mouth  of  the 
river  to  again  invade  the  soil  of  Mexico. 

I trust  that  Your  Excellency  will  agree  with  me  in  considering  the 
capture  of  the  vessel  above  named  as  simply  a legal  question  to  be 
decided  by  the  proper  tribunals,  and  divest  it  of  any  intention  on  the 
part  of  military  authorities  to  violate  the  neutrality  of  Mexico.  You 
will  bear  in  mind  that  the  proofs  are  clear  that  by  no  act  of  the  authori- 
ties or  those  under  them  was  the  vessel  seized,  and  that  they  had  no 
connection  with  it  until  the  vessel  stranded  on  our  shore.  She  was 
taken  possession  of  by  persons  claiming  to  belong  to  the  United  States — 
amongst  them  a paroled  prisoner  captured  by  me  when  the  vessel  called 
the  Young  Harry  was  wrecked  a short  time  since  on  this  shore— -and 
over  whom  I had  no  control.  The  facts  can  only  be  properly  investi- 
gated before  the  courts,  and  I shall  hold  myself  ready  to  carry  out  its 
decree,  whatever  it  may  be. 

In  order  to  avoid  a repetition  of  the  threats  which  you  inform  me 
have  been  made  by  my  soldiers  to  cross  into  Mexico,  and  which,  if  true, 
were  mere  ebullitions  of  individual  feeling,  caused  by  insults  and  epithets 
thrown  across  to  them  from  the  refugees  on  the  Mexican  side,  I have 
ordered  the  troops  now  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  to  be  withdrawn  (ex- 
cepting a picket  of  observation),  and  thus  I remove  the  danger  of  un- 
authorized collisions,  by  placing  my  men  beyond  the  reach  of  insult  and 
menace.  These  troops  will  not  be  again  placed  at  the  mouth  of  the  river 
until  the  approach  of  the  enemies  of  my  country  may  render  it  necessary. 

I have  thus  given  Your  Excellency  every  evidence  in  my  power  of  my 
determination  to  use  my  whole  authority  to  carry  out  my  desire  to  main- 
tain peaceful  relations  with  your  Government. 

There  exists  no  insubordination  amongst  my  officers  or  soldiers,  for 
the  events  of  the  15th  instant  were  caused  by  a mistaken  view  of  the 
rights  of  belligerents  to  invade  a neutral  territory  to  attack  the  ene- 
mies who  were  sheltered  there.  The  act  was  not  intended  to  molest  or 
offend  the  Mexican  authorities,  and  its  cou sequences  would  have  been 
confined  to  those  deserving  it  if  the  Mexican  authorities  would  have 
permitted  it ; and  while  I do  not  mention  this  as  evidencing  my  approval 
of  their  conduct,  I do  so  as  assuring  you  that  the  intention  and  desire 
was  as  I have  expressed.  The  officers  engaged  in  the  transaction  are 
being  held  to  a strict  accountability.  I regret  very  much  to  have  to 
inform  Your  Excellency  that  I have  reason  to  suppose  that  my  prompt 
disavowal  of  the  acts  of  the  15th  instant,  and  the  proof  of  my  sincerity, 
as  evidenced  by  the  return  of  E.  J.  Davis,  have  not  been  duly  appre- 
ciated by  the  authorities  of  Tamaulipas. 

When  Mexican  citizens,  under  the  flag  of  the  United  States,  crossed 
the  Eio  Grande,  attacked  a train  of  Government  wagons  traveling  on 
the  highway,  murdered  the  teamsters  and  plundered  the  train,  there 
was  wafted  to  the  ears  of  Your  Excellency  in  Matamoras  no  sounds  of 
music  and  shouts  of  u death  to  the  Mexicans  ” from  an  infuriated  popu- 
lace in  the  streets  of  Brownsville,  no  evidences  of  their  outraged  and 
bitter  feelings  were  allowed  expression,  but  the  soldiers,  as  well  as  the 
people,  calmly  awaited  the  result  of  the  application  to  the  authorities 


Chap.  XXVII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1135 


for  explanation ; and  upon  a frank  and  full  disavowal  of  the  act  as 
authorized  or  countenanced  by  them  being  received,  the  full  allowance 
was  made  for  the  unsettled  condition  of  affairs  on  the  line,  and  an  act 
fraught  with  danger  to  the  peace  of  both  frontiers  was  settled  on  the 
terms  proposed  by  the  Mexican  authorities.  Yet  when  a violation  of 
Mexican  soil  takes  place,  with  the  especial  difference  that  it  was  not 
aimed  at  the  Government  or  people  of  Mexico,  and  although  the  act 
was  promptly  disavowed,  I am  pained  to  know  that  the  most  violent 
ebullitions  of  feeling  against  my  country  were  shown  by  the  people  of 
Matamoras,  and  bands  of  music  paraded  the  streets,  with  shouts  of 
menace  and  insult  to  me  and  my  troops,  and  as  I heard  them  myself, 
although  sitting  at  my  quarters  in  Brownsville,  I have  a right  to  think 
and  announce  to  Your  Excellency  that  it  is  Mexico  which  shows  a hos- 
tile attitude  to  my  country,  and  that  on  her  will  rest  the  responsibility 
of  breaking  the  peaceable  relations  which  I do  so  much  to  foster.  Con- 
scious that  I have  done  my  whole  duty  both  to  Mexico  and  my  Govern- 
ment, I dismiss  the  subject,  with  the  renewed  assurance  of  my  most  dis- 
tinguished respect  and  esteem. 

With  great  respect,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army . 


Headquarters  Western  Sub-District  oe  Texas, 

Fort  Brown , March  22,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Albino  Lopez, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  Tamaulijpas : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  the  citizen  Maddox,  taken 
from  on  board  a small  boat  in  the  waters  of  the  Bio  Grande,  by  my 
permission,  has  been  examined,  and  it  being  ascertained  that  he  is,  and 
claims  to  be,  a citizen  of  the  Confederate  States,  he  has  been  set  at  lib- 
erty to  go  where  he  pleases.  The  treaty  of  Guadalupe  de  Hidalgo  pre- 
scribes that  the  center  of  the  channel  of  the  Bio  Grande  is  the  bound- 
i ary  of  Mexico,  and  I claim  for  the  Confederate  States  full  jurisdiction 
on  this  side  of  that  center  of  the  channel,  and  that  right  is  not  intended 
to  be  waived  by  the  release  of  the  said  Maddox. 

It  gives  me  great  satisfaction  to  inclose  to  you  a copy  of  the  offi- 
cial report # made  to  me  by  Capt.  Santos  Benavides  of  the  occurrences 
at  Huevo  Laredo,  which  I hope  will  relieve  the  mind  of  Your  Excellency 
as  to  any  indignity  having  been  intended  or  offered  to  the  Mexican  au- 
thorities. From  my  long  acquaintance  with  Captain  Benavides,  and 
high  appreciation  of  him  as  a man  of  prudence  and  discretion,  I am 
satisfied  that  the  authorities  on  both  sides  of  the  line  may  equally  con- 
fide in  him  as  not  likely  to  do  any  act  to  compromise  the  relations  which 
should  exist. 

With  great  respect,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army . 


INDEX 


Brigades , Divisions,  Corps,  Armies,  and  improvised  organizations  are  ‘ 1 Mentioned ’ ’ under  names  of 
commanding  officer ; State  and  other  organizations  under  their  official  designation . 


Page. 

Abandoned  and  Captured  Property.  Communications  from  B.  F.  Butler  ..  463 

(See  also  order  of  Banks,  p.  643.) 

Abandoned  Lands.  (See  Befugees , Abandoned  L^nds,  etc.) 

Abat,  Generes  & Co.  Mentioned 540 

Abat  & Cushman.  Mentioned 541 

Abbay,  George  F.  Mentioned 1032, 1061 

Abbot,  Henry  L. 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 648 

Mentioned 611 

Report  of  condition  of  Engineer  Department,  Department  of  the  Gulf 648 

Abbott,  F.  M.  Mentioned _ 373,374 

Abbott,  J.  C. 

Correspondence  with  Joseph  L.  Hallett 262 

Mentioned 259-261,705 

Abbott,  Sylvester.  Mentioned 173 

Abe  Lincoln,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned . 1102 

Abercrombie,  L.A.  Mentioned 214,217 

Abert,  William  S. 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 648 

Mentioned 305, 333, 608, 611, 677, 716 

Report  of  condition  of  Inspector-General’s  Department,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf. . 648 

Abreii,  F.  P.  Mentioned 228 

A.  B.  Seger,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 179,184,186 

Adams,  Enoch.  Mentioned 70 

Adams,  James.  Mentioned 236 

Adams,  John.  Mentioned 75 

Adams,  John  J.  Mentioned 541 

Adams,  Merrill  H.  Mentioned 71 

Adams,  Robert  L.,  & Co.  Mentioned 541 

Adams,  Thomas  E.  Mentioned 766,768 

Adams  Express  Company.  Forced,  loan  from.  Communications  from  Ben- 
jamin F.  Butler 513, 514 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Asa  S.  Blake  and  W.  B.  Dinsmore.) 

Addison,  Mr.  Mentioned 80 

Aderhold,  J.  W.  Mentioned 1069 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S,  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 46, 493, 527, 559 

Carleton,  James  H 576, 578, 597, 604, 669, 670, 681, 724 

Dudley,  N.  A.  M 47 

Holbrook,  W.  C 46 

Phelps,  J.  W 47 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  98,  547;  No.  139,  621;  No.  184,  590. 
Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  183,  545. 

72  R R— VOL  XV 


(1137) 


1138 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Alabama,  Governor  of -* 947 

Beauregard,  G.  T 6, 734, 810 

Buckner,  Simon  B 904,1055,1069,1070 

Davis,  Jefferson 953; 

Forney,  John  H 833, 859 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 883  j 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 1010 1 

Jones,  Samuel . 764 

Leadbetter,  Danville 867 

Magruder,  John  B % 884, 894, 918, 954, 999, 1004, 1030 

Maury,  Dabney  H 1056 

Pemberton,  John  C 809,835 

Pond,  P.,  jr 808 

Ruggles,  Daniel 806,810,817,821,839,890 

Smith,  E.  Kirby 972, 1045 

Taylor,  Richard . 791,864,872,877,919 

War  Department,  C.  S 185,  765,  840, 877, 905, 918 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  39,  746;  No.  50,  784;  No.  51,  19;  No. 

Ill,  905. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  73,  820;  No.  143,  760;  No.  146,  766; 

No.  174,  789;  No.  23  7,  826;  No.  282,  885,911. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  11,  948;  No.  12,  950;  No.  16,954;  No. 

35,979;  No.  71,1022;  No.  72,1023;  No.  96,1048. 

Aikens,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 239 

Ainsworth,  Ira  W.  Mentioned 646, 713 

Aitkens,  J.  S.  Mentioned 541 

Akin,  James  H.  Mentioned 1062 

Alabama  (290),  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 225, 238, 646, 647, 661, 1060 

Alabama. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Alabama,  Governor  of 939, 946 

Davis,  Jefferson 940 

Enforcement  of  Conscription  Act  in 939, 940, 947, 948 

Martial  law  in 859 

Military  departments  embracing ' - 746, 771, 784 

Operations  in.  (See 

Mobile,  Alabama . 

Southern  Alabama.) 

Alabama,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 947 

Buckner,  Simon  B 964 

Davis,  Jefferson 847,939 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 971 

Leadbetter,  Danville 963 

Mobile,  Ala.,  Committee  of  Safety  of 889 

War  Department,  C.  S 888,898,946,1076,1077 

Alabama  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Heavy — Battalions:  1st,*  850^1069 ; ( Companies),  C,  1069 ; F,  114 ; 

2d  ( Companies ) A,  850,1068;  E,  850. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries : Fowler’s,  850,1069;  Gid.  Nelson,  850,1068. 

* Companies  designated  when  practicable. 


INDEX. 


1139 


Page. 

Alabama  Troops.  Mentioned — Continued. 

Cavalry — Battalions:  15th,  850, 1069.  Companies:  Amos’,  1068;  Baldwin 
Rangers,  850, 1069  ; Dorrance  Rangers,  850, 1069 ; Mobile  City  Troop, 
850,1069;  Mobile  Dragoons,  850;  White’s,  850.  Regiments:  2d,  850, 

1068. 

Infantry — Battalions : 4th,  18,82,85,1033;  6th,  934, 1033 ; 9th,  1068;  16th, 

1033.  Companies : Eufaula  Minute  Men,  947.  Regiments:  1st, * 276-278, 

841,  971,  1033,  1062:  4th,  78, 86;  17th,  850,  1068;  18th,  850, 1069 ; 21st, 

850,  1068,  1089;  27th,  934, 1033, 1037 ; 29th,  850, 1068 ; 31st,  18,78, 82, 84, 
85,934;  35th,  18, 77,  90,  91,  93-97,  99,  1033,1125;  36th,  38th,  850,  1069; 

40th,  850;  49th,  273, 278, 1033, 1037, 1061;  53d,  903;  55th,  273, 1037. 

Alabama  and  West  Florida,  Department  of.  (Confederate.)  Merged  into 


Western  Department 770 

Albatross,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 252, 

254, 255, 257, 260, 262, 266, 268, 295, 302, 312, 316, 697, 707, 708, 1029, 1114 

Alden,  James.  Mentioned 191, 257, 258, 266, 296, 299, 307 

Alexander,  G.  L.  Mentioned 82 

Alexander,  Richard  H.  Mentioned 611 

Alexandria,  La.  Occupation  of,  May  6,  1863.  (See  report  of  Banks,  p.  313.) 

Algerine,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 1102 

Allaire,  Anthony  J.  Mentioned 342 

Allen,  Dr.  Mentioned 1115 

Allen,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 140 

Allen,  A.  W.  Mentioned 154, 155, 158 

Allen,  C.  M.  Mentioned  : 401, 402 

Allen.  Ethan.  Mentioned.. 43 

Allen,  Harvey  A.  Mentioned 651,714 

Allen,  H.  W. 

Mentioned 11, 18,  39, 40, 54, 77, 78, 81, 90-93, 101-103, 106-108, 546 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862 100 

Allen,  Pickering  D. 

Correspondence  with  Godfrey  Weitzel 680 

Mentioned 235, 290 

Allen,  T.  H.  8c  J.  M.,  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

Allen,  W.  I.  Mentioned  348, 350 

Allston,  B.  Mentioned 1009 

Allyn,  William  B.  Mentioned , 44,45,64,65 

Amacker,  O.  P.  Mentioned 90,104,792 

Amacker,  R.  M.  Mentioned 105 

Amanon,  Jules  Dona  D.  Mentioned 540 

Amberg,  C.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  s eeBiegel  Settlement , Tex.,  Citizens  of.) 

Amite  River,  La. 

Affair  on  the,  April  12,  1863.  Reports  of 

Herren,  Gadi 401 

Simonton,  John  M 400 

Reconnaissance  to,  J une  27-29, 1862,  and  skirmish.  Report  of  John  A.  Keith.  36 
Skirmishes  on  the. 

July  24,  1862. 

Communications  from  D.  C.  Hardee 787 

Reports  of  J.  H.  Wingfield 122,123 

(See  also  Butler  to  Williams,  p.  34.) 

April  17,  1863  4 


Serving  as  heavy  artillery. 


1140 


INDEX. 


✓ Page.' 

Amite  River  and  Jackson  Railroad,  La. 

Expedition  to,  March  21-29,  1863.  (See  Ponchatoula,  La.  Expedition  to,  and 
skirmishes,  March  21-30,  1863.) 

Operations  on  the,  May  9-18,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Ramsey,  S.  D 407, 406 

Terrell,  V.  L 408 

Reports  of 

Logan,  John  A 408, 40S 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 406 

Witt,  A.  R 407 

Amnesty.  (Qualified.)  Louisiana  people 466,494,516,576 

Amos,  W.  B.  Mentioned 1066 

Anderson,  Allen  L.  Mentioned 723 

Anderson,  C.  D.  Mentioned 850, 1066 

Anderson,  S.  S.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Theophilus  H.  Holmes.) 

Andrew,  John  A.  Mentioned 200,643 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Massachusetts,  Governor  of '.) 

Andrews,  George.  Mentioned 45,65 

Andrews,  George  L. 

Announced  as  Chief  of  Staff  to  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 1109 

Assignments  to  command 634 

Correspondence  with  Army  Headquarters 645 

Mentioned 241, 634, 647, 673, 710, 713, 1109 

(For  correspondence  as  Chief  of  Staff,  see  Nathaniel  P.  Banks.) 

Andrews,  John  W.  Mentioned 504,511 

Anglo-American,  U.  S.  S. 

Engagement,  between,  and  Port  Hudson  batteries,  August  29,  1862 2 

Mentioned 1102 

Ann,  Steamer. 

Capture  of,  June  29,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Bragg,  Braxton 119 

Forney,  John  H 118 

Randolph,  Y.  M - 115, 116 

War  Department,  C.  S 116 

Report  of  W.  L.  Powell 112 

Mentioned - 112-119 

Apache  Indians.  Extermination  of.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector-General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 918 

Baylor,  John  R 914 

Davis,  Jefferson 919 

Me  Willie,  M.  H 940 

Magruder,  John  B 918 

: War  Department,  C.  S 857,  919 

Apache  Pass,  N.  Mex.  Skirmish  at,  April  25, 1863.  (See  Indians  in  New  Mex- 
ico. Operations  against , January  4 -May  8, 1863.) 

Arago,  Steamer.  Mentioned 608 

Archer,  Samuel.  Mentioned 574,725 

Ariail,  M.  R.  Mentioned 750 

Arizona,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 297, 306, 307, 312, 313, 316, 358, 382 

Arizona.  (For  operations  in,  etc.,  see  New  Mexico.) 

Arizona,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  John  B.  Magruder 914 


INDEX. 


1141 


Page. 

Arkansas,  C.  S.  S. 

Construction,  etc.  Communications  from 

Brown,  Isaac  N 746, 749, 751, 762, 765 

Helm,  B.  H 1122 

Hoole,  James  L 1122 

Mathews,  R.  B j 1123 

Preston,  W 1123 

Ruggles,  Daniel 770 

Statham,  W.  S 1122 

(See  also  Beauregard  to  Lovell,  p.  752 ; Davis  to  Smith , p.  754.) 

Destruction  of,  August  6, 1862.  Communications  from  Jefferson  Davis 14 

(See  also  reports  of  Van  Dorn , pp.  14,  17,  18;  Butler,  pp.  40-42;  Weiizel, 
p.  51.) 

Engagements  with. 

July  15,  1862.  (See  reports  of  Van  Dorn,  pp.  15,  16;  Smith,  p.  9;  Will- 
iams, pp.  32,  33.  Also  Van  Dorn  to  Buggies , p.  779.) 

July  22, 1862. 

# Communications  from  War  Department,  U.  S 39 

Report  of  Alfred  W.  Ellet 38 

(See  also  report  of  Smith,  p.  10.) 

Mentioned 7, 9, 10, 14-19, 32, 34, 38-42, 51-54, 56, 77, 79, 

83,  91,  538,  747,  749,  751-754, 762, 763, 765, 766, 778, 779, 1120, 1122, 1123 


Arkansas. 

Enforcement  of  Conscription  Act  in 780, 781 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from  War  Department,  C.  S 871 

State  troops  transferred  to  Confederate  service 781 

Arkansas,  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 802 

Hindman,  T.  C.,  assigned  to  command 802 

Arkansas,  Governor  of. 

Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis 807 

Orders  the  transfer  of  all  State  troops  to  the  Confederate  service 781 

Arkansas  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Cavalry — Battalions:  1st  (Choctaw),  286.  egiments : 2d,  400,  401,  671, 

1062. 

Infantry — Battalions  : 1st  [8th],  934,  1032,  1061.  Regiments : 9th,  18, 1033; 

10th,  18, 140, 273, 841, 1033, 1037, 1061 ; 11th,  934,  1032, 1061 ; 12th,  1032, 

1061 ; 14th,  15th,  16th,  17th,  18th,  23d,  934, 1032, 1061. 

Armand,  J.  B.  G.  Mentioned 442 

Armant,  Leopold  L.  Mentioned 178,389,1089 

Arms,  Ammunition,  etc.,  Supplies  of.  (See  Munitions  of  War.) 

Army  Corps,  19th. 

Andrews,  George  L.,  assigned  to  command  of  First  Brigade,  Third  Di- 
vision   : 634 

Augur,  Christopher  C.,  assigned  to  command  of  First  Division .645 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P.,  assigned  to,  and  assumes  command  of 624,636 

Brigades  and  divisions  organized.  Orders  of  Banks 626,634,645,646 

Constituted 636 

Corcoran,  Michael,  assigned  to  command  of  First  Brigade,  First  Division.  645 
Dudley,  N.  A.  M.,  assigned  to  command  of  Third  Brigade,  First  Division..  645 

Dow,  Neal,  assigned  to  command  of  First  Brigade,  Second  Division 646 

Dwight,  William,  assigned  to  command  of  First  Brigade,  Fourth  Division.  626 

Emory,  William  H.,  assigned  to  command  of  Third  Division 634 

Grover,  C.,  assigned  to  command  of  Fourth  Division 626 


1142 


INDEX. 


Pag«! 

Army  Corps,  19th — Continued. 

Sherman,  Thomas  W.,  assigned  to  command  of  Second  Division 64 

Weitzel,  Godfrey,  assigned  to  command  of  Second  Brigade,  First  Division.  64 
(For  orders,  organization,  strength,  etc.,  see  Gulf,  Department  of  the.) 

Army  Headquarters. 

Correspondence  -with 


Andrews,  G.  L 64 

Arnold,  Lewis  G 57; 


Banks,  Nathaniel  P r .. . 200, 240, 242, 251, 257, 294, 298, 309, 316, 59(i 

613,  616,  618,  636,  639,  643, 646, 656, 661, 671, 673, 677, 690, 696, 700,  70S] 
716,  723,  725,  726,  1099,  1104,  1105,  1108,  1109,  1112, 1113,  1116,  111 
Butler,  Benjamin  F 47, 158, 160-162, 544, 555, 557, 558, 564, 572, 589, 601, 60 


Carleton,  James  H 604,72. 

Dix,  John  A.. 64 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 70 

Instructions  to  Banks 59 


Orders,  Special,  series  1860 : No.  133,  500. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862  : No.  235, 568. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  206,719. 

Army  Transportation.  Supplies  of,  etc.  (S Munitions  of  War.) 


Arnold,  Lewis  G. 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 57! 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 52! 

Closson,  Henry  W 561 

Mentioned 160, 423, 459, 547, 55 I 

Report  of  expedition  to  Milton,  Fla.,  June  14-15,  1862 101 

Arnold,  Richard. 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 649, 65( 

Mentioned 322,323,611 

Reports  of 

Artillery  in  Department  of  the  Gulf.  Organization,  strength,  etc.,  of, 

January  15, 1863  649, 65( 

Bisland,  Fort,  La.  Engagement  at,  April  12-13,  1863  32(] 

Arny,  W.  F.  M.  Mentioned 64] 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  New  Mexico , Secretary  and  Acting  Governor  of.) 


Arrington,  E.  T.  Mentioned 1060 

Arroyes,  Juan.  Mentioned 596, 

Arthur,  U.  S.  Bark.  Mentioned 19( 

Ashe,  S.  D.  Mentioned 77; 

Assessments,  etc.  Confederates  and  sympathizers 538-542,607,64^ 

Atchafalaya  River  and  Bayou  Plaquemine,  La.  Operations  on,  February 
12-28, 1863. 


Communications  from 

Allen,  Pickering  D 68C 

Emory,  William  H 246-250, 670 

Coehen,  Henry 24£ 

Cooke,  A.  P - 245 

Currie,  L.  D.  H 250 

Gardner,  Franklin 990, 999 

Gooding,  O.  P 246 

Grover,  Cuvier 245,247 

Holcomb,  R.  E 244 

Loring,  Frank  W 246 


INDEX. 


1143 


Page. 

Atchafalaya  River  and  Bayou  Plaquemine,  La.  Operations  on,  February 
12-28,  1863— Continued. 

Communications  from 

Miller,  W.  C 981 

Paine,  Halbert  E 678 

Watson,  John  C 245 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 243-249,676,681 

Youngblood,  J.  W 990 

Reports  of  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 240,242,243 

Atlantic,  Steamer.  Mentioned 607,608,613 

Atwood,  George  M.  Mentioned 713 

Aubert,  L.  C.  Mentioned 767 

Augur,  Christopher  C. 

Assignments  to  command 645, 1104 

Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 662,704,705 

Dudley,  N.  A.  M 728 

Emory,  William  H 246 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 243-248, 673, 676 

Mentioned 252, 253, 295, 296, 299, 

304,  6®9,  645,  647, 665, 692, 703, 711, 712, 720, 731, 923, 958, 990, 1104, 1113 
Autry,  James  L. 

Correspondence  with  S.  Phillips  Lee 13 

Mentioned 6,811,813 

Avendano  Brothers.  Mentioned -- 685 

Avery,  Mr.  Mentioned 189 

Avery,  D.  Mentioned 399 

Avery,  George  W.  Mentioned 149 

Aycock,  John  T.  Mentioned 239 

Aymett,  H.  H.  Mentioned 1032, 1061 

Babcock,  Willoughby.  Mentioned 110,234-236,712 

Bach,  Lewis.  Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 205 

Bache,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 613 

Bachelor,  Henry  T.  Mentioned 45,73 

Backus,  William  H.  Report  of  expedition  from  Fort  Union,  N.  Mex.,  Octo- 
ber 9-November  25,  1862 163 

Bacon,  David.  Mentioned  45 

Bacon,  Edward.  Mentioned - 283 

Bagby,  A.  P.  Mentioned 210, 212, 217, 391, 395, 397, 398, 974, 1091, 1092 

Bagdad,  Fla.  Reconnaissances  to,  August  7-10,  1862. 

(S ee  Pensacola,  Fla.  Reconnaissances  from,  August  7-10,  1862.) 

Bailey,  F.  H.  Mentioned 403 

Bailey,  J.  E.  Mentioned 934,1032 

Bailey,  Joseph.  Mentioned 20, 24, 284 

Bainbridge,  Edmund  C. 

Mentioned 234-236,322,650,712 

Report  of  engagement  at  Bisland,  Fort,  La.,  April  12-13,  1863  328 

Baird,  James.  Mentioned 165 

Baird,  S.  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Hubbell,  J.  1°65 

Magruder,  John  B 1964, 1975 

Mentioned 1957 

Baker,  Steamer.  Capture  of,  by  the  Queen  of  the  West,  February  3,  1863 3 


1144 


INDEX. 


Baker,  Captain.  Mentioned 955 

Baker,  John  A.  Mentioned 45  05 

Baker,  Joseph  A.  Mentioned 494 

Baldwin,  Ephraim  C.  Mentioned 084 

Balfour,  John  W.  Mentioned 2, 11  18 

Balfour,  Joseph  D.  Mentioned 49  1121 1! 

Baltic,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 447 

Baltic,  Steamer.  Mentioned 007  008  613 

Baltic,  Tug.  Mentioned 1102  i 

Bankhead,  James.  Mentioned 542 

Bankhead,  Smith  P. 

Correspondence  with  John  B.  Magruder 1066 

Mentioned 987,988 

Bank  of  America.  Seizure  of  coin  of.  (See  New  Orleans  Banks.) 

Bank  of  Louisiana. 

Affairs  of  the.  Communications  from  Benjamin  F.  Butler 438,  565 

Order  of  Butler  in  case  of  A.  Durand  vs 472 

Banks,  General,  Steamer.  (See  General  Banks , Steamer.) 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P. 

Assignments  to  command 590, 611, 624, 636 

Co-operation  with 


Grant,  U.  S.  (See  West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  April  9- May  14,  1863; 
also  Banks  to  Grant,  pp.  711,  720,731,  732;  Banks  to  Farragut,  pp. 
720,  731 ; Banks  to  Halleck,  p.  1117  ; Halleck  to  Banks,  pp.  656,  671, 
725,  726, 1116,  1117 ; Irwin  to  Houston,  p.  726 ; Irwin  toWeitzel,  p. 
727.) 

Sherman,  W.  T.  (See  Halleck  to  Banks,  p.  636.) 


Correspondence  with 

Abbot,  Henry  L 549 

Abert,  William  S 048 

Army  Headquarters 200, 240, 242, 251, 257, 294, 298, 309, 316, 590, 

613,  616,618,636,639,643,646,656,661,671,673*  677,  690,  696,  700,  702, 

716,  723,  725,  726,  1099,  1104,  1105,  1108,  1109,  1112,  1113,  1116,  1117 

Arnold,  Richard 049, 059 

Augur,  Christopher  C 662,  704,  705 

Bach,  Lewis 205 

Beckwith,  E.  G 097 

Bowen,  James 4497 

Bulkley,  Charles  S 052 

Burrell,  Isaac  S 201  204 

Chandler,  J.  G 749, 729, 730, 1101 

Chickering,  T.  E 4444,  4445 

Cooke,  Erastus 098 

Dow,  Neal 028 

Dwight,  William,  jr 706 

Dyer,  Isaac 098 

Emory,  William  H 247-250, 327, 333,  341, 607, 679 

Farragut,  D.  G 261, 301, 307,  308, 659, 704, 707, 718, 720, 731, 1119 

Grant,  U.  S 296, 300, 303, 304, 309, 314, 315, 317, 692,  711, 720, 731, 732 

Grover,  Cuvier 490,  493, 245, 247, 689, 1108 

Hallett,  Joseph  L 262 

Hamilton,  A.  J 200, 202, 658 

Holabird,  S.  B 658,673,693,694,719,727,729 

Holcomb,  R.  E 498, 055, 058 

Houston,  D.  C 208,726 


INDEX. 


1145 

Page. 


Banks,  Nathaniel  P. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Huggins,  C 200,614,633 

Irwin,  Richard  B 653 

Lincoln,  Abraham - 1096 

Palmer,  James  S 316 

Pemberton,  John  C 732, 740 

Porter,  David  D 312 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 688, 691,718, 1098 

Robinson,  Harai 652, 1103 

Shepley,  George  F * 1097 

Sherman,  T.  W 193, 196, 615, 663, 672, 692, 696, 699, 702, 703, 715 

Smith,  Elisha  B 709 

Stancel,  Jesse 647 

Storrs,  Sam.  John  665 

Suboureau,  Mr 1101 

War  Department,  U.  S 612,629,642,657,669,676 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 326,327,626,636,637,655,681,727 

Instructions  to.  Communications  from  Army  Headquarters 590 

Mentioned 198,207, 

226, 231,  247,  248,  262,  269,  270,  280, 301, 302, 308, 318, 327, 330, 331, 333, 

341,342,  347,  350,  361,  372,  378,  387,465,494,590,614,627,643,645,646, 
657,679,  693,  707-709,711,712,719,  886,  895,  899,  902,  904,923,943,956, 
958,  981,  1036,  1041-1043,  1045,  1046,  1050,  1056,  1059,  1062,  1079,  1084 
Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  29,  609. 

Orders  in  cases  of 

Abandoned  and  captured  property 643 

Churches 624 

Collection  of  debts 1099 

Confiscation  Act 611 

Corps  and  Headquarters  flags 678 

New  Orleans  City  Railroad  checks 625 

Oaths  of  allegiance 699 

Provisions  for  the  poor  and  destitute 643, 1111 

Public  property,  etc 623 

Registered  enemies 710 

Scandalous  publications,  etc 615 

Sequestered  Property 643 

Slaves 678 

Trade  and  Intercourse 630,643,690,1115 

U.  S.  Treasury  Notes 690 

Proclamations  of. 

Gulf  Department.  To  the  people  and  troops  of  the 624 

Louisiana.  To  the  people  of 619 

Proposition  to  planters 616 

Reports  of. 

. Atchafalaya  River  and  Bayou  Plaquemine,  La.  Operations  on,  Feb- 
ruary 12-28,  1863  240,242,243 

Galveston,  Tex.  Recapture  of,  by  Confederates,  Jan.  1,  1863 199,200 

Port  Hudson,  La.  Operations  against  and  about,  March  7-27,  1863.  251,257 

Teche,  Bayou,  La.  Engagement  on,  January  14,  1863 233 

West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  April  9-May  14,  1863 294, 

296, 298, 305, 306, 309, 311, 313, 314, 316, 318 
611,1109 


Staff.  Announcements  of 


1146 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Bankston,  W.  W.  Mentioned 125 

Barataria  (291},  U.  S.  S. 

Attack  on,  April  7,  1863.  Report  of  Gadi  Herren 291 

(See  also  Sherman  to  Irwin,  p.  699.) 

Mentioned 245, 281, 291, 679, 680, 699, 70Ci 

Bard,  Samuel.  Mentioned 82, 809 

Bargie,  L.  A.  Mentioned 23C 

Barlow,  T.  C.  Mentioned 106S| 

Barnard,  J.  G. 

Memorandums. 

Fort  Jackson,  La 413 

Fort  Saint  Philip,  La 415 

Mentioned - 413 

Barnes,  James.  Mentioned 713 

Barnes,  J.  T.  M.  Mentioned 82, 107, 390 

Barnett,  Captain.  Mentioned 936 

Barnett,  T.  R.  Mentioned 944 

Barney,  Joseph  N.  Mentioned 950,959,1030,1035,1053,1054 

Barnwell,  William  W.,  jr.  Mentioned 113 

Barrels  Landing,  La.  Expedition  to,  April  21,  1863.  Report  of  Justus  W. 

Blanchard 338 


(See  also  report  of  Banks,  p.  299.) 

Barriere  Brothers.  Mentioned 

Barrot,  C.  L.  Mentioned .... 

Barrow,  Alexander.  Mentioned  

Barry,  John.  Mentioned 

Barry,  Robert  L.  Mentioned  

Barstow,  J.  L.  Mentioned 

Bartlett,  E.  W.  Mentioned.-; 

Bartlett,  G.  W.  Mentioned 

Bartlett,  William  F.  Mentioned 

Bartley,  Johnson  & Co.  Mentioned 

Barton,  John  T.  Mentioned 

Barrett,  Richard.  Mentioned 

Bassett,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Bassett,  Chauncey  J.  Mentioned 

Bates,  Joseph.  Mentioned 

Bates,  Moses. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler  

Mentioned - 

Bates,  Samuel.  Mentioned 

Bath,  City  of,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Baton  Rouge,  La. 

Augur,  Christopher  C.,  assigned  to  command  at 

Burning  of  State  House  at,  December  28, 1862. 

Board  of  officers 

Appointed  to  examine  into  cause  of 

Proceedings  and  report  of 

Statement  of  Mr.  Charrotte 

Defenses  of.  Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 

(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  548.) 


588 

1062 

106,107 

236 j 

1068 

236 

498 

70 

712 

541 

403 

167, 234, 236, 362 

753 

68 

...  149,838,854 

553 

553 

157 

608 


..  *630 

. 630 

. 632 

544 

545, 546 


INDEX. 


1147 


Baton  Rouge,  La.— Continued. 

Engagement  at,  August  5,  1862. 

Casualties.  Returns  of 

Confederate  troops 

Union  troops 

Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 

Breckinridge,  John  C 

Butler,  Benjamiu  F 

Cahill,  Thomas  W - 

Davis,  Jefferson 

Dudley,  N.  A.  M . 

Holbrook,  W.  C 

Phelps,  J.  W 

Vermont,  Governor  of 

(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  559.) 

Congratulatory  orders.  Benjamin  F.  Butler 

Court  of  Inquiry. 

Ordered  to  investigate  conduct  of  7th  N.  H.  Vols 

Proceedings,  findings,  etc 

Reports  of 

Allen,  H.  W 

Bean,  Sidney  A 

Bowman,  J.  H 

Breaux,  Gustavus  A 

Breckinridge,  John  C 

Buckner,  John  A 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 

Bynum,  Thomas 

Cahill,  Thomas  W 

Carruth,  William  W 

Clarke,  Charles  E 

Cofer,  M.  H 

Crossland,  Edward 

Dudley,  N.  A.  M 

Edwards,  Jeptha 

Fitz  Gibbons,  Richard 

Fullam,  Volney  S 

Goodwin,  Edward 

Grimsley,  James 

Hunter,  S.  E 

Manning,  Charles  H 

Millett,  John  H 

Nickerson,  Frank  S 

Robertson,  J.  W 

Ruggles,  Daniel 

Semmes,  O.  J 

Shields,  T - 

Smith,  T.  B - 

Snodgrass,  John 

Topp,  H.  E 

Trull,  George  G 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 

Whittemore,  Horace  O 


Page. 


...  82,93 

51 

47 

55 

..  46,48 
55, 61,62 
14 
47 

46 

47 

47 

...  41,42 

48 

...  48-50 

...  100 

75 

97 

. 101,103 

76 

83 
39 

...  105 

...  54,55 
64 

...  67 

98 

99 
58 

84 

71 
69 
96 

72 

. ..  102 
63 

...  86 
69 

...  93,95 
90 

...  107 

...  104 

89 

85 
88 
62 

...  51,53 
66 


1148 


INDEX. 


Baton  Rouge,  La. — Continued. 

Engagement  at,  August  5,  1862. 

Reports  of 

Wickliffe,  J.  C 

(See  also  reports  of  Van  Dorn , pp.  14,  16-18.) 
Evacuation  of,  and  skirmish  at,  August  20-21,  1862. 
Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 

Clark,  B.  W 

Ruggles,  Daniel 

(See  also  Butler  to  Halleck , p.  555;  Butler  to  Stanton , p.552.) 
Reports  of 

De  Baun,  J 

De  Russy,  J.  A 

Ruggles,  Daniel 

Expedition  from,  June  7-9,  1862. 

Communications  from  Benjamin  F.  Butler 

Report  of  N.  A.  M.  Dudley  

Operations  about,  July  27-August  6,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Breckinridge,  John  C 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 

Davis,  Jefferson 

Ruggles,  Daniel 

War  Department,  C.  S 

Wingheld,  J.  H 

Reports  of 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 

Williams,  Thomas,  May  26-August  2 

(See  also 


Page. 


87 


552, 553 
. 801 
. 803 


130 

130 

129 

24 


790,795,1124  j 

34,543 

794 

790 

794 

792 

14,15  i 

33,34  | 


Aug.  5,  1862.  Baton  Rouge , La.  Engagement  at. 
6,  1862.  Arkansas,  C.  S.  S.  Destruction  of.) 
Projected  movement  against.  Communications  from 


Ruggles,  Daniel 775-777 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 775,776 


(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  518.) 

Reconnaissances  from. 

May  12,  1863.  Communications  from  N.  A.  M.  Dudley 728 

May  13,  1863.  Report  of  N.  A.  M.  Dudley  . .. 409 

Reoccupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  December  17,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Banks,  N.  P 609 

Beall,  W.  N.  R 901 

(See  also  Banks  to  Halleck,  p.  613.) 

Report  of  Cuvier  Grover 191 

Skirmish  at,  August  20,  1862.  (See  Baton  Rouge,  La.  Evacuation  of,  and 
skirmish  at,  August  20-21,  1862.) 

Battle,  Noble  & Co.  Mentioned 541 

Bauch,  H.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Biegel  Settlement,  Tex.,  Citizens  of.) 

Bauer,  Frederick.  Mentioned 540 

Baugh,  William.  Mentioned 73,75 

Bayliss,  W.  H.  Mentioned 773 

Baylor,  John  R. 

Assignments  to  command 858 


INDEX. 


1149 


/ <-*.  Page. 

Baylor,  John  R.  -Continued. 

Mentioned  . . . 218, 597, 599-601, 606, 683, 851,  856-859, 894-896, 902, 918, 940-942, 955 
^For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Arizona , Governor  of.) 

Bayou  City,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 212,215-217,829-831,908,974 

Bayou  Sara,  La.  Affairs  at 

August  10,  1862.  Report  of  Charles  N.  Rowley 129 

August  23,  1862.  Report  of  H.  C.  Whiteman 131 

Baxter,  Judge.  Mentioned 823 

Beagnot,  D.  J.  Mentioned “ 540 

Beall,  Lloyd  J.  Mentioned 501 

Beall,  William  N.  R. 

Assignments  to  command 758, 768, 840 

Correspondence  with 

Gardner,  Franklin 275 

Pemberton,  John  C 839, 841, 842, 859, 886, 901, 913, 1081 

Ruggles,  Daniel - 802, 807, 839 

War  Department,  C.  S - 841 

Mentioned 141, 188, 274, 276, 758, 768, 

803,  804,  840,  844,  845,  859,8/3,934,965,971,1000,1032,1037,1061,1071 

Beals,  Jennie,  Ship.  Mentioned 073 

Bean,  Sidney  A. 

Mentioned 56, 136, 299, 332, 339, 342, 713 

Reports  of 

Baton  Rouge,  La.  Engagement  at,  August  5,  1862 — 75 

Boyce’s  Bridge,  Cotile  Bayou,  La.  Expedition  to,  May  14, 1863 346 

Pkujuemine  Bayou,  La.  Expedition  to,  April  22-23,  1863 344,345 

Beard,  H.  H.  Mentioned 903 

Beard,  J.  H.  Mentioned 902 

Beaumont,  Tex.  Destruction  of  railroad  depot  near,  October  2,  1862.  Re- 
port of  A.  W.  Spaight 146 

Beaumont,  T.  W.  Mentioned ' 1933 

Beauregard,  Port,  La.  Attack  on,  May  10,  1863 4 

Beauregard,  G.  T. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 6,734,810 

Dahlgren,  C.  G 736,744 

Forney,  John  H 783 

Gotheil,  Ed 799 

Harris,  D.  B 812 

Huger,  John  M 792, 793 

Lovell,  Mansfield 735,741,746,752 

Ruggles,  Daniel 742 

Souffi,  Pierre 734 

Mentioned 6, 449, 461, 467, 552, 555, 734, 739, 746, 749, 752, 756, 764, 765, 774, 1071 

Beckett,  Thomas.  Mentioned 356,357 

Beckwith,  Edward  G. 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 697 

Mentioned - 611, 644 

Bedford,  D.  M.  Mentioned 962 

Bee,  Steamer.  Mentioned 679, 1102 

Bee,  The.  Order  of  Butler  suppressing 421 

Bee,  Hamilton  P. 

Assignments  to  command 879 

Correspondence  with 

Benavides,  Santos 1940 


1150 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Bee,  Hamilton  P. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Blucher,  Felix  A 828 

Buchel,  A 923 

Debr.ay,  X.  B 878 

Hubert,  Paul  O 829 

Holmes,  Tbeopbilus  H 881 

Magruder,  John  B 922, 933, 

950,  964,  965,  973,  979,  991,  1004,  1006, 1012, 1013, 1016, 1024, 1056, 1077 

Tamaulipas,  Governor  of 966, 

975,992,994,996,998,1006,  1007,  1025,1044,  1051,  1127-1130,  1132-1135 

Mentioned 815, 851, 858, 879, 883, 900, 909, 912, 931-933, 946, 949, 950, 

960,961,986,988,997,998,  1001,  1004,  1005,  1018,  1030,  1031,  1034,  1078 
Report  of  bombardment  of  Lavaca,  Tex.,  October  31-November  1,  1862...  18L 

Behan,  T.  W.  Mentioned 82 

Belgium  Consul,  New  Orleans,  La.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Joseph 
Deynoodt.) 

Belknap,  S.  E.  Mentioned 541 

Bell,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 238, 974 

Bell,  A.  J.  Correspondence  with  J.  P.  Flewellen 887,925 

Bell,  Charles  J.  Mentioned 1032,1061 

Bell,  H.  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Debray,  X.  B 222,223 

Magruder,  John  B . 221,222,224 

Mentioned  216, 220, 225-227 , 957 

Proclamation  declaring  Galveston  and  the  coast  of  Texas  under  blockade.  659 

Bell,  J.  J.  Mentioned 405 

Bell,  Joseph  M.  Mentioned 552,553,593,644 

Bell  & Bouligny.  Mentioned. - 542 

Bellam,  Philip.  Mentioned 495 

Belleville,  Steamer.  Mentioned * 1192 

Belle  Wood,  Ship.  Mentioned 673 

Bellino,  John.  Mentioned 185 

Bellocq,  Noblom  8c  Co.  Mentioned 541 

Belton,  J.  F.  Mentioned 1909 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  E.  Kirby  Smith.) 


Benachi,  N. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 479 

Mentioned 479 

Benavides,  Refugio.  Mentioned - 221,851,966 

Benavides,  Santos. 

Correspondence  with  Hamilton  P.  Bee 1940 

Mentioned. 221, 851, 992, 1044, 1045, 1052, 1053, 1129, 1131, 1135 

Benedict,  Lew. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  W.  Sherman 193, 196 

Mentioned 608, 634 

Benedict,  M.  D.  Mentioned 235 

Benew,  A.  Mentioned 541 

Benjamin,  J.  P.  Correspondence  with 

Taylor,  Richard 188 

War  Department,  C.  S 18° 


Mentioned 869, 981, 1004 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  C.  S.) 
Benjamin,  Solomon.  Mentioned 


502 


INDEX.  1151 

Page. 

Bennett,  W.  K.  Mentioned 944 

Bentley,  D.,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 245 

Benton,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 22, 311 

Beraud,  Desire.  Mentioned.-. 398 

Berault,  St.  M.  Mentioned 796 

Bernard,  M.  Mentioned 344 

Berry,  Captain.  Mentioned 609 

Bertrand, . Mentioned 772, 773 

Berwick,  Oscar.  Mentioned 1090 

Berwick  Bay,  Steamer.  Capture  of,  by  tlie  Queen  of  the  West,  Feb.  3,  1863.  3 

Berwick  Bay,  La.  Naval  operations  on,  November  1-6,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 185 

Benjamin,  J.  P 185 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 183 

Taylor,  Richard 188 

(See  also  Butler  to  Weitzel,  p.  587.) 

Reports  of 

Buchanan,  Thomas  McKean 183 

Faries,  T.  A 1087 

Fuller,  E.  W 185 

Bethel  Place,  La.  (See  Bisland,  Fort,  La.) 

Bibb,  W.  C.  (For  correspondence,  see  New  Orleans,  La.  Administrators  of 
Charity  Hospital  of.) 

Bickham,  A.  C.  Mentioned 104,790 

Bickler,  S.  S.  Mentioned 540 

Bickmore,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 45,70 

Biddle,  James  C.  Mentioned 33 

Biegel  Settlement,  Tex.,  Citizens  of.  Correspondence  with  W.  G.  Webb. ..  928 

Bill,  A.  J.  Mentioned 955 

Binford,  J.  R.  Mentioned 81,1033 

Bio  Bio,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1102 

Bird,  Captain.  Mentioned 80 

Birge,  Henry  W. 

Mentioned 167, 174, 360, 362, 366, 367, 371-373, 378, 381 , 385, 444, 634, 7 14 

Report  of  engagement  at  Irish  Bend,  La.,  April  14, 1863 383 

Biscoe  & Simms.  Mentioned 541 

Bisland,  Fort,  La.  Engagement  at,  April  12-13, 1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of.  Union  troops 319 

Communications  from  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 341 

(See  also  BanTcs  to  Farragut , p.  707.) 

Reports  of 

Arnold,  Richard 320 

Bainbridge,  Edmund  C 328 

Bryan,  Michael  K 355 

Carruth,  William  W 322 

Duryea,  Richard  C 334,336 

Gooding,  Oliver  P • 346 

Haley,  Eben  D 335 

Hopkins,  W.  S.  B 348 

Ingraham,  Timothy  337 

Kimball,  John  W..«.„„ 353 

Mack,  Albert  G 322 

Morton,  John  E 336 


1152 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Bisland,  Fort,  La.  Engagement  at,  April  12-13,  1863 — Continued. 

Eeports  of 

Paine,  Halbert  E 339 

Peck,  Frank  H 328 

Eodman,  William  L 350 

(See  also  West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  April  9-May  14, 1863.  Eeports  of 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P.  Mouton,  Alfred.  Taylor,  Richard. 

Emory,  William  H.  Russell,  E.  H.  Weitzel,  Godfrey.) 

Paries,  T.  A.  Smith,  E.  Kirby. 

Bisland,  John  R.  Mentioned 451,769 

Bissell,  George  P.  Mentioned 383, 626, 714 

Bittner,  Mr.  Mentioned 117 

Bixbee,  Stephen  D.  Mentioned 329 

Black,  Daniel.  Mentioned 1123 

Blackman,  A.  Mentioned 45,71 

Black  Prince,  Ship.  Mentioned 470 

Blackstone,  Steamer.  Mentioned  609 

Blake,  Asa  S. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 514 

Mentioned 514 

Blake,  H.  C.  Mentioned 647 

Blakeslee,  Captain.  Mentioned 114 

Blanc,  Jules  L.  Mentioned - 865 

Blanchard,  Albert  G. 

Assignments  to  command - 760,979 

Correspondence  with 

McKoin,  J 953 

Pargoud,  J.  F 954 

Euggles,  Daniel 821 

Taylor,  Eichard 954 

War  Department,  C.  S 779, 790 

Mentioned 332,760,786,805,867,914,922,952,954,963,979,983,984 

Blanchard,  Justus  W. 

Mentioned 256,299,353,386,713 

Eeport  of  expedition  to  Barre’s  Landing,  La.,  April  21, 1863 338 

Blanco,  Ojo.  Mentioned 228 

Bland,  Ben.  Correspondence  with 

Mazereau,A 495 

Sould,  Pierre 496 

Bland,  J.  T.  Mentioned 189 

Blasco  de  Garay,  H.  C.  M.  S.  Mentioned 612 

Bledsoe,  A.  T.  (For  correspondence  as  Assistant  Secretary,  see  War  Depart- 
ment, C.  S.) 

Bledsoe,  H.  M.  Mentioned 1633 

Blockading  Squadron,  Officers  of  the.  Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F. 

Butler 584 

Blodget,  George.  Mentioned - 71 

Bloomer,  Steamer.  Capture  of, December  — , 1862.  Eeport  of  Neal  Dow 629 
Bloomfield,  Benjamin. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  L.  Webb 942 

Mentioned 218,881,969 

Blount,  T.  W.  Mentioned 82,161 

Blount,  William.  Mentioned 64 

Blucher,  Felix  A.  Correspondence  with  Hamilton  P.  Bee 828 

Blue  Hammock,  Steamer.  Mentioned 343,344,681 

Boardman,  Frederic;  A.  Mentioned 23,24,249 


INDEX. 


1153 


Page. 

Boardman,  Mary  A.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 202, 203, 209 

Board  of  Officers.  Burning  of  State  House  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  Dec.  28, 1862. 

Appointed  to  examine  into  cause  of 630 

Proceedings  and  report 630 

Boeuf  Bayou,  La. 

Expedition  to,  April  29-30,  1863.  (See  Chicotville  and  Bayou  Boeuf,  La.) 

Skirmish  at,  April  22,  1863.  (See  report  of  William  Dwight,  jr.,  p.  367.) 

Bogart,  James  H. 

Correspondence  with  Cuvier  Grover 197 

Mentioned 196, 198, 199, 256 

Reports  of  affairs  at  Plaquemine,  La.,  December  31, 1862-January  3,  1863.  192, 193 

Bogert,  Edward  S.  Mentioned 403 

Boggess,  W.  H.  Mentioned 82 

Boggs,  W.  R.  Mentioned 1009,1058 

(For  correspondence  as  Chief  of  Staff,  see  E.  Kirby  Smith.) 

Boissat,  Armand.  Mentioned 757 

Bolivar  Peninsula,  Tex.,  embraced  in  District  of  Galveston 820 

Bomegass, — . Mentioned 549 

Bonaparte,  Napoleon.  Mentioned * 799 

Bond,  Howard.  Mentioned - 453, 457 

Bond,  John  F.  Mentioned 114 

Bond,  Nelson  F.  Mentioned • 354,357 

Bond,  W.  Mentioned 453 

Bonford,  P.  E.  Mentioned 396 

Bonfouca,  Bayou,  La.  Skirmish  at,  November  21, 1862.  Report  of  A.  R.  Witt.  188 
Bonito  Rio,  N.  Mex.  Skirmish  on  the,  March  27,  1863.  (See  Indians  in  New 
Mexico.  Operations  against,  January  4-May  8,  1863. ) 

Bonnet  Carr6,  La.  Skirmish  at,  October  19,  1862 2 

Boone,  H.  H.  Mentioned 398 

Booth,  E.  Mentioned 540 

Borne,  Paul.  Mentioned 37 

Bosworth,  Mr.  Mentioned 541 

Bosworth,  A.  W.  Mentioned 389 

Bouligny,  Mr.  Mentioned 471 

Boutte  Station,  La.  Affair  at,  September  5,  1862.  Reports  of 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 133 

Thomas,  Stephen 134 

Bovington,  John  A.  Mentioned 45, 73 

Bowen,  James. 

Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 1107 

Cooley,  James  C 1106 

Mentioned 647 

Bowen,  John  S. 

Assignments  to  command 801 

Mentioned 80, 769, 800, 801, 803, 1047, 1070, 1121 

Bowie,  George  M.  Mentioned 930 

Bowie,  George  W. 

Correspondence  with  James  H.  Carleton 605 

Mentioned 601,604 

Bowman,  James  H. 

Mentioned 81,90,93 

Report  of  engagement  at  BatoD  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862  97 

73  B R— VOL  XV 


1154 


INDEX. 


Page 

Boyce’s  Bridge,  Cotile  Bayou,  La.  Expedition  to,  May  14,  1863.  Report 

of  Sidney  A.  Bean 34' 

Boyd,  Samuel.  Mentioned 78,81,90, 102, 105-10 1 

Boyle,  Patrick  H.  Mentioned 23<! 

Boyle,  Roger  T.  Mentioned 90>  104>  10| 

Boyles,  William.  Mentioned - 1061 

Brackenridge,  J.  T.  Mentioned 851’ 108' 

Bradbury,  Albert  W.  Mentioned 234-23 

Bradford,  Major.  Mentioned 97 j 

Bradford,  James  H.  Mentioned 32 

Bradford,  J.  L.  Mentioned 1032,106 

Bradford,  R.  H.  Mentioned 392> 39:’ 

Bradfute,  W.  R.  Mentioned 103 

Bradley,  Alfred. 

Mentioned 7t| 

Report  of  expedition  from  Ponchatoula,  La.,  July  5-8, 1862 lJ 

Bradley,  John.  Mentioned - 1 

Bradley,  Theodore.  Mentioned v 360,366,367,38 

Bradley,  Wilson  & Co.  Mentioned 54 

Bragg,  Braxton. 

Assignments  to  command I 

Correspondence  with  j 

Forney,  John  118. 11 

Ruggles,  Daniel - 7®4» 7^2’ 7^*’  J'l 

Mentioned 

159, 163, 166,  555,  588,  735,  761-763,  765,  766,  771,  778,  784,  785,  /94,  81 

Braley,  Lester  E.  Mentioned 

Brand,  Frederick  B.  Mentioned 

Brander,  Chambliss  & Co.  Mentioned 54 

Brannan,  J.  M. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler “j 

Mentioned 3’j 

Brashear,  Dennis.  Mentioned 

Brashear,  John.  Mentioned - 

Breaux  Bridge  and  Opelousas,  La.  Expedition  to,  April  17-21,  1863.  Re-  jj 

port  of  A.  Power  Gallway *1 

Breaux,  Gustavus  A. 

Mentioned 78,81,90,92,100,106,7  : 

Reports  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862 161,  U 

Breazeale,  W.  W.  Mentioned 

Breckinridge,  J.  Cabell.  Mentioned | ^ 

Breckinridge,  John  C. 

Brigade  organization  of  division  of,  announced - “ 

Correspondence  with  ^ 

Cahill,  Thomas  1 1 

Helm,  B.  * ^ 

Paine,  Halbert  550»®| 

11* 

Preston,  William 

Statham,  W.  

Thompson,  J.  * -q 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff [ 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 786» 797’ 1 


INDEX.  1155 

Page. 

Breckinridge,  John  C.— Continued. 


i.,  A*/,  11,  HI,  U1,  Of,  i7,6,  I7U,  W,  OOU, 

544,  546,  548,  550, 558, 761, 762,  769, 771,  786,  787, 794, 797,  803, 1120, 1122 
Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  2,  1121;  No.  4,  790;  No.  20,  795;  Nos. 

23  , 25,  800. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  108,  801. 

Reports  of 

Baton  Rouge,  La.  Engagement  at,  August  5,  1862 76 

Port  Hudson,  La.  Occupation  of,  August  — , 1862  76 

Sanitary  condition  of  Army  of.  Report  of  J.'  W.  Thompson 1125 

Bredow,  Richard.  Mentioned 787,790 

Breeden,  R.  R.  Mentioned 107 

Breese,  K.  R.  Mentioned 560 

Brennan,  John.  Mentioned 329 

Brennan,  Thomas.  Mentioned 236 

Brent,  J.  L.  Mentioned 389  396 

Breshwood,  John  G.  Mentioned 499 

Brewer,  Lieutenant-Colonel.  Mentioned 80 

Brewin,  Captain.  Mentioned 1131 

Briggs,  Charles.  Mentioned  541 

Briggs,  Joseph  B.  Mentioned 236  714 

Brindley,  James.  Mentioned 1123 

Bringier,  M.  D.  Mentioned 396 

Bristol,  H.  B.  Mentioned . 574 

British  Consul,  Galveston,  Tex.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Arthur  T. 

Lynn. ) 

British  Consul,  New  Orleans,  La.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  George 
Coppell.) 

Broadwell,  I.  M.  Mentioned 454 

Broad  well,  W.  A.  Mentioned 958 

Broadwell  & Haynes.  Mentioned 541 

Brooklyn,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 22, 206, 223, 225, 428, 647, 957, 1034, 1053 

Brooks,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 44  57 

3rooks,  James  C.  Mentioned _ 521 

Brossat,  Armand.  Mentioned 757 

3rother,  A.  Correspondence  with  James  M.  Putnam 496 

3rower,  George  C.  Mentioned ’ * *"*  54i 

3rown,  Major.  Mentioned 79,81,84,801 

3rown,  Alexander  J.  Mentioned 1032, 1061, 1071, 1076 

3rown,  Benjamin  K.  Mentioned 37 

Brown,  G.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 188  700 

3rown,  Isaac  N. 

Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles 746, 749, 751, 762, 765, 770 

Mentioned 7, 15, 19, 959, 1122, 1123 

Jrown,  J.  B.  Mentioned 362 

Jrown,  J.  H.  Mentioned  . . r 43, 45, 56, 59, 60, 66, 455 

Jrown,  J.  M.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1102 

Jrown,  John.  Mentioned 441  488 

Irown,  John  A.  Mentioned 1009 

Jrown,  Joseph  E.  Mentioned 871,947 

Jrown,  Milton.  Correspondence  with 

Buckner,  Simon  B 937 

Pemberton,  John  C 937 


1156 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Brown,  R.  R. 

Correspondence  with  X.  B.  Debray 846 

Mentioned 149,851,949,1080 

Brown,  Samuel  B.  Mentioned 217 

Brown,  T.  Winthrop.  Mentioned 107 


Brown,  Uriah  T.  Mentioned 


18 


Brownell,  S.  Mentioned 128 

Bruce,  Frank.  Mentioned 45, 64, 65,  322 

Bruner,  E.  D.  Mentioned .. 629 

Bryan,  Surgeon.  Mentioned - 19 

Bryan,  B.  F.,  Mayor.  Mentioned 602 

Bryan,  B.  F.,  Captain.  Mentioned 1038,1062 

Bryan,  G.  M. 

Correspondence  with  Theophilus  Hr  Holmes 833 

Mentioned 832, 843 

Bryan,  James  Ferry.  Correspondence  with  E.  S.  Rugeley 930 

Bryan,  Michael  K. 

Mentioned 256, 336, 346, 348, 645 

Report  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland,  La.,  April  12-13,  1863  355 

Bryant,  T.  D Mentioned 455 

Buchanan,  Franklin.  Mentioned 959 

Buchanan,  Thomas  McK. 

Mentioned 124-126, 140, 183, 234, 235, 587, 588, 637 

Report  of  naval  operations  on  Berwick  Bay,  La.,  November  1-6,  1862 183 

Buchel,  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Bee,  Hamilton  P 923 

Debray,  X.  B 912 

Tamaulipas,  Mex.,  Governor  of 924 

Mentioned 920,987,988 

Buchler,  Ferdinand.  Mentioned 322 

Buckner,  D.  F.  Mentioned 845 

Buckner,  John.  Mentioned 37 

Buckner,  John  A. 

Mentioned 78, 79, 88, 89, 99 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862  83 

Buckner,  Simon  B. 

Assignments  to  command 899, 905, 1055 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 904, 1055, 1069, 1070 

Alabama,  Governor  of 964 

Brown,  Milton 937 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 938 

War  Department,  C.  S 1035, 1036 

Mentioned 899, 947, 964, 1001, 1048, 1056, 1059, 1060, 1068, 1077 

Staff.  Announcements  of 905 

Buell,  Don  Carlos.  Mentioned 169, 424, 494, 519, 555 

Buford,  A. 

Assignments  to  command 273 

Mentioned 273,274,1005,1032,1033,1036,1037 

Buisson,  B.  Mentioned 733 

Bulkley,  Charles  S.  Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 652 

Bulletin,  The.  Order  of  Butler,  suppressing 533 

Bullitt.  Cuthbert.  Mentioned 515 


INDEX. 


1157 


Page. 

Bullock,  William  W.  Mentioned 410,712 

Bunnell,  Daniel  W.  Mentioned 323 

Burbank,  Mr.  Mentioned 554 

Burbank,  F.  G.  Mentioned 187,245 

Burbridge,  J.  N.,  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

Burbridge,  Stephen  G.  Mentioned 983 

Burch,  Captain.  Mentioned 146 

Burdett,  O.  S.  Mentioned 187 

Burgess,  James  W.  Mentioned 126 

Burgess,  John  D. 

Correspondence  with  William  R.  Scurry 1065 

Mentioned . . 1064, 1065, 1075 

Burke,  J.  D.  Mentioned 178 

Burke,  R.  E.  Mentioned 179,804,919 

Burke,  R.  H.  Mentioned 131 

Burlingame,  William.  Mentioned 892 

Burnet,  James.  Mentioned 1032, 1061 

Burnett,  William  L.  Mentioned 107 

Burnside,  A.  E.  Mentioned 904 

Burrell,  Charles  B.  Mentioned 204 

Burrell,  Isaac  S. 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 201, 204 

Mentioned 199, 200, 202, 206-209, 224, 225, 227, 957 

Statement  of.  Surrender  of  42d  Massachusetts  Infantry  at  Galveston,  Tex., 

January  1, 1863  226 

Bursley,  A.  A.  Mentioned 18 

Burt,  C.  A.  Mentioned 362 

Burt, William  L.  Mentioned.. 200 

(For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  A.  J.  Hamilton.) 

Burton,  Steamer.  Mentioned 529 

Burton,  James  H.  Mentioned 895 

Burton,  W.  D.  Mentioned 767 

Bush,  Louis.  Mentioned 397,399 

Bustamente,  Juan.  Mentioned 980, 1004 

Butler,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 673,907 

Butler,  Benjamin  F. 

Address  to  soldiers  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf 610 

Congratulatory  orders. 

Baton  Rouge,  La.  Engagement  at,  August  5, 1862 41, 42 

Pass  Manchac,  La.  Skirmish  at,  June  17, 1862  529 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 46, 493, 527, 559 

Army  Headquarters. ...  47, 158, 160-162, 544, 555, 557, 558, 564, 572, 589, 601, 602 

Arnold,  L.  G 526 

Bates,  Moses 553 

Benachi,  N 479 

Blake,  Asa  S 514 

Blockading  Squadron,  Officers  of  the 584 

Brannan,J.  M 458 

Callejon,  Imanuel 479 

Coppell,  George 479,517 

Deynoodt,  Joseph 479 

Dinsmore,  W.  B 514 

Dow,  Neal 522,584 


1158 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Butler,  Benjamin  F. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Durant,  Thomas  J 467, 468 

Farragut,  D.  G 183, 457, 537, 538, 547, 548, 564 

French,  Jonas  H 469 

Haggerty,  P 445 

Halleck,  Henry  W 530 

Johnson,  Reverdy 521 


Keith,  John  A. 


450 


Kruttschnitt,  John 575 

Lanata,  Joseph 479 

Lincoln,  Ahraham 532 

Lovell,  Mansfield 463 

McCormick,  Charles 585 

Mejan,  E 427, 479, 516, 533, 549 

Mercer,  W.  Newton 438, 565| 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 568, 569 

New  Orleans,  La. , Administrators  of  Charity  Hospital  of- 512 

New  Orleans,  La.,  City  Council  of 462 

New  Orleans,  La.,  City  Treasurer  of 563) 

New  Orleans  Daily  Picayune,  Editors  of 525 

New  Orleans,  La.,  Mayor  and  City  Council  of 427 

Opelousas,  La.,  Officer  commanding  C.  S.  forces  at 554 

Page,  Edward,  jr 444, 446, 464 

Paine  Halbert  E 544, 550, 552,  553j 

Phelps,  J.  W 442,443,446,464,486,525,534-536,5421 

Piaget,  A 470! 

Pierce,  L.,jr 588,591 

Porter,  David  D 464,547,560 

Porter,  W.  D - 537,567 

Quartermaster- General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 470,571 

Reichard,  A 575 

Reynaud  (Admiral) 

Rozier,  J.  Ad 467, 468 

Ruggles,  Daniel 519 

Santa  Maria  Clara 563 

Shepley,  George  F.,  et  al 462 

Smith,  Robert  K 445j 

Stafford,  Spencer  H 526 

State  Department,  U.  S 473,518,533,608 

Taylor,  Richard 565 

Teryaghi,  B 479 

Treasury  Department,  U.  S" 491, 499, 513, 582 

Vermont,  Governor  of 48 

War  Department,  U.  S 422, 

439, 447, 465, 471, 478, 485, 493-495, 500,  502, 515, 518, 521, 534, 543, 
548,  552,  559, 563, 573, 578, 581. 585, 588, 589, 591,592, 602, 603, 611 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 162, 164, 171, 172, 460, 543-545, 587 

Williams,  Thomas 24-26,31,34 

Denounced  as  a felon  by  Jefferson  Davis 906 

Mentioned 6, 13, 22, 34, 47, 135, 172, 201, 436, 447, 450, 452, 457, 466, 

468,473,479,491,  494,  497,509,516-518,521,  522,  526-528,  535,545,547, 
548,  559, 563, 564,  567,  568,  575,  578, 581 , 583, 585,  587-592, 601, 602, 612, 
613,  618,  628,  037,  638,  640,  642,  648,649,653,654,743,750,753,754.757, 
760,766,773,  774,801,809,821,  833,836,  861,  862,  899,904,  906,907, 1096 


INDEX. 


1159 


Page. 

Butler,  Benjamin  F.—  Continued. 

Orders  in  cases  of 

Adams  Express  Company 514 

Andrews,  Jolin  W 511 

Bee,  The 421 

Bulletin,  The 533 

Citizens’  Bank,  deposits  in 475 

Confederate  Currency 426,437,438 

Confiscation  act 571-573, 575, 576, 581 

Crescent,  The 421 

Daily  Advocate,  The - 595 

Davis’  fasting  proclamation 426 

Delta,  The 422 

Dividends,  etc * 518, 581 

Durand  vs.  Bank  of  Louisiana 472 

Estafette  du  Sud,  The 439 

Foreigners,  registration  of 571 

Keller,  Fidel 511 

Le  Beau,  Edgar 554 

Le  Beau,  Edward 554 

Mumford,  William  B 469 

New  Orleans  banks 526 

Oaths  of  Allegiance  and  Neutrality 483,484,491,492 

Officers,  Commissioned 591 

Phillips,  Philip,  Mrs 510 

Picayune,  The 525,533 

Provisions  for  the  poor  and  destitute. . . 425, 426, 447, 517, 538-542, 558, 572, 607 
Sequestration  of  Property. 

East  Louisiana 602 

West  Louisiana.  (La  Fourche  District) 592 

Smith,  Samuel,  & Co 513 

Soldiers’ families 589 

Walker,  George  Washington 554 

Women  of  New  Orleans 426 

Relieved  from  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf 611 

Reports  of 

Baton  Rouge,  La.  Engagement  at,  August  5, 1862 39 

Boutte  Station,  La.  Affair  at,  September  5, 1862 133 

Des  Allemands  Bayou,  La.  Affair  at,  September  4, 1862  133 

La  Fourche  District,  La.  Operations  in,  October  24-November  6, 1862.  158, 

160-162 

Pass  Manchac,  La.  Skirmish  at,  June  17, 1862 Ill 

Pass  Manchac  and  Ponchatoula,  La.  Expedition  to  and  skirmish, 

September  13-15, 1862 138 

Butler,  E.-G.  Mentioned 10,849 

Butler,  John  P.  Mentioned 16 

Butte-a-la-Rose,  La.  Capture  of,  by  Union  fleet, -April  20,  1863.  (See  reports 
of  Banks,  pp.  299, 306 ; Banks  to  Grant,  p.  303 ; Banks  to  Farragut, 
pp.  308,  707.) 

Butterfield,  F.  D. 

Correspondence  with  Godfrey  Weitzel 326 

Mentioned - 173, 237 , 326 

Byerly,  D.  C.  Mentioned 165 


1160 


INDEX. 


Page.  | 

Bynum,  Thomas. 

Mentioned 81 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5, 1862 105 

Byrd,  J.  M.  Mentioned 81,86 

Cable,  Isaac  C.  Mentioned 464 

C.  C.  Pinckney,  Schooner.  Mentioned 1025,1134 

Cage,  Duncan.  Mentioned 1048 

Cage,  John  B.  Mentioned 1062,1076 

Cahill,  Thomas  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Breckinridge,  John  C 55 

Dudley,  N.  A.  M 61,62 

Mentioned 40,  43, 53, 61-63, 71, 72, 544, 545, 602, 626-628 

Reports  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862 54,55 


Cairo,  111.,  Senior  Naval  Officer  at.  Correspondence  with  Navy  Depart- 


ment, U.  S 517 

Cajoude  Arivaypo,  N.  Mex.  Skirmish  at,  May  7, 1863.  (See  Indians  in  New 
Mexico.  Operations  against,  January  4-May  8,  1863. ) 

Caldwell,  Charles  H.  B.  Mentioned 26, 131 

Caldwell,  John  W.  Mentioned 78 

Caledonia,  La.  Skirmish  at,  May  10,  1863 4 

Calhoun,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 184, 


235, 290, 326, 358, 364, 371, 380, 460, 461, 564, 637, 694, 718 


California  Column.  Expedition  through  Arizona  to  Texas  and  New  Mexico, 

April  13-September  20,  1862.  Address  of  J.  H.  Carleton 571 

California  Troops.  Mentioned 

Cavalry — R egim ents : 1st,  229, 580, 596, 597, 604, 670, 721, 725 ; 2d,  604, 725. 

Infantry — Regiments : 1st,  580, 596, 597, 670, 721, 725;  4th,  577, 605;  5th,  228, 

577, 604, 605, 670, 715, 721, 725. 

Callejon,  Imanuel. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 479 

Mentioned 479 

Cambria,  Steamer.  Mentioned 201, 204, 205, 219, 935 

Camp,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 234,237 

Campbell,  J.  A.  (For  correspondence  as  Acting  Secretary,  see  War  Depart- 
ment, C.  S .) 

Campbell,  J.  T.  Mentioned 75 

Campbell,  Richard.  Mentioned 73, 75 

Campbell  & Strong.  Mentioned 541 

Canadian  River,  N.  Mez.  Expedition  to  the,  October  9-November  25, 1862. 

(See  Fort  Union , N.  Me x.  Expedition  from,  Octobei'  9 -November  25, 

1862.) 

Canby,  E.  R.  S.  Mentioned 576, 577' 

Caniffe,  H.  J. 

Correspondence  with  P.  R.  Tully 60& 

Mentioned 604 

Cantey,  James.  Mentioned : 1001,1068; 

Capers,  W.C.  Mentioned 10 

Capron,  J.  P.  Mentioned 331, 337 

Cardenas,  Steamer.  Case  of.  (See  Watson  to  Seward,  p.  567.) 

Carleton,  James  H. 

Address  to  troops  of  the  California  Column ....  574 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General's  Office,  U.  S.  A - „ , 576, 578, 597, 604,669, 670, 681, 724* 


INDEX. 


1161 


Page. 

Carleton,  James  H. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 604,723 

Bowie,  George  W 605 

Carson,  Christopher 579 

Chihuahua,  Mex. , Governor  of . 687,  701 

Colorado,  Governor  of 666 

Creel,  Reuben  W 70S 

New  Mexico,  Secretary  and  Acting  Governor  of 665 

West;  Joseph  R 580, 598, 599, 605, 7 15, 720, 721 

Wright,  George 604 

Mentioned 574, 596, 604, 634, 635, 642, 670, 674, 687, 725 

Report  of  operations  against  Indians  in  New  Mexico,  J anuary  4-May  8, 1863 . 227 

Carlton,  William  F.  Mentioned...: 729 

Carondelet,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned . 32 

Carpenter,  H.  Mentioned 120,122 

Carpenter,  Lewis  E.  Mentioned 235 

Carr,  John  F.,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 216,930 

Carr,  Joseph  P. 

Mentioned 1043 

Reports  of  subsistence  stores  on  hand  at  Port  Hudson,  La. 

March  23, 1863  1022 

April  15, 1863 1043 

April  30, 1863 1061 

Carrazal,  Jose  Ma.  Mentioned 998 

Carrington,  W.  T.  Mentioned . 217 

Carroll,  Hoy  & Co.  Mentioned . 541 

Carruth,  William  W. 

Mentioned 43, 45,  52,  56, 59, 60, 168, 169, 234-236, 450,  .454, 455, 650 

Reports  of 

Baton  Rouge,  La.  Engagement  at,  August  5,  1862 64 

Bisland,  Fort,  La.  Engagement  at,  April  12-13,  1863  322 

Carson,  Christopher. 

Correspondence  with  James  H.  Carleton 579 

Mentioned 227, 228, 574, 576, 577, 580, 596 

Carter,  A.  G.  Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles 777 

Carter,  George  W.  (Captafh.)  Mentioned 331,339 

Carter,  George  W.  (Colonel.) 

Correspondence  with  Paul  0.  Hubert 824 

Mentioned 822-824 

Carter,  J.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Mobile,  Ala.,  Committee  of  Safety  of .) 

Carter,  Oswald.  Mentioned 464 

Cary,  J.  M.  Mentioned 1069 

Casey,  Captain.  Mentioned 598 

Cassidy,  Michael.  . 

Mentioned 108, 373, 714 

Reports  of 

Milton,  Fla.  Expedition  to,  June  14-15,  1862 109 

West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  March  26-April  20,  1863 379 

Castle,  Mr.  Mentioned . 20,21,518 

Castle,  Henry,  jr.  Mentioned ..  519 

Catina,  H.  I.  M.  S.  Mentioned 424, 427 

Causey,  Z.  R.  Mentioned 93,106 

Cavallo,  Bark.  Mentioned. 205,935 


1162 


INDEX. 


Page,  i 

Cave,  E.  W.  Mentioned 217 

Cavendy,  Edward.  Mentioned 608 

Cayuga,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 402. 403, 428 

Centreville,  La.  Engagement  near,  April  12-13,  1863.  (See  B island,  Fort,  La.) 

Ceres,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 139 

Chamberlin,  Edwin  M.  Mentioned 713 

Chambliss,  N.  R.  Mentioned 1068 

Chambliss,  Samuel  L.  Mentioned 954 

Chambray,  Georges.  Mentioned 717 

Champlin,  J.  W.,  & Co.  Mentioned 541 

Chandlee,  J.  Mentioned 586 

Chandler,  J.  G. 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 719,729,730,1101 

Mentioned : 689, 719, 729 

Chapin,  Edward  P.  Mentioned ... . 712 

Chapman,  Augustus  W.  Mentioned 284 

Chapman,  Edward.  Mentioned 540 

Chapman,  Jacob.  Mentioned 45 

Charity  Hospital,  New  Orleans,  La.  Resignation  of  Administrators  of. 
Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 512 

Charity  Hospital,  New  Orleans,  La.  Administrators  of  the 512 

(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  502.) 

Charles  Osgood,  Steamer.  Mentioned 614 

Charpentier,  S.  Mentioned 1068 

Charrotte,  J.  C. 

Mentioned 632, 633 


Statement  of.  Burning  of  State  House  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  December  28, 


1862  632 

Chase,  Charles  T.  Mentioned 1115 

Chase,  Salmon  P.  Mentioned 311,503,584,591,691 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Treasury  Department,  U.  S .) 

Chattahoochee,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 959 

Chatterton,  John  F.  Mentioned 128 

Chaves,  J.  F.  Mentioned 230, 576, 725 

Cheever,  Henry  P.  Mentioned 44,46,58 

Che  Kiang,  Steamer.  Mentioned * 11C2 

Cheney,  W.  F.  Mentioned 750,857 

Chesley,  Mrs.  Mentioned 183 

Chetrew,  Ve  H.  Mentioned 541 

Chickering,  T.  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 1114, 1115 

Rogers,  G.  W 1115 

Ment  ioued  * 253, 256,  382, 626, 692 

Report  of  skirmishes  on  the  Comite  River,  La.,  March  9-10,  1863  263,264 

Chicotville  and  Bayou  Bceuf,  La.  Expedition  to,  April  29-30,  1863.  (See 
reports  of  B antes,  p.  305 ; Emory,  p.  333.) 

Chihuahua,  Mex.,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  James  H.  Carleton..  687, 701 

Childress,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 85 

Chilton,  Colonel.  Mentioned ....  1131 

Chinn,  R.  H.  Mentioned 846 

Chinn,  T.  B.  R.  Mentioned 54, 81, 106, 1033, 1070 

Chippendale,  W.  B.  Mentioned.....  105 


INDEX. 


1163 


Page. 

Choate,  Rufus.  Mentioned 552 

Choppin,  Samuel.  Mentioned 19 

Christian  Pass,  Miss.  (See  Pass  Christian,  Miss.) 

Chubb,  Captain.  Mentioned 816,829 

Chust,  A.  Mentioned 1933 

Cisco,  John  J.  Mentioned 514 

Citizens’  Bank.  Order  of  Butler  as  to  deposits  in 475 

City  of  Bath,  Steamer.  Mentioned 608 

Clack,  F.  H.  Mentioned 395 

Clamann,  George.  Mentioned 541 

Clanton,  James  H. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 1069 

. Mentioned 939, 940, 947, 948, 1069 

Clark,  Mr.  Mentioned 962 

Clark,  B.  W. 

Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles 801 

Mentioned 100, 103 

Clark,  Charles.  Mentioned 14 

39, 40, 54, 55, 76, 78, 80, 81, 83, 84, 87-89, 91, 92, 94, 97, 99, 546, 790, 792 

Clark,  John.  Mentioned 426 

Clark,  John  S.  (Captain.)  Mentioned 134 

Clark,  John  S.  (Colonel.) 

Appointed  provost-marshal-general  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf 615 

Mentioned 254,611,615,1114 

Clark,  M.  R.  Report  of  expedition  to  Ponchatoula,  La.,  and  skirmishes,  March 

21-30,1863 285 

Clark,  Thomas  S. 

Correspondence  with  H.  H.  Miller 289 

Mentioned 234, 236, 259, 280, 281, 284, 406, 646, 713 

Report  of  expedition  to  Ponchatoula,  La. , and  skirmishes,  March  21-30, 1863 . 282 

Clarke,  Charles  E. 

Mentioned 36, 45, 56, 58-60, 283, 284 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862 67 

Clarke,  Frederick  J.  Mentioned 61,68 

Clary,  William  M.  Mentioned 476-478 

Clawson,  P.  Mentioned 927 

Clay,  Cassius  M. 

Assignments  to  command 568 

Mentioned 568 

Clay,  H.  L.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector  Gen- 
eraVs  Office,  C.  S.  A.) 

Clay,  T.  J.  Mentioned 905 

Cleary,  Nicholas.  Mentioned 1075 

Clemence,  William  H.  Mentioned 1103 

Clepper,  L.  G.  Mentioned 837 

Cleveland,  H.  B.  Correspondence  with  D.  D.  Shea 847 

Clifford,  George.  Mentioned 336 

Clifton,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 202, 

203, 209, 211, 213, 326, 358,  363, 364, 371, 377, 379, 428, 537, 720, 847 

Clinch,  Henry  A.  Mentioned 10,19 

Clogston,  Luman.  Mentioned 46,57 

Closson,  Henry  W. 

Correspondence  with  Lewis  G.  Arnold 569 

Mentioned 361, 362, 365, 571, 650, 714 

Report  of  campaign  in  West  Louisiana,  April  9-May  14, 1863 365 


1164 


INDEX, 


Clothing,  Camp  and  Garrison  Equipage. 

War.) 


Supplies  of.  (See  Munitions  of 


Page.  ; 


Coahuila,  Mex.,  Governor  of.  (See  Nuevo  Leon  and  Coahuila,  Mex.,  Governor  of.) 


Coan,  Abbott.  Mentioned 140 

Coatazacoalcos,  Steamer.  Mentioned 563 

Cobb,  Howell.  Mentioned 947,948 

Cobb,  R.  Mentioned 84 

Cochran,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 406, 671 

Coehen,  Henry.  Correspondence  with  William  H.  Emory 249 

Cofer,  M.  H. 

Mentioned 90, 94 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5, 1862 98 

Coffin,  W.  N.  Mentioned 1027 

Cohen,  J.  H.  Mentioned 540 

Colburn,  Ledyard.  Mentioned 237 

Colby,  Eben  T.  Mentioned 342,713 

Coleman,  F.  W.  Mentioned 1061 

Collens,  Paul  W.  Correspondence  with  Franklin  Gardner 1008 

Collin,  John  B.  Mentioned 128 


Collins,  J.  H.  Mentioned 805 

Collville,  J.  E.  Mentioned  362 


Colorado,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  James  H.  Carleton 666 

Colorado,  Mangus.  Mentioned 228, 670 

Colorado  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments:  1st, 574;  2d,  153-158, 574. 

Colored  Troops. 

Mentioned.  (See  Louisiana  Troops.) 

Recruitment,  organization,  etc.  Communications  from 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 716 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 162, 164, 534, 536, 542, 556 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 556, 557 

Phelps,  J.  W 534, 535 

Weitzel,  G 171 

(See  also  Butler  to  Halleck,  p.  555 ; Butler  to  Stanton,  pp.  548, 559.) 


1105 

169 


Reports  of 


263, 264 
. . 280 
..  882 


..  710 

221, 223 


Columbia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Comings,  B.  N.  Mentioned 

Comite  River,  La.  Skirmishes  on  the,  March  9-10, 1863. 

Chickering,  Thomas  E 

Magruder,  J.  M 

Comonfort,  Ignacio.  Mentioned 

Conduct  of  the  War.  Communications  from 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 

Bell,  H.  H 

Breckinridge,  John  C 55,550 

Burrell,  Isaac  S 226 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 463, 467-469, 565, 743 

Cahill,  Thomas  W 55 

Debray,  X.  B 222,225 

Durant,  Thomas  J 467 

Farragut,  D.  G 484 

Gardner,  Franklin 710 

Lee,  S.  Phillips 13,14 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 743 

Lovell,  Mansfield ...... 474 


INDEX. 


1165 

Page. 


Conduct  of  the  War— Continued.  Communications  from 

Magruder,  John  B 222, 224, 227 

Nichols,  Ed.  T 475 

Paine,  Halbert  E 550, 551 

Porter,  W.  D 567 

Rozier,  J.  Ad 467^ 

Ruggles,  Daniel 519 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  Mayor  of 13 

War  Department,  C.  S 750 

Williams,  Thomas 474 

(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton,  pp.  447, 465.) 

Conestoga,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 245, 1104 

Confederate  Currency. 

Circulation  of,  or  trade  in,  forbidden 426,437,438 

Ordered  to  be  received 772, 773, 782 


(See  also  Proclamation  of  Governor  of  Louisiana,  pp.  504-510.) 


Confederate  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Baton  Rouge,  La.  Engagement  at,  August  5, 1862  82, 93 

Port  Hudson,  La.  Bombardment  of,  March  14,  1863  278 

Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light— Batteries : Semmes’,  60,  77-79,  82,  84,  90-93,  99,  100, 
102-105, 107, 108, 169, 176, 245, 346, 389-392,-395, 680, 804, 1087. 

Cavalry — Regiments ; 1st  (Co.  A),  19. 

Engineers — Companies:  Wintter’s,  11,18. 

Infantry — Battalions : 1st  (Forney),  1033 ; 2d  (Malone),  18.  Regiments: 

1st,  850, 1069. 

(For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States.) 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Gulf,  District  of  the* 770, 850, 903, 1001 . 1068, 1069 

Louisiana,  District  of 820, 888 

Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana,  Department  of.  (See  Port  Hudson,  La. ) 

Mississippi,  District  of  the 792 

Port  Hudson,  La bo*,  841, 965, 1000, 1032, 1033, 1059, 1 061, 1062 

Texas,  District  of '891.920 

Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona,  District  of 883, 884, 946, 1001, 1034 

Western  Louisiana,  District  of.  (See  Louisiana,  District  of.) 

Recruitment,  organization,  etc.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 791 

Alabama,  Governor  of  . . 939 

Arkansas,  Governor  of  - 781 

Blanchard,  Albert  G 954 

Breckinridge,  John  C 1121 

Davis,  Jefferson  940 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 832,833 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 740, 743, 747, 773, 874 

Taylor,  Richard 872,874,954 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 768 

War  Department,  C.  S 1069 

(See  also  Lovell  to  Moore,  p.739;  Lovell  to  Beauregard,  p.  741.) 
Confiscation  Act. 

Enforcement  of,  in  Louisiana 543,571-573,575,576,581 

Suspension  of,  in  Louisiana 611 


Sometimes  called  Department. 


1166 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Congress,  U.  S.  Acts  of 

March  13, 1862  622 

July  17, 1862 622 

Conklin,  George  E.  Report  of  bombardment  of  Lavaca,  Tex.,  October  31- 

November  1 , 1862 182 

Connecticut,  Steamer.  Mentioned 534 

Connecticut  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry —Regiments : 9th,  25-27, 35, 39, 43, 51, 52, 56-58, 62, 63, 71, 72, 75, 133, 
135-138,281-283,626,  628,  646,  713;  12th,  124,  168,  169,  172,  173,  234,  236, 

319, 328, 329, 628, 645, 648, 712 ; 13th,  139, 167-169, 172, 173, 319,360,383-385, 

627, 634, 714  ; 23d,  234, 237, 615, 628, 647,  714  ; 24th,  361, 382, 383, 626, 627, 

714;  25th,  319,383-385,626,627,714;  26th,  628,  646,713;  28th,  628,699, 

714. 

Connelly,  George,  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

Connelly,  G.  F.  Mentioned 453 

Connelly,  James  W.  Mentioned 455,754 

Cornier,  Captain.  Mentioned 217 

Connor,  Julius  M.  Mentioned 930 

Conoley,  John  F.  Mentioned , 1068 

Conrad,  Charles  M.  Mentioned 501 

Conrady,  Howard  C.  Mentioned 343 

Conscript  Bureau,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S...  984 

Conscription  Act.  Enforcement  of,  in 

Alabama 939, 940, 947, 948 

Arkansas 780,781 

Louisiana  175, 176, 740, 749, 767, 779,  789, 797, 804, 872, 874, 919 

Texas 220, 870, 881, 886, 887, 890, 900, 921, 925-929, 931, 936, 942, 945, 

946, 952, 955, 960, 974, 975, 978, 979, 981, 982, 987, 988, 1018, 1056, 1057 

Constellation,  Ship.  Mentioned 673 

Cook,  Joseph  J. 

Correspondence  with 

Debray,  X.  B 150, 826 

Manly,  John  H 837 

Mentioned 148, 214, 217, 223-226, 826, 829, 830, 832, 836, 839, 869, 931, 935 

Report  of  capture  of  Galveston,  Tex.,  by  Union  fleet,  October  5, 1862 151 

Cook,  R.  V.  Mentioned 403 

Cooke,  A.  P. 

Correspondence  with  Godfrey  Weitzel - 245 

Mentioned 184, 235, 299, 358, 364, 368, 707 

Cooke,  Erastus. 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 60S 

Mentioned 634 

Cooley,  James  C. 

Correspondence  with  James  Bowen 1166 

Mentioned 332 

Coons,  I.  C.  Mentioned 186 

Cooper,  B.  Mentioned 453,457 

Cooper,  M.  D.  Mentioned 642 

Cooper,  Samuel.  Mentioned 6, 833, 840, 843, 922, 947, 969, 980, 984, 1010,  1 077 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A.) 

Coopwood,  Bethel.  Mentioned 678 

Copeland,  William  G.  Mentioned 630 

Copes  & Phelps.  Mentioned 642 


INDEX. 


11G7 


Page. 


Coppell,  George. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 479,517 

Mentioned 479,497,516,517 

Cora,  Steamer.  Mentioned 930 

Corcoran,  Michael. 

Assignments  to  command 645 

Mentioned 645,886,903,923 

Corden,  John.  Mentioned 43, 68 

Corkern,  J.  B.  Mentioned 81,103 

Corinth,  Miss.  Re-enforcements for.  Communications fromMansfield Lovell.  735 

Corliss,  Augustus  W.  Mentioned 305,333,716 

Cornie,  Steamer.  Mentioned 299,306,309,311,393,1093-1095 

Corpus  Christi,  Tex.  Defenses  of.  Communications  from 

Bee,  Hamilton  P 829 

Blucher,  Felix  A 828 

Corso, . Mentioned 772,773 

Corwin,  Thomas.  Mentioned 882, 974, 980, 991, 1004 

Corypheus,  U.  S.  Schooner.  Mentioned 282,700 

Cosby,  Charles  V.  Correspondence  with  E.  Kirby  Smith 1055, 1056 

Cosby,  G.  B.  Mentioned 905 

Cotton. 

Burning  of,  by  Confederates.  (See  Private  Property.) 

Trade  in.  (See  Trade  and  Intercourse.) 

Cotton,  J.  A.,  C.  S.  S.  (See  J.  A.  Cotton , C.  S.  S.) 


Courts-Martial. 

Grant,  Alexander.  Orders  promulgating  findings,  etc.,  in  case  of 1093 

Sibley,  Henry  H.  Orders  promulgating  findings,  etc.,  in  case  of 1093 

Courts  of  Inquiry.  Baton  Rouge,  La.  Engagement  at,  August  5, 1862. 

Ordered  to  investigate  conduct  of  the  Seventh  New  Hampshire  Volunteers.  48 

Proceedings,  findings,  etc - 48-50 

Couturee,  Amedee.  Mentioned 422,471 

Covas,  Stamatz.  Seizure  of  sugar  of 479,516 

Covington,  La.  Skirmish  at,  July  27, 1862.  (S ee  PontcJiartrain  Lalce,  La.  Op- 
erations around , July  25- August  2,  1862.) 

Cowan,  Jonathan  E.  Mentioned 235 

Cowie,  W.  P.  Mentioned 362 

Cowles,  David  S.  Mentioned 646,713 

Cox,  Clayton.  Mentioned 320 

Cox,  W.,  & Co.  Mentioned 541 

Craig,  George  William.  Mentioned 478 

Craven,  T.  T.  Mentioned 23 

Creel,  Reuben  W. 

Correspondence  with  James  H.  Carleton 708 

Mentioned * 682, 683, 686, 721 

Creole,  Steamer.  Mentioned 112, 461, 526, 584 

Crescent,  Steamer.  Mentioned 113,119,673,1102 

Crescent,  The.  Order  of  Butler,  suppressing 421 

Creoswell,  E.  Mentioned 540 

Creuzbaur,  E.  Mentioned 851 

Crewell,  D.  W.  Mentioned 453,455,457 

Cricket  [Crocket],  Steamer.  Mentioned 344,681 

Crocker,  Frederick.  Mentioned 364 

Crockett,  R.  H.  Mentioned 934, 1061 

Crofts,  Captain.  Mentioned 930 


1168 


INDEX. 


Cromwell,  Steamer.  Mentioned . 
Cromwell,  J.  & G.  Mentioned.. 

Cronin,  James.  Mentioned 

Crosby,  J.  F.  Mentioned 


Page. 

242 

542 

337 

599 


Crosby,  J.  Schuyler.  Mentioned 126, 127, 314, 316, 321 

Cross,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 1064 

Cross,  A.  H.  Mentioned 19 

Crossland,  Edward. 

Mentioned 18, 78, 81, 84, 90, 94, 95, 97, 1033 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862 99 

Crowell,  J.  H.  Mentioned 70 

Cumming,  A.  Mentioned 1069 

Cummings,  A.  B.  Mentioned 252,302 

Cummings,  A.  J.  Mentioned 207 

Cummings,  James  R.  Mentioned 32® 

Cummings,  R.  C.,  Sc  Co.  Mentioned 541 

Cuney,  R.  H.  Mentioned 82 

Cunningham,  E.  Mentioned 1009 

(For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  E.  Kirby  Smith.) 

Cunningham,  James.  Mentioned 1068 

Curlew,  Steamer.  Mentioned 608 

Currie,  Leonard  D.  H. 

Correspondence  with  William  H.  Emory 250 

Mentioned 250, 332, 339, 342, 634 

Curtis,  John  C.  Mentioned 72 

Curtis,  Samuel  R.  Mentioned 519,530,748 

Cushing,  E.  H.  Correspondence  with  John  B.  Magruder 897 

Cutler,  Benjamin  C.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  James  H.  Carleton.) 

Cutrer  & Harrison.  Mentioned 542 

Dahlgren,  C.  G. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 736, 744 

Mentioned 922 

Daigre,  H.  L.  Mentioned 1038, 1124 

Daily  Advocate,  The.  Order  of  Butler,  suppressing 595 

Daily,  Brad.  Mentioned - 605,606 

Dallas  Station,  La.  Expedition  to,  December  25-26,  1862.  (See  Millikeri’s 
Bend , La.  Expedition  from,  December  25-26,  1862.) 

Dan,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned - 180, 835 

Dana,  John  W. 

Correspondence  with  Godfrey  Weitzel 326 

Mentioned 173, 174, 237 , 326 

Dane,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 260,261 

Daniels,  B.  S.  Mentioned 81,103 

Daniels,  Nathan  W.  Mentioned 712,714 

Danube,  C.  S.  Ship.  Mentioned 1011 

Dapremont,  A.  Mentioned 81,104 

Darbro,  Z.  Mentioned 989 

Darby,  Steamer.  Mentioned 343,344,681,1088 

Dashiell,  J.  Y.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  and  I.  G.,  see  Texas,  Governor  of.) 

Davidson,  Charles  C.  Mentioned 464 

Davidson,  F.  G.  Mentioned 805 

Davidson,  Henry.  Mentioned 63 

Davidson,  J.  Sc  J.  C.  Mentioned 540 

Davidson,  N.  P.  Mentioned 291 

Davidson,  Thomas  G.  Mentioned 80 


INDEX. 


1169 


Davis  Brothers.  Mentioned _ 

Davis,  Charles  A. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  recapture  of  Galveston,  Tex.,  by  Confederate  forces,*  January 

M863 . I 206 

)avis,  Charles  H. 

Correspondence  with  Navy  Department,  U.  S 5X7 

Mentioned 28, 32, 33, 38, 498, 504, 521, 522, 529 

>avis,  Edmund  J.  Mentioned 219  406 

591,  592,  713,  1013,  1014,  1016,1017,1025,1030,1031,1079,1129  1131-1134 

>avis,  Henry  Winter.  Mentioned ’ 5Q2 

>avis,  Jefferson. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeneraPs  Office,  C.  S.  A 953 

Alabama,  Governor  of g47  g^g 

Arkansas,  Governor  of ' Qn~ 

Gray,  p.  w v : ;;;; ;;;;;; ;;  Z 

J ackson,  Claiborn  0 F g^ 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 740, 747, 753, 767,'784,  786'807, 892  893 

Mackey,  T.J ^ 

Magruder,  John  B ^ 

Navy  Department,  C.  S qc.Q 

•; -v::;;;;;;;;;;;;.;;;;;;;;;;;;;-754,758 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 14>  767, 778, 794 

War  Department,  C.  S 14,  741,  863j  871>  919>  920  940  9g4 

Mentioned. . ......  15, 218, 220, 238, 239, 426, 463, 501, 502, 507, 510, 558, 736, 738, 758 

760, 764, 771,  772,  805,  807,  810,  817,  841-843,  857,  874, 890-894, 898*901’ 
905-908, 910, 915, 918, 932, 933, 936, 946, 947, 954, 962, 963, 1027',  1034  ’l080 
Proclamations 906 

ivis,  Jenkins  & Co.  Mentioned ^44 

ivis,  John.  Mentioned * 

ivis,  J.  Lucius.  Mentioned ' 7g4 

ivis,  L.  H.,  Schooner.  Mentioned 2go 

ivis,  R.  S.  Mentioned c-o 

(P  or  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Benjamin  F.  Butler.) 
lvis,  Samuel  Boyer.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Paul  O.  Hubert.) 

ivis,  William  F.  Mentioned q„n 

iy,  Nicholas  W.  y 

Mentioned 

Report  of  campaign  in  West  Louisiana,  March  26-Anril  20  1863  Qan 

■yton,  William  L.  * 

Correspondence  with  State  Department,  U.  S fiev7 

Mentioned 

Bentley,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned ^45 

an,  Chauncey  C.  Mentioned 9(*q  ~nc; 

Baun,  J.  66,268,705 

Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles 786  788_790 

I Report  of  evacuation  of  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  and  skirmish,  Aug.  20-21, 1862.  130 

bray,  X.  B. 

Assignments  to  command 979 

Correspondence  with 

Bee,  Hamilton  P ___ 

S7g 

74  R R—~yOL  XY 


1170 


INDEX. 


Page 

Debray,  X.  B. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Bell,  H.  H 222, 22 

Brown,  R.  R 84 

Buchel,  A 91 

Cook,  Joseph  J 150, 82 

Forshey,  C.  G 90 

Hdbert,  Paul  O 813-815, 820, 825, 826, 829, 832, 836, 838, 854-856, 865, 87 

Hobby,  A.  M 91 

- Kellersberg,  J 834,85 

Lubbock,  H.  S 830,83 

Lubbock,  W.  M 83 

Magruder,  John  B 225,897,90! 

Nichols,  E.  B 95 

Shea,  Daniel  D 90 

Wharton,  E.  C 82| 

Mentioned 152, 211, 217, 851, 883, 895, 897, 905, 908, 909, 911, 946, 957, 97 

Reports  of 

Galveston,  Tex.  Capture  of,  by  Union  fleet,  October  5, 1862 14 

Matagorda,  Tex.  Affair  near,  November  20, 1862  18 

Sabine  Pass,  Tex.  Engagement  at,  September  24-25, 1862 14 

Debts.  Order  of  Banks,  prohibiting  collection  of  - 109 

De  Camp,  John.  Mentioned - 2 

De  Clouet,  Alexander.  Mentioned 11,1 

Deering,  Captain.  Mentioned 11 

De  Gournay,  P.  F.  Mentioned 276,971,1033,106!, 

De  Kay,  George.  Mentioned - 24,33,51' 

De  Labarre,  S.  P.  Mentioned 42' 

Delaney,  Colonel.  Mentioned 979,98 

De  Laporte, . Mentioned 45! 

Delaspit,  Mr.  Mentioned - 45! 

Delhi,  La.  Expedition  to,  December  25-26,  1862.  (See  Milliken’s  Bend,  La. 
Expedition  from,  December  25-26, 1862.) 

Delisle, . Mentioned - 

Delony,  I.  F.  Mentioned 

Del  Rayo,  Joaquin.  Correspondence  with  Charles  McCormick 57’ 

Del  Rio,  Martinez.  Mentioned 68i. 

Delta,  The.  Order  of  Butler,  seizing 42j 

Demerest,  John  M.  Mentioned - &4< 

Deming,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 48,50,471,504,602,64! 

De  Morse,  Charles.  Mentioned  895, 89i 

Dempsey,  H.  M.  Mentioned 15’ 

Denegre,  W.  O.  Mentioned — . — - 54 

Denslow,  William  J.  Mentioned 109, 110, 126, 358, 371, 373, 63< 

Department  No.  1.  (Confederate.) 

Limits  defined 741 

Merged  into  Western  Department 1 76! 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  — , March  20,589;  No.  17,459. 

• Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from  Robert  E.  Lee 75< 

Department  No.  2.  (Confederate.)  (See  Western  Department.) 

De  Russy,  J.  A. 

Mentioned *3. 

Report  of  evacuation  of  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  and  skirmish,  Aug.  20-21,  1862.  13< 

De  Russy,  L.  G.  Mentioned 876,87’ 


INDEX. 


1171 


Page. 

De  Russy  Port,  La.  Engagement  at,  May  4,  1863 4 

Des  Allemands  Bayou,  La. 

Affair  at,  September  4,  1862.  Reports  of 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 133 

Thomas,  Stephen 134 

Skirmishes  at,  June  20,22 1 

Desert  Station,  La.  Skirmish  at,  December  10,  1862 3 

Deslondes,  A.  Mentioned 554, 555, 566 

De  Soto,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1106 

Dewey,  Daniel  P.  Mentioned 319,385 

Dewey,  George.  Mentioned - 1115 

Deynoodt,  Joseph. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 479 

Mentioned 479 

Diana,  U.  S.  S. 

Capture  of,  March  28,  1863.  Reports  of 

Taylor,  Richard 290 

Weitzel,  Godfrey - 290 

(See  also  Banka  to  Halleck,  p.  696.) 

Destruction  of,  April  — , 1863.  (See  report  of  Banks , p.  297  ; Banks  to  Grant, 
p.  303 ; Farragut  to  Grant,  p.  308 ; Banks  to  Farragut,  pp.  704, 707 ; 

Banks  to  Halleck,  p.  696.) 

Mentioned  . . , 184, 235, 242-249, 290, 296, 297, 303, 

308,  320-324,  328-330,  332,  335,  339,  340,  360, 365;  385, 389, 390, 392, 395, 
399,  443,  444,  587,  673,  694,  697  , 704,  707,  728, 730, 1049, 1050, 1093, 1094 

Dias,  Jose.  Mentioned v 1133 

Dick  Fulton,  Steamer.  Mentioned 498 

Dick  Keys,  Steamer.  Mentioned 113,115,119 

Dickey,  William  H.  Mentioned 284 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  Thomas  S.  Clark.) 

Dickinson,  A.  G.  Mentioned 217,881 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  B.  Magruder. ) 

Dies,  Adolph.  Mentioned 121, 122. 

Diffendorfer,  David  R.  Mentioned 598,607,635,682 

Dillingham,  Charles.  Mentioned 135 

Dillon,  Edward.  Mentioned 1121 

Dimon,  C.  A.  R.  Mentioned 44,61 

Dinsmore,  W.  B.  Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler. 514 

Dismukes,  Paul  T.  Mentioned 10,849 

Dividends,  etc.  Orders  of  Butler  in  case  of 518, 581 

Divine,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 1013 

Dix,  John  A. 

• “American  flag  order.”  (See  Butler  to  Chase,  p.  499.) 

Correspondence  with  Army  Headquarters 646 

Mentioned... 499 

Dixon,  John  S.  Mentioned 95 

Dobbins,  Marcus  D.  Mentioned 605  . 

Dodd,  T.  H.  Mentioned 574 

Donaldsonville,  La. 

Bombardment  of,  August  9, 1862. 

Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 563 

Farragut,  D.  G - 796 

Resolutions  of  citizens  of 795 


1172 


INDEX. 


* Paget 

Donaldsonville,  La. — Continued. 

Capture  of,  October  25,  1862.  (See  La  Fourche  District , La.  Operations  in, 
October  24-November  6,  1862.) 

Expedition  to,  and  skirmish,  September  21-25, 1862.  Report  of  James  W. 

McMillan 141 

Donaldsonville,  La.,  Citizens  of. 

Correspondence  with  D.  G.  Farragut 796 

Resolutions  of.  Bombardment  of,  August  9, 1862  795 

Donelson,  John.  Mentioned 682 

Don  Juan,  Vessel.  Mentioned 402 

Donoghue,  John.  Mentioned 45,49,64 

. Dorbritz,  F.  W.  Mentioned 926 

Doming,  Henry.  Mentioned 187 

Douglass,  David.  Mentioned 686 

Dow,  Neal. 

Assignments  to  command 646 

Correspondence  with  : J 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 628 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 522, 584 

Farragut,  D.  G 629j 

Hesseltine,  Frank  S 523 

Mentioned 523, 627, 628, 646, 713i 

Reports  of  f 

Bloomer,  Steamer.  Capture  of,  December  — , 1862  629 

Pass  Christian,  Miss.  Expedition  to,  June  22, 1862 112 

Dowling,  Richard  W.  Mentioned 239' 

Doyle,  Daniel.  Mentioned 467, 4691 

Doyle,  Patrick.  Mentioned 110 

Draper,  Gilbert  A.  Mentioned 319,385,630 

Dresher,  V.  Mentioned  596 

Drexel,  Guide.  Mentioned 344,345 

Driscoll,  John  J.  Mentioned 328 

Drouyn  de  Lhuys,  Edouard.  Mentioned 657 

Dryer,  B.,  8c  Co.  Mentioned 540 

Dublieux,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 1105-1107 

Ducker,  John.  Mentioned 962 

Dudley,  N.  A.  M. 

Assignments  to  command  645 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 47 

Augur,  Christopher 728 

Cahill,  Thomas  W 61,62 

Mentioned 27, 43, 44, 56, 61-63, 66, 67, 254, 257, 258, 269, 645, 648, 649, 712 

Reports  of 

Baton  Rouge,  La. 

Engagement  at,  August  5,  1862  58 

Expedition  from,  June  7-9,  1862 19 

Reconnaissance  from,  May  13,  1863  409 

False  River,  La.  Reconnaissance  to  mouth  of,  March  19,  1863 266 

Hermitage  Landing,  La.  Expedition  to,  March  24,  1863 267 

Duer,  Edward  A.  Mentioned 328,571 

Duff,  J ames.  Mentioned 851, 933, 1077, 1078, 1080 

Duffee,  John  R.  Mentioned 45,64 

Duffel,  A.  Mentioned 796 


INDEX. 


1173 


Page. 

Duggan, . Mentioned 930 

Du  Monteil,  F.  Report  of  expedition  to  Ponchatoula,  La.,  and  skirmishes, 

March  21-30,  1803 285 

Duncan,  George  W.  Mentioned.. 651 

Duncan,  Johnson  K.  Mentioned 449 

Duncan,  William.  Mentioned 120, 121 

Dunham,  Robert  T. 

Mentioned 256, 299, 306, 309, 338, 611 

Report  of  capture  of  steamer  Ellen,  April  22, 1863 386 

Dunlop,  Isaac  L.  Mentioned 18,1033 

Dunn,  Mr.  Mentioned 183 

Dunn,  Mrs.  Mentioned 183 

Dupeire,  St.  L.  Mentioned 19 

DuPont,  Samuel  F.  Mentioned 702,726 

Duran,  Cesario.  Mentioned 230 

Durand,  A.  Mentioned 472, 473 

Durant,  Thomas  J. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler.., 1 467,468 

Mentioned 465 

Durell,  E.  H.  Mentioned 602 

Durrive,  Ed.,  jr.  Mentioned 10,849 

Duryea,  Richard  C. 

Mentioned 330, 331, 341, 650, 714 

Reports  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland,  La.,  April  12-13,  1863  334,336 

Dutrail,  E.  N.  Mentioned 453,454,457 

Dutton,  Henry  F.  Mentioned 236 

Dwight,  Charles.  Mentioned 373 

Dwight,  Charles  C.  (Captain.)  Mentioned 110 

Dwight,  Charles  C.  (Colonel.)  Mentioned 234,236,645 

Dwight,  Howard. 

Apprehension  of  murderers  of.  Order  of  Banks 1119 

Mentioned 312 

Dwight,  William,  jr. 


Action  of,  in  case  of  Henry  Hamill,  approved 1119 

Assignments  to  command 626 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 706 

Mentioned 241, 258, 298, 299, 305, 307, 312, 313, 

333, 334, 358-362, 378, 379, 384, 626, 647, 673, 704, 714, 715, 1097, 1117, 1119 

Reports  of 

Port  Hudson,  La.  Expedition  toward,  March  17,  1863  264 

West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  March  26-May  1, 1863 367-370, 374, 375 

Dwyer,  J.  E.  Mentioned 912,913 

Dyer,  Isaac.  Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 698 

Baler,  Henry  A.  Mentioned 464 

Bastern  Queen,  Steamer.  Mentioned 698,699,1102 

Eastern  Sub-District  of  Texas.  (Confederate.) 

Debray,  X.  B.,  relieved  from  command . 979 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  67,  1054. 

Scurry,  William  R.,  assigned  to  command 979 

Bast  Louisiana. 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Beall,  William  N.  R 839 

Carter,  A.  G 777 

Gardner,  Franklin  999, 1070, 1071 

Garland,  W.  H 1038 


1174 


INDEX. 


Pag© 


East  Louisiana — Continued. 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Johnston,  Joseph  ^ 

Miller,  J ohn  C ^ 

Moulker,  J.  E - 

Pemberton,  John  ®^9, 

Ruggles,  Daniel 778,785,801 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 785,786,80- 


Waddy,  J.  R. 


Whitman,  J.  C 
(See  also 
June 


July 


Baton  Rouge , La.  Expedition  from . 

17,  1862.  Pass  Manchac,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

27-29,  1862.  Amite  River,  La.  Reconnaissance  to  the,  and  skirmish. 
5-  8,  1862.  Ponchatoula,  La.  Expedition  from. 

24,  1862.  Amite  River,  La.  Skirmish  on  the. 

25-Aug.  2,  1862.  Pontchartrain  Lake,  La.  Operations  around. 
27-Aug.  6,  1862.  Baton  Rouge,  La.  Operations  about. 

Aug.  20-21,  1862.  Baton  Rouge,  La.  Evacuation  of,  and  skirmish  at. 
Sept.  13-15,  1862.  Pass  Manchac  and  Ponchatoula,  La.  Expedition  to, 
and  skirmish. 

19,  1862.  Bonnet  Carr6,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

21,  1862.  Bonfouca  Bayou,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

10,  1862.  Desert  Station,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

17,  1862.  Baton  Rouge,  La.  Reoccupation  of,  by  Union  forces. 


Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 


Mar.  7-27,  1863.  Port  Hudson,  La.  Operations  against  and  about. 


21-29,  1863.  Amite  River  and  Jackson  Railroad,  La.  Expedition  to. 


April 


May 


21-30,  1863.  Ponchatoula,  La.  Expedition  to,  and  skirmishes. 

7. 1863.  Barataria,  U.  S.  S.  Attack  on. 

12,  1863.  Amite  River,  La.  Affair  on. 

17-May  2,  1863.  Grierson’s  Raid. 

1.1863.  Greensburg,' La.  Skirmish  near. 

Williams’  Bridge,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

2,  1863.  Roberts’  Ford,  Comite  River,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

9-18,  1863.  Amite  River  and  Jackson  Railroad,  La.  Operations 
on  the. ) 

Property  in,  sequestered.  Orders  of  Butler 

East  Tennessee,  Department  of. 

Buckner,  S.  B.,  assigned  to  command  of 

Maury,  D.  H.,  relieved  from  command  of 105 


105 


Eaton,  S.  M. 

Correspondence  with  Joseph  L.  Hallett 

Mentioned 

Edey,  Percy  E. 

Affidavit  of 

Mentioned 

Edminster,  David  P.  Mentioned 

Edmiston,  David.  Mentioned 

Edwaids, . Mentioned 

Edwards,  Jeptha. 

Mentioned - 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862 

Edwards,  T.  C.  Mentioned 

Elder,  Mr.  Mentioned 


26 

173, 174,237,259,26 

56 

56 

45,7 

45 

^45 

18, 82, 88, 1033, 10C 

$ 

c 

*.* 105 


INDEX. 


1175 


Page. 

Ella  Warley,  Steamer.  Mentioned 688 

Ellen,  Steamer. 

Capture  of,  April  21,  1863.  Report  of  Robert  T.  Dunham 3Sb 

(See  also  reports  of  Banks,  p.  299;  Blanchard,  p.  338.) 

Mentioned. - 299,338,386 

Ellet,  Alfred  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Farragut,  D.  498 

War  Department,  U.  S 39,  497, 498, 515, 521, 529 

Mentioned **2, 302, 515 

Report  of  engagement  with  C.  S.  S.  Arkansas,  July  22,  1862  38 

Ellet,  Charles  R.  Mentioned - 498,515 

Ellet,  Edward  C.  Mentioned 498 

Ellett,  Theo.  E.  Mentioned 99 

Ellis,  Charles  E.  Mentioned ^29 

Ellis,  James  A.  Mentioned - 98 

Ellis,  M.  H.  Mentioned ^56 

Elliot,  J.  C.  Mentioned 494 

Elliott,  H.  H.  Mentioned 28,33,44,49,58,72 

Elliott,  S.  N.  Mentioned 494 

Elmore,  E.  C.  Mentioned 479 

Elmore,  H.  M.  Mentioned 44^ 

Elsberg  & Amberg.  Mentioned - 9^4 

Emerson,  Charles.  Mentioned., 333 

Emory,  William  H. 

Assignments  to  command 634 

Correspondence  with 

Augur,  C.  C 246 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 247-250, 327, 333, 341, 607, 679 

Coehen,  Henry - - 249 

Currie,  L.  D.  250 

Gooding,  O.  P 246 

Holcomb,  Richard  E , 247,248 

Loring,  Frank  W 248 

Paine,  Halbert  E 978 

Watson,  John  C 245 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 246-249 

Mentioned 240-243, 247-249, 252, 253, 256-258 

294, 296,  298,  307,  313,  320,  323, 327, 339-343, 346-348, 350, 356, 361, 372, 
378,  613,  618,  634,  645,  647,676,692,711,713,1096,1104,1106,1112,1113 

Report  of  campaign  in  West  Louisiana,  March  13-May  2,  1863 330,332,333 

Empire  Parish,  Steamer.  Mentioned 383, 390, 528, 560, 562, 1102 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Gotheil,  Ed 880 

Leadbetter,  Danville 1018, 1029 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 876-878 

War  Department,  G.  S 879 > 877 

English,  Earl.  Mentioned 232 

English,  R.  T.  Mentioned : 49**3 

Ericsson,  Steamer.  Mentioned 607,608,613 

Ernest,  Mr.  Mentioned 499 

Ernest,  F.  B.  Mentioned 94^ 

Essex,  Ship. 

Case  of.  Communications  from  Benjamin  F.  Butler 575 

Mentioned 979 


1176 


INDEX. 


t»ag< 


Essex,  U.  S.  S. 

Engagement  between,  and  Port  Hudson  batteries,  September  7,  1862  

Mentioned 17, 38, 40, 42, 54, 129-132, 251, 252, 26C 

274, 276, 538, 564, 567, 588, 801, 803, 808, 901, 914, 943, 1009, 1027, 1113,  111 

Estafette  du  Sud,  The.  Order  of  Butler,  suppressing 431 

Estlin,  R.  W.,  & Co.  Mentioned 54 

Estrella,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 

185, 235, 290, 312, 313, 316, 358, 363, 364, 371, 379, 381, 637, 65‘ 

Eustis,  J.  B.  Mentioned 218  222  88' 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  B.  Magruder.) 

Eustis,  J.  G.  Mentioned ^ 

Evans,  George  S.  Mentioned * ’ ’ 60< 

Evans,  H.  L.  Mentioned ^ 

Evans,  J . Mentioned  ....  120—122  186 

Evans,  John.  (For  correspondence,  etc.*see  Colorado , Governor  of.) 

Everett,  Charles.  (Captain.)'  Mentioned J 

Everett,  Charles.  (Lieutenant-Colonel.)  Mentioned 267 

E.  Wilder  Farley,  Ship.  Mentioned 673 

Fair  Play,  Steamer.  Capture  of  the,  August  18,  1862  2 

Falls  City,  Steamer.  Mentioned  963  1083 

False  River,  La.  Reconnaissance  to  mouth  of,  March  19,  1863.  Reports  of 

Dudley,  N.  A.  M 266 

Paine,  Charles  J 267 

(See  also  Banks’  report , pp.  254,257.) 

Fancy  Natchez,  Steamer.  Mentioned 134 

Faries,  T.  A. 


Mentioned 390,  395>  397>  39^ 

Reports  of 


Berwick  Bay,  La.  Naval  operations  on,  November  1-6,  i862  1087 


Petite  Anse  Island,  La.  Affairs  at,  November  21-22,  1862 1088 

West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  April  9-May  14,  1863 1089- 

Farley,  E . Wilder,  Ship.  Mentioned 673. 

Farley,  Jury  & Co,  Mentioned 541 

Farr,  Alpha  B.  Mentioned 43, 646, 713 

Farra,  A.  K.  Mentioned ’ ’ qq§ 

Farragut,  D.  G. 

Correspondence  with 


Banks,  Nathaniel  P 261, 301, 307, 308, 659, 704, 707, 718, 720, 731, 1119 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 183,457,537,538,547,548,564 

Donaldson ville,  La.,  Citizens  of 796 


Dow,  Neal g29 

Ellet,  Alfred  W 493 

Grant,  U.  S * 301, 308, 693 

Halleck,  Henry  W 544  517 

Huggins,  C ’66& 

Lovell,  Mansfield 434, 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 517,527,  583; 

Porter,  David  D 527, 531i 

Williams,  Thomas 474^ 


Mentioned 6, 13, 15, 28, 32, 33, 38, 40, 160, 201, 226, 241, 251, 252, 257, 266,. 

295,  296,  299,  300, 306, 311, 313, 314,  318,  ’332,  448, 44%  461, 464, 465, 469; 
474,  498,  514,  515,  517-519,  521, 522,  527, 529,  530,  534,  560, 561, 563;. 583^ 
584,  590,  591,  614,  619,  642,  656,  661, 690, 692,697,700, 702, 704, 72%  726, 
795,  899,  1009,  1039,  1050,  1096,1097,  1104,  1106,  1109,  1112,  1113, 1117 


INDEX. 


1177 


Page. 

Farrand,  E.  Mentioned 764,963,964,1019 

Farrar,  F.  H.  Mentioned 129,857 

Farrell,  John.  Mentioned 540 

Farrell,  M.  Mentioned 18 

Farrington,  Seth  C.  Mentioned 139,140 

Fassett,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 45,68 

Fauntleroy,  Chs.  M.  Correspondence  with  Joseph  E.  Johnston 943 

Fauntleroy,  T.  K.  Mentioned 77, 82, 90, 104, 105, 107 

Fay,  Mr.  Mentioned 493,494 

Fearing,  Hawkes,  jr.  Mentioned 171, 332, 339, 634, 713 

Fellman,  Mr.  Mentioned 599 

Fellowes  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

Fenner,  C.  E.  Mentioned 1032, 1061 

Ferguson,  S.  W.  Mentioned 11,769 

Fergusson,  David. 

Correspondence  with 

Kimmey,  Myndert  M 686 

Pierce,  L.,jr 686 

West,  J oseph  R 634, 635, 638, 674, 682, 687 

Detailed  to  visit  Chihuahua,  Mex 635 

Instructions  to 635 

Mentioned 635, 670, 674, 681, 682, 687, 701, 725 

Fernandez,  Juan.  Mentioned 1040 

Ferris,  Samuel  P.  Mentioned 714 

Field,  David  C.  G.  Mentioned 539, 581, 607 

Field,  Joseph.  Mentioned 540 

Fields,  Robert.  Mentioned 157 

Fink  Asylum  Fund  Trustees.  Mentioned 540 

Finnegass,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 140 

Fisher,  John  A.  G. 

•Correspondence  with  Charles  McCormick 587 

Mentioned... 585,586 

Fiske,  E.  A.  Mentioned 32 

Fiske,  William  O.  Mentioned 358,371,377 

Fitch,  Henry  B.  Mentioned 236 

Fitch,  Horace  B.  Mentioned  236 

Fitz  Gibbons,  Richard. 

Mentioned 713 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5, 1862  71 

Fitzpatrick,  Eugene.  Mentioned 342 

Fitzpatrick,  John  J.  Mentioned 81,89) 

Fitzwilliams,  A.  A.  Surgeon.  Mentioned 597 

Fleming,  L.  J.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 937 

Flewellen,  J.  P.  Correspondence  with 

Bell>  A-  J - - - 887,925 

Magruder,  John  B gg6  g90 

Florida,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 117,904 

Florida. 

Military  departments  embracing 547, 7 66, 784 

Operations  in.  (See 

* Pensacola,  Fla. 

West  Florida. ) 

Florida  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Battalions:  3d,  850, 1068.  Companies:  Marianna  Dragoons.  850, 

1001. 


1178 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Foard,  A.  J.  Mentioned 752 

Fogo,  C.  McDougall.  Mentioned 573 

Foley,  Avery  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

Fontaine,  S.  T.  Mentioned 214,215,217 

Foote,  Andrew  H.  Mentioned 461 

Forbes,  H.  C.  Mentioned 410 

Fordham,  E.  H.  Mentioned 354 

Foreign  Consuls.  Complications  "with 422,471,473, 


479,  493,  497,  498,  516,  517, 521, 533, 549, 550, 553, 557, 563, 564, 567, 568, 
573,  575,  578,  581,  585,  588,589,  592,  602,  643,657,676,776,905,911,912 


Foreigners. 

Oath  to  be  taken  by,  residing  in  Louisiana . 479 

483, 484, 491, 492, 497, 498, 516, 553, 557 

Eegistration  of.  Orders  of  Butler 571 

Forey,  Elie  Frederic.  Mentioned 981 

Forney,  G.  H.  Mentioned 1933 

Forney,  John  H. 

Assignments  to  command 771, 899 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 833,859 

Beauregard,  G.  T 783 

Bragg,  Braxton 118,119 

Luttrel,  Ned 833 

Pemberton,  John  C 833, 834, 839, 842 

Randolph,  V.  M 116,118 

War  Department,  C.  S 804,874,902 

Mentioned 115, 770, 771, 773, 835, 848, 850, 853 

Forrest,  G.  W. , Steamer.  Mentioned 1102 

Forrest,  N.  B.  Mentioned - 799 

Forrester,  R.  H.  Mentioned 806 

Forshey,  C.  G. 

Correspondence  with 

Debray,  X.  B 908 

Magruder,  John  B 885, 1001 

Mentioned 218, 1022 

For  stall,  L.  E.’  Mentioned 427 

Forsyth,  R.  C.  Mentioned 1069 

Fortier,  Private.  Meutioned 1091 

Fortier,  A.  Mentioned 750 

Fort  Union,  N.  Mex.  Expedition  from,  Oct.  9-Nov.  25,  1862.  Reports  of 

Backus,  William  H 153 

Shoup,  George  L 154 

Foster,  Mr.  Mentioned 798 

Foster,  Henry  E.  Mentioned 132 

Foster,  W.  R.  Mentioned 222 

Foulkes,  E.  B.  Mentioned * 956 

Fournet,  V.  A.  Mentioned 389,395,739 

Fowler,  Charles.  Mentioned 238, 402, 974 

Fowler,  W.  H.  Mentioned 1069 

Fox,  Steamer. 

Capture  of,  May  12, 1862.  (See  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  422 ; Keith  to  Butler,  p.  450. ) 

Mentioned- c 424,451,457,458,528,560,562, 1102 

Fox,  Steamer,  Captain  of.  Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Morris 562 

Fox,  George  W.  Mentioned 713 

Fox,  Gustavus  V.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Navy  Department,  U.  S.) 


INDEX. 


1179 


Page. 

Frakes,  Jesse.  Mentioned irqwQ 

Francis,  James  L.  Mentioned ’ 

Francisco,  Janero.  Mentioned 

Franklin,  R.  M.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  X.  B.  Debray.) 

Frank  Mumford.  Steamer.  Mentioned 1102 

Frank  Webb,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 34, 40, 245, 255, 258, 297, 307, 313 

Frederic,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Freer,  John  T.  Mentioned - oJo 

French,  Albert  H.  Mentioned - ; * 229,59b 

French  Consul,  New  Orleans,  La.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  E.  Mejan.) 

French  Consulate.  Specie  deposited  at.  Communications  from  B.  F.  Butler.  516 

French,  G.  Mentioned *82 

French,  J.  Compton.  Mentioned 1048 

French,  Jonas  H. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 4®^ 

Mentioned 1097,1098 

French,  Joseph  P.  Mentioned 45,57,70,71 

French  Legion  of  Louisiana.  Regulations  of  the 478,480-483 

French,  Peter.  Mentioned ^2 

French  Subjects.  Claims  and  complaints  of.  Communications  from 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P : 676 

State  Department,  U.  657 

War  Department,  U.  657 

Freret,  William  P.  Mentioned 680 

Friedlander  & Gerson.  Mentioned - - : °42 

Frierson,  Conway  & Co.  Mentioned - 641 

Frizzell,  W.  W. 

Correspondence  with  Post-Office  Department,  C.  S 823 

Mentioned 822,823 

Frost,  George  H.  Mentioned H 

Frost,  George  W.  Mentioned - 649 

Frye,  Frederick. 

Mentioned - 72 

Report  of  expedition  to  vicinity  of  Saint  Charles  Court-House,  La.,  and 

skirmish,  September  7-8,  1862  167 

Full  am,  Volney  S. 

Mentioned 49, 59 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862  69 

Fuller,  C.  A.  Mentioned 10,740 

Fuller,  E.  W. 

Mentioned 179, 180, 185, 188, 297, 303, 707, 753, 754, 757 

Report  of  naval  operations  on  Berwick  Bay,  La.,  November  1-6,  1862 185 

Fuller,  Henry  W.  Mentioned 716 

Fuller,  Truman  K.  Mentioned 693 

Fulton,  Steamer.  Mentioned 295 

Fulton,  Dick,  Steamer.  Mentioned - .498 

Fulton,  R.  L.  Mentioned - 830,837 

Fuqua,  James  O. 

Correspondence  with  D.  C.  Hardee 787 

Mentioned 82,806 

Fusilier,  Alfred  A.  Mentioned 396,397,400 

Fusilier,  Leclerc.  Mentioned 396 

Gabaudan,  Edward  C.  Mentioned 294-296, 303, 308 

Gage,  C.  P.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Mobile,  Ala.,  Committee  of  Safety  of.) 


1180 


INDEX 


Gaiennie,  Corporal.  Mentioned ^ 

Gaines,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned ****’**’’"” 117  ! 

Gaines,  C.  C.  Mentioned 54Q 

Gaines,  C.  C.,  8c  Co.  Mentioned 54Q 

Gallagher  & Dyer.  Mentioned * 1 542 

Galleher,  J.  N.  Mentioned 

Gallway,  A.  Power. 

Mentioned 1 331,332,339,342,713  j 

Keport  of  expedition  to  Breaux  Bridge  and  Opelousas,  La.,  April  17-21, 1863  343 

Galveston,  Tex. 

Blockade  of.  Proclamations. 

Bell,  H.  H 659 

Magruder,  John  B 931 

Capture  of,  by  Union  fleet,  October  5,  1862. 

Communications  from  X.  B.  Debray ]50 

Reports  of 

Cook,  Joseph  J ^ 

Debray,  X.  B 148 

Hubert,  Paul  O 

Conflict  with  citizens  of.  Communications  from  John  H.  Manly 837 

Defenses  of.  Communications  from  V.  Sulakowski 1041, 1063 

Occupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  December  24,  1862.  Communications  from 

Banks,  N.P 201,614,615 

Burrell,  Isaac  S 204 

(See  also  reports  of  Charles  A.  Davis , p.  206;  W.  S.  Long,  p.  208;  John 
B.  Magrudei •,  p.  211.) 

Recapture  of,  by  Confederate  forces,  January  1,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Bach,  Lewis 205 

Burrell,  Isaac  S 

Davis,  J efferson 2H 

Debray,  X.  B 222,225 

Forshey,  C.  G 908 

Hamilton,  A.  J 1 200, 202 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H ’ 220 

Houston,  D.  C 208 

Huggins,  c 2oo 

Lynn,  Arthur  T.etal 905 

Magruder,  John  B 220-222,224,227,911 

Mason,  C.  M 935 

(See  also  Magruder  to  Anderson,  p.  936.) 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Holmes.) 220 

Reports  of 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 199  goo 

Davis,  Charles  A ’ 

Long,  W.  S 208 

Magruder,  John  B 210  211 

Resolutions  of  thanks  by  Texas  Legislature 221 

Galveston,  Military  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 320 

Debray,  X.  B.,  assigned  to  command  of  Virginia  Point  and  Galveston 

Island,  Tex  ... ...... ...... .... ...... . 979 

Galveston  Island,  Tex.  Embraced  in  military  district  of  Galveston 820 

Galveston,  Tex.,  Mayor  of.  Correspondence  with  O.  G.  Jones 895 


INDEX. 


1181 


Page. 

Gamble,  Mrs.  Mentioned 12 

Ganahl,  Charles.  Mentioned 684 

Ganey,  Elijah.  Mentioned 120 

Gantt,  George. 

Correspondence  with  Franklin  Gardner 999, 1008, 1010, 1023, 1039 

Mentioned 949, 971, 1009, 1033, 1039, 1062 

Garcia,  Gregorio.  Mentioned ■ 1 580 

Gardiner,  William  H.  Mentioned...... 45,71 

Gardner,  Franklin. 

Assignments  to  command 913 

Congratulatory  orders.  Operations  against  and  about  Port  Hudson,  La., 

March  7-27,  1863  278 

Co-operation  of  Taylor  with 922, 923 

Correspondence  with 

Beall,  William  N.  R 275 

Collen8,  Paul  W 1008 

Genesee,  U.  S.  S.,  Commanding  Officer  of  the 710 

Gantt,  George 999, 1008, 1010, 1023, 1039 

Garland,  W.  H 1009, 1038 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 921 

Maxey,  S.  B 276 

"Miller,  W.  C 931 

Pemberton,  John  C 260,914,933,942,955- 

959,  965,  971,  972,  985,  990,  999,  1000,  1005, 1023, 1024, 1026-1029, 1035- 
1037, 1039,  1047,  1049,  1055,  1059,  1060,  1069-1071,  1074-1076, 1079, 1081 

Red  River,  Commanding  Officer  at  mouth  of 275 

Rust,  Albert 271 

Simonton,  J.  M 1083 

Taylor,  Richard 922, 1003, 1018, 1021 

Youngblood,  J.  W 962, 990 

Mentioned 288 

289, 913, 921, 943, 944, 965, 1000, 1009, 1024, 1032, 1033, 1061, 1076, 1081 
Orders,  General,  series  1863:  No.  27,  272;  No.  31,  278. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863*:  No.  76,  273;  No.  125,  1071. 

Reports  of  operations  against  and  about  Port  Hudson,  La.,  March  7-26, 

1863  269-279 

Gardner,  I.  B.  Mentioned 71 

Gardner,  W.  H.  Mentioned 44  51  57 

Garey , J ohn  E . Mentioned 955,  955, 932, 1021 

Garland,  W.  H. 

Correspondence  with  Franklin  Gardner 1009  1038 

Mentioned 949, 971, 1009, 1023, 1033,’  1062 

Garner,  George  G.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Braxton  Bragg.) 

Garrett,  S.  R.  Mentioned 398,1091  1092 

Garvin,  Edwin  L.  Mentioned 335  337 

Gatewood,  F.  Mentioned 453  457 

Gaudet,  J.  Adam.  Mentioned 795 

Gaudet,  J.  K.  Mentioned 795 

Gaudet,  Michel  D.  Mentioned 795 

Gaudet,  Oscar.  Mentioned 393  1088-1092 

Gault,  Samuel.  Mentioned 319  343  351 

Gautherin  & Co.  Mentioned ’ 592 

Gayne,  F.  Mentioned 455 

G.  Brown,  Steamer.  Mentioned 136  799 

Geddes,  Robert,  Mentioned ’549 


1182 


INDEX. 


Page. 

GeisendorfFer,  Charles.  Mentioned 451 

Geisser,  John.  Mentioned - 357 

Gemsbok,  U.  S.  Bark.  Mentioned 608,609 

General  Banks,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1102 

General  Meigs,  Steamer.  Mentioned • 109 

General  Sterling  Price,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 311 

General  Williams,  Steamer.  Mentioned 173 

General  Worth,  Schooner.  Mentioned 835 

Genesee,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 252,262,276,710,1009 

Genesee,  U.  S.  S.  Commanding  Officer  of  the.  Correspondence  with  Frank- 
lin Gardner 710 

Gentre,  Mr.  Mentioned 455 

Gentry,  Colonel.  Mentioned 815 

George  Peabody,  Ship.  Mentioned 673 

Georgia.  Military  department  embracing * 766,771 

Georgia  Landing,  La.  Action  at,  October  27.  (See  La  Fourche  District , La. 
Operations  in , October  24- November  6,  1862. ) 


Germans.  Disaffection  of,  in  Texas. 

(See  Texas.  Resistance  to  Conscription  Act. ) 

732 

At  4 ■ 1 *L  rv /-\  v r\  IVT pfl  "f  l AT)  p/l 

609 

(jriDDs,  JLiieoaore  x^..  — 

930 

932 

455 

129 

824 

542 

87 

t 810, 876 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A .) 

Giquel  & Jamison.  Mentioned 

Girard,  Louis  J. 

Memorandum  of  batteries  at  Port  Hudson,  La.,  October  24,  1862  846 

Mentioned 844-846 

Girault,  J.  F.  Mentioned $1 

Gladden  & Seixas.  Mentioned 542 

Glenn,  J.  W.  Correspondence  with  Danville  Leadbetter 1080 

Glidden,  B.  B.  Mentioned 

Gloss,  J.  Mentioned ^ 

Godfrey,  J.  F.  Mentioned 265,411,713,728 

Godwin,  A.  S.  Mentioned - 

Gonzales,  Captain.  Mentioned 
Good,  Tilghman  H.  Mentioned 

Good,  W.  S.  Mentioned - 218,909 

Goode,  James.  Mentioned 

Gooding,  Oliver  P. 

Correspondence  with  William  H.  Emory 

Mentioned 321, 327, 330-332, 334-336, 349-351, 354, 357, 626, 679, 680, 714 

Report  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland,  La.,  April  12-13,  1863 346 

Goodman,  L.  H.  Mentioned 

Goodrich,  Luther.  Mentioned - - — “ - 

Goodrich,  W.  E.  Mentioned 


1062 

714 


739,741 


246 


191 


Goodwin,  Edward. 

Mentioned , - 78,81,94-96,1033 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5, 1862 ^ 


Qoodwin,  Ezra  S. 


Mentioned 835,246-248 


ItfDEX, 


1183 


Page. 

541 

Goran,  James.  Mentioned 

Gordo.  Mentioned 

Gordv,  M.  T.  Mentioned 

Gorgas,  Josiah.  Mentioned •••••  218,876,877,952.1035 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A.) 

Gossamer,  Steamer.  Mentioned - ^81 

Gotheil,  Ed.  Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T . . 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 

Gott,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 266’^ 

Gould,  N.  C.  Mentioned * * 

Gracey,  F.  P.  Mentioned * ’ 

Graham,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Grand  Duke,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 297,313,388 

Grand  Gulf,  Miss. 

Affair  at,  May  26,  1862.  (See  report  of  Thomas  Williams,  pp.23, 24.) 

Engagement  at,  June  9, 1862.  Report  of  Mansfield  Lovell  - - - • 21 

Skirmish  near,  June  24,  1862.  (See  Hamilton's  Plantation,  Miss.) 

Granniss,  Samuel  H.  Mentioned 

Grant,  Alexander. 

Court-martial  in  case  of.  Orders  promulgating  findings,  etc 1693 

Mentioned 1095,1096 

Grant,  U.  S. 

Co-operation  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks.  (See  West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in, 

April  9-May  14, 1863.  Also  Banks  to  Grant,  pp.  711,  720,  731, 732 ; 

Banks  to  Farragut,  pp.  720,  731 ; Banks  to  Halleck,  p.  1117 ; Halleck 
to  Banks,  pp.  656,  671,  725,  1117 ; Irwin  to  Houston,  p.  726 ; Irwin  to 
Weitzel,  p.  727.) 

Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 296, 300, 303, 304, 309, 314, 315, 317, 692, 711, 720, 731, 732 

Farragut, 301,308,693 

Mentioned. ..  295, 299-301, 306-309, 311-318, 407, 521, 529, 530, 590, 656, 657, 671, 690, 
700,  702,  704,  705,  707,708,718,720,725-727,729-731,  1109,1116-1119 

Graves,  Emmons  E.  Mentioned 235 

Gray,  A.  B.  Mentioned 

Gray,  E.  F.  Mentioned 8~8 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  Hamilton  P.  Bee.) 

Gray,  Henry.  Mentioned 361,388,390,392,395,1107 

Gray,  John.  Mentioned 357  . 

Gray,  F.  W. 

Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis - 863 

Mentioned 217, 1002 

Grayson,  J.  B.  Mentioned 

Greek  Consulate.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  N.  Benachi.) 

Green  & Crump.  Mentioned 541 

Green,  Francis  N.  Mentioned 

Green,  Thomas.  - 

Correspondence  with  J.  B.  McCown 921 

Mentioned 210, 212, 213, 216, 332, 388-390, 392-394, 399, 935, 974, 1092, 1094 

Greene,  W.  L.  G.  Mentioned 48 

Greene,  William  R.  Mentioned 203 

Greenleaf,  Halbert  S.  Mentioned 383,626,714 

Greensburg,  La.  Skirmish  near,  May  1,  1863.  (See  April  17-May  2,  1863. 
Grierson's  Paid.) 

Greenwood,  Moses.  Mentioned 342 


1184 


INDEX. 


Gregg,  John.  Mentioned..  926, 933, 934, 965, 971, 1000, 1032, 1033, 1062, 1069, 1070, 1076 


Grenada,  Miss.  Harman,  B.  Desha,  assigned  to  command  at 1120 

Grey  Cloud,  Steamer.  Mentioned 124  787 

Gribble,  J.  B.,  & Co.  Mentioned 542 


Grierson’s  Raid,  April  17-May  2, 1863.  Communications  from  Franklin  Gard- 
ner  - 1070,1075 

(See  also  Banks  to  Halleck , p.  306.) 

Griffen,  Smedes  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

Griffin,  Eli  A.  Mentioned 283 

Griffin,  William  H. 

Correspondence  with  W.  R.  Scurry 402 

Mentioned 217,935,1053 

Report  of  affair  at  Sabine  Pass,  Tex.,  April  18, 1863 402 

Griffith,  John.  Mentioned 1061 

Grimsley,  James. 

Mentioned 44, 49, 57, 75, 450 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862 72 

Grinstead,  Thomas.  Mentioned 75 

Grosvenor,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 378, 379 

Grout,  Luman  M.  Mentioned 132, 236 

Grover,  Abernethy.  Mentioned 523 

Grover,  Cuvier. 

Assignments  to  command 626 

Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 196, 198, 245, 247, 689, 1108 

Bogart,  James  H * . 197 

Mentioned 195, 196, 198, 242, 252, 253, 256-258, 260, 261, 265, 294,  297, 


298,  313,  320,  326,  334,  338,  363-367,  382-385,  609,613,618,626-628,641, 
647,  659,  692,  696,  704,  707,  712,  714, 914, 923,  958, 1096, 1105, 1112, 1113 

Reports  of 


Baton  Rouge,  La.  Reoccupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  December  17, 1862 . 191 

West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  March  26-April  20, 1863 357 

Grover,  George  W.  Mentioned 905,911 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Galveston,  Tex.,  Mayor  of.) 

Grow,  John  A. 

Mentioned 743 

Report  of  loss  of  steamer  Sparkling  Sea,  January  9,  1863  231 

Guano,  Mr.  Mentioned 455 

Guerrillas.  Treatment  of,  etc.  (See  Conduct  of  the  War  and  Prisoners  of  War.) 

Gulf)  Department  of  the.  (Union.) 

Address  to  soldiers  of.  (Butler) 610 

Adjutant-General’s  Department.  Report  of  R.  B.  Irwin,  of  condition  of..  653 

Artillery.  Report  of  Richard  Arnold,  of  condition  of,  etc 649,650 

Assessments,  etc.  Confederates  and  sympathizers 538-542, 607, 643 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P.,  assigned  to,  and  assumes  command  of 590,611,624 

Butler,  Benjamin  F.,  relieved  from  command  of 611 

Cavalry  companies.  Report  of  H.  Robinson,  of  number  and  approximate 

strength  of 652 

Clark,  John  S.,  appointed  provost-marshal-general  of  the 615 

Clay,  Cassius  M.,  assigned  to  duty  in 5C8 

Engineer  Department.  Report  of  Henry  L.  Abbot,  of  condition  of 648 

Foreigners  required  to  register 57 1 

Inspector-General’s  Department.  Report  of  W,  8.  Abert,  of  condition  of. . 648 


INDEX, 


1185 

rage. 


Gulf,  Department  of  the.  (Union.)— Continued. 

Instructions  to  Banks 590 

Johnson,  Reverdy,  appointed  special  agent  of  State  Department,  to  investi- 
gate complaints  of  foreign  consuls 471 

Limits  extended 547 , 590 

List  of  steamers  in  the,  February  20,  1863 1102 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  25,  425;  Nos.  27,  28,  29,  426;  No.  30, 

437  ; No.  32,  445;  No.  35,  447  ; No.  36, 467  ; No.  40,  463 ; No.  41,  483 ; 

No.  42,  491;  No.  44,  492;  No.  45,  493;  No.  47, 517;  No.  48,  518;  No. 
50,526;  No.  51,  529;  No.  55,  538;  Nos.  56,  57,  41;  No.  62^,  42;  No. 

63,  556 ; No.  71,  571 ; No.  73,  572 ; No.  74,  573;  No.  76,  575;  No.  82, 

581 ; No.  88,  588  ; No.  90,  589;  No.  91,  592;  No.  98,  50;  Nos.  99  101, 

602;  No.  105,  607;  No.  106,  610;  Nos.  107,  111,  611 ; Nos.  113,  114, 

615;  No.  117,  623;  Nos.  118,  120,  624;  No.  121,  625. 

Orders,  General,  series  1863 : No.  1,  630 ; Nos.  7,  8,  643  ; No.  12,  666 ; No. 

15,  1099;  No.  17,  678;  No.  20,  1109;  No.  21,  690;  No,  23,  1115;  No. 

25,  699;  No.  27,701;  No.  29  , 705;  Nos.  35,  37,710;  No.  40,  716; 

No.  93,  591. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862  : No.  3,  634;  Nos.  37,  39,  421 ; No.  42,  439; 

No.  44,  444 ; No.  45,  446;  No.  70,  469;  No.  79,  464 ; No.  98,  476;  No. 

99,  477;  No.  103,  478;  No.  150,  510;  Nos.  151,  152,  511;  No.  228, 

533,  554;  No.  235,  533;  No.  462,  48;  No.  513,  595;  No.  599,  626; 
(Grover)  No.  10,  630. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  12,  645  ; No.  13,  646;  No.  57, 1104;  No. 


66,  1111 ; Nos.  106,  108,  1119. 

Provisions  for  the  destitute.  Orders  of 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 643, 1111 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 425,426,447,517,538-542,558,-572,607 

Proclamation  of  Banks  to  the  people  and  troops  of  the 624 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 544,555,589 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 298,673,702 

Brannan,  J.  M 458 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 458 

Miles,  W.  R 821 

Ruggles,  Daniel 821, 898 

Sherman,  Thomas  W . . 703 

(See  also  Butler  to  Halleck,  p.  555  ; Butler  to  Stanton,  pp.  447,  465, 478, 

548,  552;  Halleck  to  Banks,  p.  590,  725;  Stanton  to  Butler,  p.  543.) 

Registered  enemies  ordered  to  leave 710 

Sanitary  condition  of  troops,  December,  1862.  (See  Banks  to  Halleck,  p.  613.) 
Sherman,  Thomas  W. 

Assigned  to  duty  in.. i - 545 

Authorized  to  issue  and  approve  orders  during  temporary  absence  of 

Banks 1112 

Stone,  Charles  P.,  assigned  to  duty  in 719 

Telegraph  service.  Report  of  Charles  S.  Bulkley,  of  condition  of 652 

Union  troops  in. 

Constituted  Nineteenth  Army  Corps 636 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

December  31,  1862  627,628 

January  3, 1863 634 

January  12,  1863  645 

January  13,  1863  646 

75  R R— VOL  XY 


1186 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Gulf,  Department  of  the.  (Union.)— Continued. 

Union  troops  in. 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

January  15,  1863  650,651 

April  30,  1863 - 711-714 

West  Florida  added  to ^>47 

Gulf,  District  of  the.  (Confederate.  )* 

Buckner,  S.  B. 

Assigned  to,  and  assumes  command  of 899,905 

Relieved  from  command  of 1055 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc. 

June  30,  1862  770 

October  31,  1862 850 

December  20,  1862  903 

February  28,  1863 499* 

May  1,1863 1(“9 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 774 

Forney,  John  H. 

Assigned  to  command  of 774 

Relieved  from  command  of - 899 

Limits  extended j 

Mackall,  W.  W.,  assigned  to  command  of 899  j 

Maury,  Dabney  H.,  assigned  to  command  of 4056  ] 

Orders,  General,  series  1862  : No.  99,  899  ; No.  105,  905. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  288,  885. 

Gushee,  Frank  A.  Mentioned 328  ] 

Gusman,  G.  Mentioned 131 

Gwinn,  Lucy,  Steamer.  Mentioned 934>  957  ’ 10°3 

G.  W.  Forrest,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1102  1 

G.  W.  Whitman,  Steamer.  (See  Fox,  Steamer.) 

Haden,  John  M.  Mentioned 1049,1121 

Haggerty,  F. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 440 

Mentioned 479 

(For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  Benjamin  F.  Butler.)  ^ 

Haley,  Eben  D. 

Mentioned ; 329>  334>  334>  335>  340> 347 

Report  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland,  La.,  April  12-13,  1863 335 

Haley,  John  H.  Mentioned 191 

Haley,  John  P.  Mentioned - - - 44 > 67 , 

Hall,  . Captain.  Mentioned ^ 939 , 

Hall,  Edward.  Mentioned 675,687 

Hall,  Edward.  (Captain  8th  Yt.)  Mentioned 134 

Hall,  James.  Mentioned 229 

Hall,  Richard  B.  Mentioned * 57 

Hall,  Thomas  S. 

Mentioned 3®j 

Report  of  campaign  in  West  Louisiana,  April  9-May  14,  1863 364 

Halleck,  Henry  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 

Farragut,  D.  514’547 

War  Department,  U.  S 494,515,518,519 


Sometimes  called  Department, 


INDEX. 


1187 


Page. 

Halleck,  Henry  W.— Continued. 


Mentioned .....31,39, 494, 514, 517, 534, 543, 564, 570, 592, 601, 643, 656, 906 

(For  correspondence  as  General-in-Chief,  see  Army  Headquarters.) 

Hallett,  Joseph  L. 

Correspondence  with 

Abbott,  J.  C 262 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 262 

Eaton,  S.  M 262 

Rowley,  William  W 262 

Mentioned 260, 261, 364 

Reports  of 


Port  Hudson,  La.  Operations  against  and  about,  March  10-16,  1863  . . 261 

West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  April  9-May  14,  1863 - 363 

Halstead,  G.  B.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Christopher  C.  Augur.) 

Hamill,  Henry.  Mentioned 1119 

Hamilton,  Andrew  J. 

Appointed  Military  Governor  of  Texas 595 

Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 200, 202, 658 

War  Department,  U.  S 595 

. Mentioned 200, 201, 587, 595, 642, 643, 656, 868, 870, 921 

Hamilton,  P.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Mobile,  Ala.,  Committee  of  Safety  of.) 

Hamilton,  William  B.  Mentioned 80 

Hamilton’s  Plantation,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  June  24, 1862.  Report  of  H.  E. 

Paine 35 


Hamlen,  Charles  H.  J.  Mentioned 713 

Hammer,  H.  A.  Mentioned 403 

Hammond,  P.  Lee.  Mentioned 114 

Hanbold,  F.  [Honbold?].  Mentioned 925,989 

Hanham,  Moore.  Mentioned 109,110 

Harby,  L.  C.  Mentioned 213,217,831,865,974 

Harby,  Samuel.  Mentioned 540 


Hardee,  D.  C. 

Correspondence  with  James  O.  Fuqua 787 

Mentioned - 77,805 

Hardeman,  Peter. 

Correspondence  with  John  B.  Magruder - 946,960,989 

Mentioned 220, 884, 909, 931, 936, 937, 939, 942, 955, 956, 978, 979, 982, 1000 

Hardie,  John  T.,  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

Harding,  Mr.  Mentioned 230 

Harding,  George  C.  Mentioned 142 

Hardy,  John.  Mentioned 947 

Hare,  Captain.  Mentioned 404 

Hargrove,  R.  W.  Mentioned.. 887 

Harman,  Asa  W.  Mentioned 1027 

Harman,  B.  Desha. 

Assignments  to  command 1120 

Mentioned 765, 1120 

Harned,  Frank.  Mentioned 81,98 

Harney,  William  S.  Mentioned 501 

Harper,  William.  Mentioned 75 

Harriet  Lane,  U.  S.  S. 

Capture  of,  by  Confederates.  (See  Galveston,  Tex.  Recapture  of , by  Confed- 
erates, January  1,  1863.) 


1188 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Harriet  Lane,  U.  S.  S.— Continued. 

Equipment  of,  by  Confederates.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 950 

Magr uder,  J ohn  B - - 931 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 959, 1030 

(See  also  Scurry  to  Turner,  p.  1053.) 

Mentioned 151, 200, 202, 203, 206, 207, 209-211, 213, 215-217, 219, 222, 224, 226, 

237,  238,  428,  661,  931,  932,  950,  959,  1030,  1034,  1053,  1054,  1063,  1107 

Harriet  Ralli,  Brig.  Mentioned 499 

Harris,  Mr.  Mentioned 753 

Harris,  D.  B. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 812 

Mentioned. 6,810-812 

Harris,  Henry.  Mentioned 337 

Harris,  John  C.  Mentioned 655 

Harris,  R.  C.  Mentioned 363 

Harrison,  W.  H.  Mentioned 968-970, 983 

Harrod,  B.  Morgan.  Mentioned 10,11,849 

Harrod,  Margaret.  Mentioned 640 

Harrover,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 230 

Harrower,  Gabriel  T.  Mentioned 410, 645, 712 

Hart,  C.  S.  S. 

Destruction  of,  April  — , 1863.  (S ee  report  of  Banks,  p.  297  ; Banks  to  Grant, 
p.  303 ; Farragut  to  Grant,  p.  308 ; Banks  to  Farragut,  pp.  704, 707.) 

Mentioned - 179, 184, 186, 297, 303, 704, 707, 710, 1049, 1088, 1108 

Hart,  Mr.  Mentioned - 801,802 

Hart,  H.  Mentioned 131 

Hart,  Simeon. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 866 

Detailed  as  purchasing  agent  in  Mexico 866 

Mentioned 578, 599, 900, 901, 960, 961, 986, 1030 

Hart,  S.  M.  Mentioned 131 

Harten,  E.  von.  Mentioned 150,217,957 

Hartford,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned  22, 

33,  245,  251,  252,  254,  255,  257,  260-262,  266,268,  273-277,295, 
303,  312,  314,  317,  368,  423,  428,  697,  708,  731,  1009,  1029,  1114 

Hartley,  Samuel.  Mentioned 136 

Hartry  8c  Wintry.  Mentioned - 540 

Hartwell,  Charles  A.  Mentioned - 611 

(For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  Nathaniel  P.  Banks.) 

Hartwell,  Samuel  C.  Mentioned 332 

Harvey,  James.  Mentioned 120,122 

Harvie,  Edwin  J.  Mentioned - 943 

Harwood,  Franklin.  Mentioned - 299, 318 

Haskell,  A.  M.  Mentioned 19>  H21 

Haskin,  William  L.  Mentioned 335,337 

Hasse,  H.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Biegel  Settlement,  Tex.,  Citizens  of.) 

Hatch,  Gilbert.  Mentioned 453,457 

Hatteras,  U.  S.  S.  Capture  of,  off  Galveston,  Tex.,  January  11,  1863. 

Communications  from  Jesse  Stancel -- 647 

Statement  of  S.  H.  Partridge 647 

Mentioned 225, 238, 646, 647, 981 

(See  also  Banks  to  Halleck,  p.  646.) 

Hauteville,  Frederick  d'.  Mentioned * 611 


INDEX. 


1189 


Page. 

Hawes,  J.  M.  Mentioned 4982 

Hawkins  & Norwood.  Mentioned 542 

Hayden,  Captain.  Mentioned 434 

Hayden,  Samuel  S.  Mentioned - 319,385 

Hayes,  Gairverse  & Co.  Mentioned 541 

Haynes,  George.  Mentioned 37 

Haynes,  W.  H.  Mentioned 55,801 

Haynie,  H.  H.  Correspondence  with  John  B.  Magruder 952 

Hays,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 85 

Hays,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 43,56,73,234,236,452 

Hays,  Harry  T.  Mentioned 791 

Hays,  S.  K.  Mentioned 905 

Hazeltine,  Robert  H.  Mentioned 499 

Hearn,  Mr.  Mentioned - 442 

Hebard,  George  T.  Mentioned 743 

Hebert,  Paul  O. 

Assignments  to  command 829 

Correspondence  with 

Bee,  Hamilton  829 

Carter,  G.  824 

Debray,  X.  B 813-815, 820, 825, 826, 829, 832, 836, 838, 854-856, 865, 878 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 832> 843 

Taylor,  Richard *. - . 838> 898 

Texas,  Governor  of 8,e>8> 92^ 

Walker,  J.  G 4057 

War  Department,  C.  S 822,824,871 

Mentioned 148, 240, 684, 774, 779, 819, 823, 826, 

831, 843, 851, 867-870, 878, 881, 883, 895, 897, 898, 900, 925, 968, 1055, 1056 

Report  of  capture  of  Galveston,  Tex.,  by  Union  fleet,  October  5,  1862 147 

Hebert,  William  I.  Mentioned 9^5 

Hedden,  H.  H.  Mentioned 544 

Heerman,  Valentine.  Mentioned 540 

Heidsick,  Charles. 

Arrest,  of.  Communications  from  Benjamin  F.  Butler 533 

Mentioned — 533,564 

Helams, , sr.  Mentioned 929 


Helm,  B.  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Breckinridge,  John  C 

Hoole,  James  L 

Mentioned 

Helmbe,  Charles.  Mentioned 

Helmick,  A.  S.  Mentioned . 

Henderson, . Mentioned 

Henderson,  Captain.  Mentioned - 

Henderson,  Nat.  Mentioned 

Henderson,  Terry  & Co.  Mentioned 

Henderson,  Thomas  & Peale.  Mentioned 

Henderson  & Gaines.  Mentioned 

Henkel,  A.  D.,  & Co.  Mentioned 

Hennessy,  David  Mentioned 

Hennessy,  James  P.  Mentioned 

Henry  Janes,  U.  S.  Mortar  Schooner.  Mentioned 
Herbert,  George  R.  Mentioned 


1122 

1122 

9, 18, 39, 40, 77, 83, 85, 89, 90, 1121 

357 

455 

982 

82 

191 

541 

542 

541 

541 

236 

138 

188 

705 


1190 


index. 


Page. 

Herbert,  P.  T.  Mentioned 396,910,1063 

Hermans,  Gustavo  Mayo  y.  Mentioned 685 

Hermitage  Landing,  La.  Expedition  to,  March  24,  1863.  Eeports  of 

Dudley,  N.  A.  M 267 

Magee,  James  M 268 

Herod,  A.  J.  Mentioned 1032,1061 

Herren,  Gadi. 

Mentioned 400 

Eeports  of 

Amite  River,  La.  Affair  on  the,  April  12,  1863 401 

Barataria  (291),  U.  S.  S.  Attack  on,  April  7,  1863  291 

Herron,  Edwin  R.  Mentioned 341,342 

Hersey,  Philo.  Mentioned 385 

Herwerth,  W.  L.  Mentioned 128 

Hesseltine,  Frank  S. 

Correspondence  with  Neal  Dow 523 

Mentioned 

Heuberer,  Charles  E. 

Mentioned *99 

Eeport  of  expedition  to  Milton,  Fla.,  June  14-15, 1862 HI 

Hewitt,  Norton  & Co.  Mentioned 541 

Hibbert,  Joseph,  jr.  Mentioned 362,633 

Hight,  Horatio.  Mentioned 140 

Hildebrand,  R.  Mentioned 925 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Biegel  Settlement , Tex.,  Citizens  of.) 

Hill,  Charles.  Mentioned 218 

Hill,  Richard  M.  Mentioned 609, 611, 703 

Hillay,  A.,  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

Hindman,  T.  C. 

Assignments  to  command ®62 

Mentioned 662, 774, 779, 782, 822, 824, 895 

Hinds,  Howell.  Mentioned. 806 

Hines,  Alfred  D.  Mentioned 930 

Hinkle,  W.  S.  Mentioned - 455 

Hinneman,  J.  B.  Mentioned 65 

Hiriart,  E.  Mentioned 921 

Hoadley,  F.  W.  Mentioned -*-» 10 

Hobby,  A.  M. 

Correspondence  with  X.  B.  Debray 9*9 

Mentioned 221, 851, 909, 1002. 1085 

Eeport  of  affair  at  Saint  Joseph’s  Island,  Tex.,  May  3, 1863 404 

Hobby,  E.  E. 

Mentioned 404, 405 

Eeport  of  affair  at  Saint  Joseph’s  Island,  Tex.,  May  3, 1863 405 

Hodge,  Justin.  Mentioned ^65 

Hoffman,  James.  Mentioned 683,684 

Hoffman,  Wickham.  Mentioned ^ 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Thomas  W.  Sherman.) 

Holabird,  Samuel  B. 

Correspondence  with 


Eobinson,  Harai 

Mentioned - - 611, 643, 658, 702, 1103 

Holbrook,  Frederick.  (For  correspondence*  etc.,  see  Vermont , Governor  of.) 


INDEX. 


1191 


Page. 


Holbrook,  William  C. 

Correspondence  with  Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 4b 

Mentioned 46-49,712,714 

Holcomb,  Pythagoras  E.  Mentioned 124-126,199,650,714 

Holcomb,  Richard  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel  198, 655, 658 

Emory,  William  247,  248 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 244,249 

Mentioned 194-196, 244, 371, 373, 374, 588, 645, 714 

Reports  of 

Indian  Village,  La.  Skirmish  at,  January  28, 1863 239 

West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  March  29- April  30,  1863 376 

Holden,  J.  B.  Mentioned - 962 

Hollander,  Fanny.  Mentioned 540 

Hollister,  E.  P.  Mentioned 349, 350, 357 

Holloway  & Lonsdale.  Mentioned 541 

Holmes,  Captain.  Mentioned 1095 

Holmes,  Charles  E.  L.  Mentioned 234,237,714 

Holmes,  D.  H.  Mentioned 540 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H. 

Congratulatory  orders.  Recapture  of  Galveston,  Tex.,  January  1,  1863..  - 220 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 883 

Bee,  Hamilton  884 

Bryan,  G.  833 

Hubert,  Paul  0 832,843 

Magruder,  John  B 220, 879, 886, 894, 895, 897, 900, 902, 903, 922, 936, 972 

Sibley,  H.  843,910 

Smith,  E.  Kirby 1041, 1042, 1046, 1050, 1054 

Taylor,  Richard  971 

Mentioned 229 , 775, 784, 786, 

791,795,  822,  826,  832,  833,  843,  867,870,872,873,883-885,900-904,911, 
937,  952,  969, 970, 972, 984, 986, 988, 999, 1004, 1030, 1055, 1056, 1058, 1082 

Holt,  Alfred  F.  Mentioned 44,61 

Holt,  H.  C.  Mentioned 82 

Holtzclaw,  J.  T.  Mentioned - 1069 

Honduras,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1013, 1102, 1133 

Hooe,  Roy  Mason.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Daniel  Buggies.) 

Hooker,  Joseph.  Mentioned 725 

Hooks,  William  H.  Mentioned 895 

Hooper,  W.  Sturgis.  Mentioned 611,644 

Hoole,  James  L.  Correspondence  with  B.  H.  Helm 1122 

Hope,  Steamer.  Mentioned 268 

Hope,  John  S.  Mentioned 80 

Hopkins,  William  S.  B. 

Mentioned 346, 347, 351, 356, 357, 714 

Report  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland,  La.,  April  12-13,  1863 348 

Hornsby,  A.  S.  Mentioned 455 

Hornsby,  S.  H.  Mentioned 453 

Hornsby,  William.  Mentioned 455 

Hornsby,  William  H.  Mentioned 453 

Horrell,  Gayle  & Co.  Mentioned 341 

Hoskins,  James  A.  Mentioned 4933 


1192 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Host,  Steamer.  Mentioned 680,681 

Houma,  La.  Operations  about,  May  11-18, 1862. 

Communications  from  John  A.  Keith 450, 457 

(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton , p.  447.) 

Proclamation  of  John  A.  Keith 456 

Houston,  David  C. 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks *. 208,726 

Mentioned 318, 609, 611 

Houston,  Samuel.  Correspondence  with  John  B.  Magruder 933 

Hovey,  Samuel  D.  Mentioned 349,350 

Howard,  George  T.  Mentioned 757 

Howard,  Patrick.  Mentioned 541 

Howard,  Thomas  B.  Mentioned 217,843 

Howe,  W.  G.  Mentioned 44,61,67 

Howell,  Alexander  R.  Mentioned 930 

Howell,  L.  C.  Mentioned 349 

Howell,  Seymour.  Mentioned 45,68 

Hubbard,  G.  C.  Mentioned 94 

Hubbard,  John  B.  Mentioned 167, 235, 324 

Hubbard,  Nathaniel  H.  Mentioned 383,626,714 

Hubbell,  J. 

Correspondence  with  S.  M.  Baird 1065 

Mentioned 1064, 1065, 1075 

Huckins,  Mr.  Mentioned 427 

Hudgkins,  Robert  K.  Mentioned 499 

Hudnall,  B.  B.  Mentioned... 945 

Hudson,  William.  Mentioned 818 

Huger,  John  M. 


Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 792, 793 

Mentioned 476,799 

Huggins,  C.  Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 200, 614, 633 

Farragut,  D.G 662 

Hughes,  Felix  Mentioned 18,78,81,83,89 

Hughes,  Hyllestead  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

Hughes,  M.  Mentioned - 218 

Hulbert,  H.  S.  Mentioned 128 

Hulme,  Isaac  N.  Mentioned 1032, 1061 

Humes,  W.  Y.  C.  Mentioned 1068 

Humphrey,  B.  S.  Mentioned 236,328 

Humphreys,  Joshua.  Mentioned 393 

Hunt,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 18,77,78,83,88 

Hunt,  William  B.  Mentioned 373 

Hunter,  Charles. 

Correspondence  with  State  Department,  U.  S 522 

Mentioned 522 

Hunter,  David.  Mentioned 318, 441, 442, 459, 702, 732, 1116 

Hunter,  J.  M.  Mentioned 38, 39 

Hunter,  R.  A. ' Mentioned 805 

Hunter,  S.  E. 

Mentioned 78, 81, 90, 100, 106, 1032 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862 102 

Hunter,  William.  Mentioned 522 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  se©  State  Department , U.  S.) 


INDEX. 


1193 


..  1033 

382, 714 
..  795 


Page. 

Hunter,  W.  W.  Mentioned 932> 1002 

Hutchisson,  J.  H.  Mentioned 1068 

Hussey,  William.  Mentioned 228 

Hyde  & Goodrich.  Mentioned 540 

Hynes,  Andrew  R.  Mentioned 18 

Iberville,  Steamer.  Mentioned 142,173,370,1102,1114,1115 

Illinois,  Steamer.  Mentioned 642,673 

Illinois  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 6th,  307,409,410;  7th,  307,409,410,521. 

Ilsley,  C.  L.  Mentioned 

Ilsley,  Edward.  Mentioned 

Ilsley,  John  H.  Mentioned 

Independence  Station,  La.  Skirmish  at,  May  15, 1863.  (See  Amite  River  and 
Jackson  Railroad , La.  Operations  on  the,  May  9-18, 1863.) 

Indian  Bend,  La.  Skirmish  at,  April  13,  1863.  (See  Porter’s  and  McWilliams' 
Plantations,  La.) 

Indianola,  U.  S.  S. 

Capture  of,  February  24,  1863.  (See  Gardner  to  Waddy,  p.  999.) 

Mentioned 1 - 313, 985, 999, 1024, 1109 

Indian  Village,  La.  Skirmish  at,  January  28,  1863.  Report  of  Richard  E. 

Holcomb 239 

Indians  in  New  Mexico.  Operations  against. 

Communications  from 

Carleton,  James  H 579,580,669 

West,  Joseph  R 596 

Report  of  James  H.  Carleton,  January  4-May  8, 1863 227 

(See  also  Apache  Indians.) 

Indiana  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Heavy  -Regiments : 1st,*  25, 26, 39, 40, 43, 45, 49, 51, 52, 56, 57, 59, 60, 

62-66, 68, 70, 72-75, 133, 135-137, 141, 142, 163, 184, 234, 236, 256, 258, 319, 320, 

329, 340, 450, 451, 457, 502, 628, 634, 650, 651, 655, 692, 713, 776. 

Ingraham,  Timothy. 

Mentioned 258, 264, 265, 330, 342, 346, 353, 713 

Report  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland,  La.,  April  12-13, 1863  337 

Ireland,  John.  Mentioned 190,191,221,851 

Irish  Bend,  La.  Engagement  at,  April  14, 1863. 

'Casualties.  Returns  of  Union  troops - 319 

Reports  of 

Birge,  Henry  W 383 

Rodgers,  John  I - 366 

Van  Zandt,  Jacob 380 

(See  also  West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  April  9-May  14,  1863.  Reports  of 


Banks,  Nathaniel  P. 
Cassidy,  Michael. 
Closson,  Henry  W. 
Day,  Nicholas  W. 
Dwight,  William,  jr. 


Grover,  Cuvier. 
Holcomb,  R.  E. 
Kimball,  W.  K. 
Mouton,  Alfred. 
Nims,  Ormand  F. 


Rodgers,  John  I. 
Smith,  E.  Kirhv. 
Taylor,  Richard. 


Also  Banks  to  Farragut,  p.  707.) 

Iroquois,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 33, 428, 736, 737 

Irvine,  J.  S.  Mentioned 143,144,813,817 

Irwin,  Richard  B. 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 653 

Mentioned 611,720 


* Originally  21st  Infantry.  Designation  changed  February,  1803. 


1194 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Irwin,  Richard  B. — Continued. 

Report  of  condition  of  Adjutant-General’s  Department,  Dept,  of  the  Gulf. . 653 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Nathaniel  P.  Banks.) 

Italian  Consul,  New  Orleans,  La.  (For  correspondence,  see  Joseph  Lanata.) 

Itasca,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 21, 130, 131, 142, 167, 194, 196, 197, 428 

Ives,  Francis  M.  Mentioned 347 

Ives,  Joseph  C.  Mentioned 332; 

Ives,  R.  O.  • (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  William  H.  Emory.) 

Ives,  S.  S.  Mentioned 95 

Jackman,  William.  Mentioned 45, 71 

Jackson,  Miss.  Mentioned 915 

Jackson,  A.,  jr.  Mentioned 19, 19 

Jackson,  Alexander  M.  Correspondence  with  John  B.  Magruder 905,912 

Jackson,  Andrew.  Mentioned 164,557,621 

Jackson,  Claiborne  F. 

Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis 


807 


526 

523 


Mentioned 

Jackson,  C.  M. 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  Franklin  Gardner.) 

Jackson,  Fort,  La. 

Bombardment  and  capture  of.  (See New  Orleans,  La.) 

Condition  of,  etc.  Communications  from 

Dow,  Neal. 

Hesseltine,  Frank  S 

Palfrey,  John  C 428,435 

Memorandum  of  J.  G.  Barnard 4k 

Non-combatants  excluded  from 446 

Sketch  of jl 

Jackson,  James.  Mentioned 1933 

Jackson,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 494, 802, 1025 

Jackson,  W.  H.  Mentioned 1120 

Jacobs,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Jackson  Railroad,  La.  Operations  on  the,  May  9-18,  1863.  (See  Amite  River 
and  Jackson  Railroad,  La.  Opei'ations  on  the,  May  9-18, 1863.) 

J.  A.  Cotton,  C.  S.  S. 

Destruction  of,  January  14,  1863.  (See  Teche  Bayou,  La.  Engagement  on, 
January  14, 1863.) 

Mentioned 1^5,  1^9, 180, 

184-186,234-237,245,297,313,  388,637,860,  1087,  1089,  1095,1096,  1107 

James,  W.  H.  Mentioned — 

Janes,  Henry,  U.  S.  Mortar  Schooner.  Mentioned 

Jeanerette,  La.  Skirmish  at,  April  14,  1863.  (See  report  of  R.  C.  Duryea,  pp. 
335,337.) 

Jefferson  Parish,  La.  Property  in,  excepted. from  sequestration  order 593 

Jenkins,  A.  G.  Mentioned 

Jenks,  John  F.  Mentioned 

Jennie  Beals,  Ship.  Mentioned 

Jennings,  J.  L.  Mentioned 453,454,457 

Jenny  Lind,  Ship.  Mentioned 973 

Jerrard,  Simon  G.  Mentioned 305,626,715 

Jeter,  W.  G.  Mentioned - 81,103 

Mentioned - 9S 

586 


Jetton,  C.  Wess. 
Jicaltipec,  Schooner. 


Mentioned 


INDEX 


1195 


Page. 

. M.  Brown,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1102 

ohn  F.  Carr,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 216,930 

ohnson,  Captain.  Mentioned 219 

ohnson,  Captain.  Mentioned 238,974 

ohnson,  A.  C.  Mentioned. . 930 

ohnson,  B.  W.  Mentioned 1032,1061 

ohnson,  C.  F.  Mentioned 905 

ohnson,  Elijah  D.  Mentioned 712 

ohnson,  Reverdy. 

Appointed  special  agent  of  State  Department  to  investigate  complaints  of 

foreign  consuls 471 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 521 

Mentioned 422, 471, 493, 516, 521, 573, 583 

ohnson,  W.  A.,  & Co.  Mentioned . 541 

ohnson,  W.  H.  Mentioned 751,758 

ohnson,  W.  W.  Mentioned 739 

ohnston,  Captain.  Mentioned 935 

ohnston,  A.  S.  Mentioned 810 

ohnston,  Joseph  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A 1010 

Alabama,  Governor  of 971 

Buckner,  Simon  B 938 

Fauntleroy,  Chs.  M 943 

Gardner,  Franklin 921 

Pemberton,  John  C 920, 921, 938, 1009 

Taylor,  Richard 958 

Mentioned 308, 501, 938, 1056 

ohnston,  William  Preston.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  D.  C.,  see  Jeffei'son 
Davis.) 

oinville,  Schooner.  Mentioned 835 

ones,  Bart.  Mentioned 1061 

ones,  Bushrod.  Mentioned 1068 

ones,  Catesby  Ap  R.  Mentioned 932,959 

ones,  Charles.  Mentioned..-.. 82 

ones,  E.  F. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Palfrey 435 

Mentioned 428,446 

ones,  Edward  P.  Mentioned 11 

ones,  John  H.  Mentioned 930 

ones,  O.  G.  Correspondence  with  Galveston,  Tex.,  Mayor  of 895 

ones,  Paul,  Steamer.  Mentioned 752 

ones,  Samuel. 

Correspondence  with  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A 764 

Mentioned 765, 770 

ones,  William  Hemphill.  Mentioned 499 

ones,  W.  J.  Mentioned 402, 403 

ones,  W.  R.  Mentioned 218 

ordan,  M.  Mentioned 235 

ordan,  Thomas.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard .) 
uarez,  Benito  Pablo.  Mentioned 882 


umonville,  Ch.  (For  correspondence,  see  New  Orleans,  La.  Administrators  of 
Charity  Hospital  of.) 

unker,  W.  A.  Mentioned 


144 


1196 


INDEX. 


Pagtj 


Kane,  Patrick.  (Captain.)  Mentioned 35 ] 

Kane,  Patrick.  (Private.)  Mentioned 467,46!,' 

Katahdin,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 142, 167, 192, 194, 197, 428, 537, 569, 

Kattenstroth,  Henry.  Mentioned 

Kaufman,  W.  B.  Mentioned 

Kean,  J.  M.  Mentioned 

Keating,  George.  Mentioned 

Keefe,  James.  Mentioned 71 

Keene,  Aaron  H.  Mentioned 

Keith,  John  A. 


I 

II 

102 
71 " 


1 


Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 45 


J 


Mentioned 40, 43, 44, 56, 57, 73, 74, 447, 457, 713, 78: 

Proclamation  to  citizens  o.f  Houma,  La 45 

Report  of  reconnaissance  to  Amite  River,  La.,  and  skirmish,  June  27-29, 


1862 

Keith,  K.  D.  Mentioned 

Kelleher,  John.  Mentioned 

Keller,  Mr.  Mentioned . 

Keller,  Fidel.  Mentioned... 

Kellersberg,  J. 

Correspondence  with  X.  B.  Debray 
Mentioned 


3 

14 

; 


17 


- 20,2; 
504,51 


834,85 

147, 150, 217, 816, 820, 838, 865, 95'! 


Kellogg,  Spencer.  Mentioned 56'; 

Kelly,  Edward.  Mentioned 671 

Kelty,  Eugene.  Mentioned 20, 21, 44, 51, 61, 611 

Kemp,  W.  B.  Mentioned 12| 

Kendall,  Lucian  H.  Mentioned 40: 

Kennebec,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 22, 24, 421 

Kennedy,  Mifflin.  Mentioned 107< 

Kenner,  Butler,  Mrs.  Mentioned 441 

Kensel,  George  A.  Mentioned 163, 17( 

Kensington,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 52S 


Kentucky  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Light— Batteries : Cobb’s,  11, 18, 77-79, 82, 84,  800,  801, 1123, 1125. 
Infantry— Regiments : 3d,  18,  39,  52,  77,  90, 93-95,  97,  99,  273,  546, 1033, 1125; 
4th,  18,  39,  52,  82-87,  546  ; 5th,  18,  39,  52,  78,  82-85,  87,  88,  546;  6th,  18, 
39,  52,  77,  90,  91,  93-96,  98,  99,  546,  1125;  7th,  18,  39,  52,  77,  79,  84,  90,  91, 
93-95,  99,  100,  273,  546, 1033, 1125  ; 8th,  39,  52. 


Kepper,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1101 

Ker,  David.  Mentioned 73S 

Kerr,  Captain.  Mentioned 17' 

Kerr,  J.  F.  Mentioned 1( 

Ketchum,  Charles  T.  Mentioned 106£ 

Key  West,  Steamer.  Mentioned 60£ 

Keys,  Dick,  Steamer.  Mentioned 113,115,111 

Killborn,  Curtis  W.  Mentioned 801, 80S 

Kimball,  John  W. 


Mentioned 346,  348,  352,  361,  714 

Report  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland,  La.,  April  12-13, 1863  355! 

Kimball,  William  K. 

Mentioned Ill,  359-362,  383,  516, 529,  626,  714\ 

Reports  of 

New  Iberia,  La.  Destruction  of  salt-works  near,  April  18, 1863  382 

West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  March  27-April  20,  1863 382 


INDEX. 


1197 


Page. 

mmel,  M.  M.  Mentioned 19,1121 

mmey,  Myndert  M.  Correspondence  with  David  Fergusson  686 

nchen,  Mr.  Mentioned 120 

nchen,  Preston  T.  Mentioned 121 

neo,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 22-24, 40, 167, 173, 252, 262, 276, 428, 537 

ng,  Frederick  T.  Mentioned 1115 

ng,  Richard.  Mentioned 1074 

ngman,  John  W.  Mentioned 646,713 

ngsley,  Thomas  G.  Mentioned 646, 713 

nney,  John  C.  Mentioned 38? 

Dsma n,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 183, 184, 235, 244, 245, 248, 673, 674, 110? 

nsman,  J.  B.  Mentioned 466,467,493,494,593,644 

nyon, . Mentioned 597 

rk,  J.  T.  Mentioned 835 

rkpatrick  & Co.  Mentioned 541 

ttatinny,  U.  S.  Ship.  Mentioned 462 

ttredge,  J.  W.  Mentioned 221 

ttredge,  W.  A.  Mentioned • 580 

tight,  Isaac.  Mentioned 45,73 

tox,  N.  K.  Mentioned 131 

tox  & Higgins.  Mentioned 541 

ale,  H.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Biegel  Settlement , Tex.,  Citizens  of.) 

ause,  Rudolph.  Mentioned 198 

uttschnitt,  John. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 575 

Mentioned . 575 

badieville,  La.  Action  at  Georgia  Landing,  La.,  near,  October  27.  (See 
La  Fourche  District,  La.  Operations  in,  October  24- November  6, 1862. ) 

blanche,  Babbillard.  Mentioned 485,486,490,491 

blanche,  Jack.  Mentioned : 485,486 

Fayette,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 311 

ford,  T.  Mentioned 540 

Fourche  District,  La. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from  Benjamin  F.  Butler 592 

Commissioners  appointed  to  take  charge  of  sequestered  property  in 592-595 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined *592 

Operations  in,  October  24-November  6,  1862. 

Casualties,  returns  of.  Union  troops,  action  at  Georgia  Landing,  La., 

October  27,  1862 172 

Communications  from  • 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 864 

Butler,  Benjamin  F. .• 162, 164, 587 

Morrison,  J.  H 855 

Pemberton,  John  C 855 

Taylor,  Richard 855,859 

Reports  of 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 158,160-162 

Mouton,  Alfred 176 

Taylor,  Richard 174 

Vance,  John  A 173 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 166, 167, 170-172 

Property  in,  sequestered.  Orders  of  Butler ' 592 

gay,  F.  Mentioned 541 

ke, — ; — , Mentioned  930 


1198 


INDEX, 


Lamar,  L.  Q.  C. 
Lambert, 


Pag«j 

Mentioned 96| 

Correspondence  with  John  Marks 66 


Lamon,  S.  P.  Mentioned 5 4 

Lanata,  Dque.  Mentioned 54 

Lanata,  Joseph. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 47 

Mentioned 47 

Lancaster,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 302,51 

andis,  Steamer.  Mentioned 464,528,529,110 

andry,  J.  Aristide.  Mentioned 795,79 

andry,  Joseph.  Mentioned 109 


andry,  Trusemon.  Mentioned 

Lane  & Salter.  Mentioned 

Lange,  Jacques.  Mentioned 

La  Paz,Jose.  Mentioned 

Lapeyre,  J.  M. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  Stevenson 

Mentioned 

Larette,  Mr.  Mentioned 


Larette,  Sheriff.  Mentioned. 


..  86. 
..  86; 
453, 45 
..  45! 


Larguier,  Joseph.  Mentioned 13 

Larned,  Frank  H.  Mentioned 651, 71, 

Latham,  Mr.  Mentioned 90j' 

Latham,  Edward.  Mentioned 12 

Latham,  Matthew  A.  Mentioned 43,44,51,7 

Lathrop,  Robert  D.  Mentioned 319, 38 

Latimer,  Elisha  E.  Mentioned 22 

Laurel  Hill,  Steamer.  Mentioned 326, 338, 363-365, 371, 380, 383, 663, 981, 11C 

Lavaca,  Tex.  Bombardment  of,  October  31-November  1,  1862.  Reports  of 

Bee,  Hamilton  P 18, 

Conklin,  George  E •.  18, 

Law,  Richard  L.  Mentioned 203,207,20 

Lawrence,  R.  J.  Mentioned ' 

Layton,  Thomas.  Mentioned 54 

Lea,  A.  M.  Mentioned 215,219,238,936,1017,106 


23 


Lea,  J.  N.  (For  correspondence,  see  New  Orleans,  La.,  Administration  of  Charity 
Hospital  of.) 

Leadbetter,  Danville. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 86 

Alabama,  Governor  of 96 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 1018,102 

Glenn,  J.  W 108 

Mentioned «. 96 

Reports  of  defenses  of  Mobile,  Ala. 

January,  1863 101 

February,  1863 101 

Leader,  Schooner.  Mentioned 219,93 

Le  Beau,  Edgar.  Mentioned 55 

Le  Beau,  Edward.  Mentioned 55 

Lebere,  Mr.  Mentioned 46, 

Le  Bisque,  Felix.  Mentioned 102 


INDEX. 


1199 


Page. 

Lecompt,  Schooner.  Mentioned - 182 

Lee,  H.  Mentioned 540 

Lee,  John  L.  Mentioned 541 

Lee,  John  W.  Mentioned 357 

Lee,  Robert  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Lovell,  Mansfield 756 

War  Department,  C.  S 794 

Mentioned 733, 756, 764, 906 

Lee,  S.  Phillips.  Correspondence  with 

Autry,  James  L 13 

Smith,  M.  L 6, 7 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  Mayor  of 12-14 

Legendre,  Emile.  Mentioned 796 

Leobel,  Charles.  Mentioned 357 

Leonard,  John.  Mentioned 1123 

Letchford,  W.  H.  Mentioned - 540 

Levi,  A.,  & Co.  Mentioned 541 

Levy,  William  M.  Mentioned 389,396 

Lewis, . Mentioned 926 

Lewis,  Charles  D.  Mentioned 108 

Lewis,  George  N.  Mentioned 329 

Lewis,  J.,  & Co.  Mentioned 540 

Lewis,  John  L. 

Assignment  to  command  with  Louisiana  Militia 734 

Mentioned 557, 734, 756, 759, 798, 799, 826 

Lewis,  Joseph  H.  Mentioned 18 

Lewis,  R.  F.  R.  Mentioned 167, 196 

Lewis,  W.  H.  Mentioned 725 

Lewis  & Oglesby.  Mentioned 541 

L.  H.  Davis,  Schooner.  Mentioned - r 283 

Libertad,  Mex.  Survey  of  route  from.  Communications  from  J.  H.  Carleton.  670 

Lieb,  Theodore.  Mentioned 478 

Lieber,  G.  Norman.  Mentioned 611 

Ligineroz,  Leonards.  Mentioned 688 

Limburg,  Baron  von.  Mentioned - 471 

Lincoln,  Abe,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 1102 

Lincoln,  Abraham. 

Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 1096 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 532 

Emancipation  proclamations. 

September  22, 1862  621 

January  1, 1863  667 

Mentioned - 39,  160, 162, 166,  226,  311,  424,  439, 

469, 471,  478,  479,  481,  486,  488, 490,  493,  494,  497,  501,  514,  516,  522,  532, 
536,  542,  543, 556,  557,  568,  576,  582,  589-591,  593,  594,  610,  612-614, 618- 
621,  624,  636,  640,  642,  644,  657,  666,  668,  671,  682,  697,  702,  725,  726,  907 

Ordersj  October  20, 1862,  establishing  a provisional  court  in  Louisiana 581 

Lind,  Jenny,  Ship.  Mentioned 673 

Lindsay,  Captain.  Mentioned 179 

Lindsay,  L.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  Mayor  of .) 

Litsell,  B.  F.  Mentioned 464 

Little  Buffalo,  Mentioaed. * t,..,,.  154 


1200 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Littlejohn,  De  Witt  C.  Mentioned 634 

Livingston,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 615 

Locke,  Erie.  Mentioned 503 

Locke,  M.  B.  Mentioned 1°62 

Locke,  Oliver  S.  Mentioned 37 

Lockett,  S.  H.  Mentioned 11,852 

Lockwood,  Byron  F.  Mentioned - 319,385 

Loeb,  Samuel.  Mentioned 540 

Loebnitz,  Henry  E.  Mentioned 905,912,968-970 

Loeffler,  Charles.  Mentioned 541 

Logan,  John  L. 

Correspondence  with 

Ramsey,  S.  D 407,  408 

Terrell,  V.  L 408 

Mentioned 934,  1032,  1061, 1083 

Report  of  operations  on  the  Amite  River  and  Jackson  Railroad,  La.,  May 

9-18,  1863 408,409 

Lomax,  L.  L.  Mentioned - — 19 

Lone  Star,  Steamer. 

Capture  of  the,  November  27,  1862.  Report  of  Y.  L.  Terrell 189 

Mentioned * 1®9 

Long,  Mr.  Mentioned 407 

Long,  A.  L.  (For  correspondence  as  Military  Secretary,  see  Eobert  E.  Lee.) 

Long,  Alanson  B.  Mentioned 382, 709 

Long,  John.  Mentioned 236 

Long,  Malcolm  W.  Mentioned 45,71 

Long,  W.  S. 

Mentioned  : 204, 208 

Report  of  recapture  of  Galveston,  Tex.,  by  Confederate  forces,  January  1, 

1863  v 208 

Looke,  Samuel.  Mentioned 540 

Lopez,  Albino.  Mentioned 923, 

960, 961, 964, 973, 980, 991, 992, 997, 998, 1006, 1007, 1024, 1030, 1040 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Tamaulipas,  Mex .,  Governor  of.) 

Loring,  Frank  W. 

Correspondence  with  William  H.  Emory 248 

Mentioned - 244, 245, 332, 353, 673 

(For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  William  H.  Emory.) 

Loring,  W.  W.  Mentioned 794 

Loughlin,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 85 

Louise,  Steamer.  Mentioned 343, 344 

Louisiana,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 1 42, 449, 561 

Louisiana. 

Addresses  to  the  people  of.  Louisiana,  Governor  of 504, 743 

Affairs  io,  generally.  Communications  from 


Banks,  Nathaniel  P 240, 242, 251, 257, 294, 298, 309, 

613,  618, 639, 646, 661, 669, 694, 697, 1096, 1097, 1099, 1104, 1105, 1109, 1117 

Beauregard,  G.  T 734 

Blanchard,  Albert  '79 

Bowen,  James 4107 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 422, 

447,  465,  478,  502,  518,521,  538,548,552,555,  558,559,564,571,573,602 
Cooley,  J ames  C - - . ...... --, — ----t-  1196 


INDEX. 


1201 


Louisiana — Continued. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Davis,  Jefferson 

Grover,  Cuvier 

Lovell,  Mansfield 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 

Mackey,  T.  J 

Sould,  Pierre... 

State  Department,  U.  S 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff 

War  Department,  C.  S 

War  Department,  IJ.  S 

Amnesty  (qualified)  to  people  of 


Page. 


767,784,786 

1108 

733,735,739 

504,  740,  747, 753, 773 
.... 805 


734 

497 

797,1124 

775 

471,493,515,543,559 
....  466,494,516,576 


Confiscation  Act. 

Enforcement  of 543, 571-573, 575, 576, 581 

Snspension  of 611 

Conscription  Act.  Enforcement  of 175, 

176, 740, 749, 767, 779,  789, 797, 804,  872, 874, 919 

Enrolment  of  French  subjects.  Communications  from  E.  Mejan 776 

Foreigners  residing  in,  to  take  and  subscribe  an  oath 479, 

483, 484, 491, 492, 497, 498, 516, 553, 557 


Free  negroes  in. 

Called,  on  to  enlist  in  U.  S.  service 162,556,557 

Militia  organization.  Native  guards 556, 557 

French  Legion.  Regulations  of  the 480-483 

(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  478.) 

Martial  law 740, 771, 772, 806, 841 

Military  departments  embracing 746, 771, 784, 820, 948 


Officers,  civil,  and  citizens  of,  to  take  and  subscribe  oath  of  allegiance 479, 

483, 484 


Operations  in.  (See 

East  Louisiana. 
Mississippi  River. 
New  Orleans , La. 
We-^t  Louisiana.) 


Partisan  Rangers.  Organization,  etc 741, 743, 744, 747, 748, 767, 773, 774, 791 


Peabody,  Charles  A.,  appointed  provisional  judge  to  hold  court  in 582 

Proclamations  to  the  people  of. 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 619 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 504;  743 

Provisional  court  established.  Order  of  Abraham  Lincoln 581 

River  defenses.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 877 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 876,877,880 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 784 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 876, 878, 922 

Taylor,  Richard J 877 

War  Department,  C.  S 876,877,922 

Sequestration  of  property  in 

E ast  Louis  i an  a 602 

West  Louisiana.  (La  Fourche  District) 592 

Shepley,  George  F.,  appointed  Military  Governor  of 471 

West  of  the  Mississippi  River  designated  La  Fourche  District 592 

Louisiana  Belle,  Steamer.  Mentioned 249, 250, 679, 1102 

76  R R — YOL  XV 


1202 


INDEX. 


Pace. 


Louisiana,  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc. 

October  1,  

December  4,  1862 - 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 

Taylor,  Richard,  assigned  to  command 802 

Louisiana,  Governor  of. 

Address  of,  to  the  people  of  Louisiana 

Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jefferson 740, 747 , 753, 767, 784, 786, 807, 892, 893 

Lovell,  Mansfield / 33, 735, 738 

776 


504 


Mejan,  E . . 

Ruggles,  Daniel 891,894 

Taylor,  Richard 

War  Department,  C.  S 766,  / 68, 773, 775 

Orders. 

Arrest  of 

Bassett,  Mr 

Harris,  Mr 

Sweeny,  Captain 

Soldiers’  families.  Ejection  for  rent,  etc 


753 

753 

755 

589 


Seizure  of  coin  of  New  Orleans  banks 750,751,  /53,  /55 

Seizure  of  steamer  Moro ' " 

Proclamations.  Butler’s  “ women  order” - 743 


^Louisiana  Militia. 

Called  into  service 734, 739, 742, 755,  756, 759, 767, 769,  784, 

788, 796, 797, 803, 804,  819,  82 6, 827, 857, 858, 879, 887, 914, 991, 1079, 1080 


Lewis,  John  L.,  directed  to  report  for  duty  with,  at  Opelousas,  La 

Mentioned.  (S ee  Louisiana  Troops , Confederate.) 

Orders,  series  1862:  No.  426,557;  No.  582,734;  No.  589,739;  No.  610, 
742;  Nos.  63  7,  638,  750;  No.  643,  751;  No.  651,  753;  Nos. 
660,  663,  755;  No.  665  , 756;  Nos.  674,  676,  757;  Nos.  681, 
682,759;  No.  683,760;  No.  684,  761;  No.  690,  767;  No.  694, 
769;  No.  72  7,772;  No.  765,784;  No.  789,788;  No.  810,796; 
Nos.  812,  814,798;  No.  841,  803;  No.  881,  819;  No.  889,  826; 
No.  898,  857;  No.  903,  874;  No.  906,  879;  No.  908,  887  ; No. 
911,  914  ; April  24  (Lewis),  496. 

Orders,  General,  series  1863:  No.  9,  985;  No.  10,  991. 

(See  also  North  Louisiana  Militia,  District  of,  and  South  and  East  Louisi- 
ana Militia,  District  of.) 

Louisiana  Troops,  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Heavy — Battalions  : 8th,  6, 10;  12th,  276,  278,  794,  841,  971,  1033, 
1062.  Regiments : 1st,  10, 19. 

Artillery,  Light— Batteries : Benton’s,  805;  Boone’s,  804,  841,  845,  934, 
1033;  Fenner’s,  841,  845,  846,  934,  1032,  1061,  1070;  Pelican,  176,245,  389, 
390,  395,  397,  398,  680, 1087-1093;  A and  C,  Pointe  Coupee,  1033  ; Saint 
Mary’s  Cannoneers,  384,  389-392, 680,  1090,  1092;  Watson,  18,  273, 1033, 
1037,  1061,  1076. 

Cavalrv — Battalions  : Rreazeale’s,  773 ; 9th, * 90,  104, 105, 188, 272, 278, 519, 
789,  841,  948,  .949,  971,  1033,  1062;  13th,  805,  953,  983,984.  Companies  - 
Bryan’s,  1033, 1062, 1075-;  Daigre’s,  841, 949, 1033, 1038, 1062  ; Grivot  Par- 
tisan Rangers,  773;  Harper’s  Partisan  Rangers,  805;  McWaters’,  773; 
Nutt’s,  773;  Prairie  Rangers,  753;  Stuart’s,  949,  1033;  Thompson’s, 
129,  773.  Regiments  : 2d,  176, 245, 389-392, 395, 680. 1092  ; 3d,  953,954. 


734 


Sometimes  called  1st  Regiment  P.  R. 


INDEX.  1203 

Page. 

Louisiana  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) — Continued. 

Infantry — Battalions:  Confederate  Guards  Response  (Clack),  169,  176, 

177,  245,  376,  391, 392,  395 ; Dupeire’s  Zouaves,  19 ; 8th,  19;  9th,  120-123, 

790,  841, 1033, 1062, 1070 ; 10th,  338, 389, 393,  397,  398,  680  ; 11th,  805,  962. 
Regiments : 1st,  841 ; 3d,  9 ; 4th, 7, 11, 18, 43, 52, 68, 72, 77, 78, 90, 93, 101-103, 

106, 546,  804, 841, 934,  1032, 1061, 1070  ; 5th,  7 ; 12th,  803,  804,  1033 ; 17th, 
11,18;  18th,  167,169,176,  178,  245,  347,  355,  389,  390,  397,  398,  680,  804; 

19th,  804,  850,  1068;  20th,  7;  22d,  23d,  10;  26th,  11,  18,  734;  27th,  6, 

11, 18 ; 28th  (Gray),  245,  361,  389,  390,  392,  395,  680,  790, 805, 1107 ; 29th  * 
(Thomas),  7,11,  18,739;  30th,  52,77,81,90,93,  101-106,  546,804,  841,  934, 

1032, 1061 ; 31st,  805, 873 ; 33d  (see  note,  p.  176) ; Crescent,  169, 176, 178, 

245,  389,  397, 680. 

Militia — Battalions:  Johnson’s  Special,  739.  Regiments:  Avoyelles,  857 ; 

Jeff.  Davis,  680;  La  Fourche,  177,  178;  Pointe  Coupee,  857;  Saint 
Charles,  177 ; Saint  John  the  Baptist,  177 ; Saint  Landry,  857 ; Terre 
Bonne,  176, 769. 

Miscellaneous— Miles’  Legion,  278, 804, 841, 934, 1033, 1071,  1076 ; Stewart’s 
Legion,  77,  90,  100-102, 105-107,  788. 

Louisiana  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Artillery,  Heavy — Regiments . 1st  ( Colored),  628,713. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 1st,  167-169,  172,  234,  236,  239,  256,  299,  319,  324,  347, 

359,  362,  375,  410,  411,  628,  653,  712, 713,  728, 729, 1103. 

Infantry — Regiments : 1st,  198,  363,  371,  373,  374,  376-379,  548,  556,645,655, 

714 ; 1st  (Colored),  159,  161,  162,  170,  628,  634,  711,  713;  2d,  254,  257,  266, 

267,  409,  627,  645,  712;  2d  (Colored),  159,  162,  587,  628,  634,  712-714;  3d 


(Colored),  256,628,  634,  711,  713;  4th  (Colored),  711,713. 

Louisville,  Steamer.  Mentioned 245,963 

L’Ouverture,  Toussaint.  Mentioned 566 

Love,  George  M.  Mentioned 712 

Lovell,  Mansfield. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 735, 741, 746, 752 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 463 

Farragut,  D.  G 474, 484 

Lee,  Robert  E 756 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 733, 735, 739 

War  Department,  C.  S 459, 741, 750, 751, 758, 760 

Wren,  William 460 

Mentioned 6,9, 

15, 25, 54, 424, 448, 449, 502, 589, 740-742, 746, 752, 754, 762, 766, 811, 901 

Report  of  engagement  at  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  June  9, 1862  21 

Lovell,  William  S. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 852 

Report  of  inspection  of  defenses  of  Vicksburg,  Miss 852 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  I.  G.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton.) 

Lowell,  Charles  R.  Mentioned 259,703 

Lowry,  Reigart  B.  Mentioned 167,568 

Lowry,  Robert.  Mentioned .* 18,1033 

Lubbock,  Captain.  Mentioned .. 930 

Lubbock,  Francis  R.  Mentioned 149,221,807,829,836,838,870, 


887,  895, 897, 900, 915,  925, 926,  928, 945, 950-952, 972, 1034, 1057, 1079, 1080 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Texas,  Governor  of.) 


Also  called  28th. 


1204 


INDEX. 


Pace. 


Lubbock,  H.  S. 

Correspondence  with  X.  B.  Debray - 830,831 

Mentioned 215, 216, 225, 227, 829, 974 

Lubbock,  W.  IVL 

Correspondence  with  X.  B.  Debray 831 

Mentioned 929,830,865 

Luckett,  P.  N. 

Correspondence  with  John  B.  Magrader - ---* - - - 960 

Mentioned 851,923,1017 

Lucy  Gwinn,  Steamer.  Mentioned 931,957, 1053 

Ludlow,  W.  H.  Mentioned 

Lujan,  Martin.  Mentioned - _ 229 

Lull,  Oliver  W.  Mentioned 235>  331 

Luna,  J.  A.,  & Co.  Mentioned 541 

Luttrel,  Ned.  Correspondence  with  John  H.  Forney 833 

Lyle,  Dr.  Mentioned ^ 801,802 

Lyle,  William  J.  Mentioned 737’  738>  7^r> 

Lyles,  O.  P.  Mentioned 1032,  1061 

Lynch.  F.  J.  Mentioned 

Lynch,  William  F.  Mentioned 16,  lh 

Lynn,  Mr.  Mentioned — * * 

Lynn,  Arthur  T.  Correspondence  with  John  B.  Magrnder 905,911 

Lynn,  D.  A.  Mentioned 1061 

Lynn,  J.  W.  Mentioned 32 

McAfee,  Robert  C.  Mentioned *9 

McAllister,  David.  Mentioned 

McCan  & Harrell.  Mentioned 

McCardle,  W.  H.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton .)  j 

McCarthey,  Charles.  Mentioned 356 

McCauley,  G.  W.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  B.  H.  Helm.) 

McCleave,  William. 

Correspondence  with  Joseph  R.  West 

Mentioned 580>  598>  601’  J84’  ^ 

McClellan,  Steamer.-  Mentioned , 233 ’ 3 

McClellan,  George  B.  Mentioned 421,458,465,494,502,516,544,77® 

McClelland,  Robert,  U.  S.  R.  C.  (See  Robert  McClelland , U.  S.  R.  C.) 

Me  demand,  John  A.  Mentioned 1041,1043,1045,104/, 

McCluer,  James  L.  Mentioned 

McClnng,  H.  L.  W.  Mentioned 18,801,SU3 

McClure,  J.  W.  Mentioned 

McCord,  James  J.  Mentioned - g— 

McCormick,  Captain.  Mentioned ’ 

McCormick,  Charles.  Correspondence  with 

Butler,  Benjamin  

Del  Rayo,  Joaquin 

Fisher,  John  A.  

McCown,  J.  B. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  Green 

Mentioned * 

McCoy,  Captain.  Mentioned 

McCoy,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 

McCrory,  T.  N.  Mentioned 

McCulloch,  H.  E.  Mentioned 

McCulloch,  William  H.  Mentioned 


611 

167 


585 


bit 

587 


...  921 

...  887 

...  832 

§9 

10 

1056, 1083 
...  672 


INDEX. 


1205 


Page. 

McDermot,  David  A.  Mentioned 402,403 

McDermott,  Peter.  Mentioned - 64° 

McDonald,  M.  Mentioned 11 

McDonogh  School-Fund  Trustees.  Mentioned 540 

MacElroy, . Mentioned 982 

McFarland,  Moses.  Mentioned J 23^> 

McFarland  & Barksdale.  Mentioned °41 

McFerran,  John  C.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  J.  H.  Carleton.) 

MacGavock,  R.  W.  Mentioned 1033 

McGivem,  Claud.  Mentioned 1121 

McGovern,  Captain.  Mentioned 217 

McGreal,  P.  Mentioned 222 

Mcllhenny,  R.  Mentioned ^ 

Mclivaine,  William.  Mentioned 2®4 

Mack,  Albert  G. 


Report  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland,  La.,  April  12—13,  1863 322 

Mackall,  William  W. 

Assignments  to  command 899 

Mentioned 899, 903, 1001, 1068, 1077 

McKee,  A.  W.  Mentioned 757,774,986,1054 

McKee,  William  H.  Mentioned *80 

McKenzie,  John.  Mentioned 44,67 

Mackey,  T.  J.  Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis 805 

McKie,  M.  J.  Mentioned 806 

McKinley,  Daniel  A.  Mentioned 930 

McKinley,  Thomas.  Mentioned * 930 

McKinstry,  James  P.  Mentioned  252,302 

Macklin,  S.  Mentioned 47*> 

Me  Knight,  Dr.  Mentioned 1131 

McKoin,  J.  Correspondence  with  Albert  G.  Blanchard 953 

McLaflin,  Edward.  Mentioned 136,184,450,455 

McLane,  Abraham.  Mentioned 467,469 

McLean,  Frank  Jay.  Mentioned 999 

McLellan.  J.  C.  Mentioned 541 

McLemore,  Rayburn  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

Maclin,  R.  B.  Mentioned 851 

Maclin,  R.  D.  Mentioned 540 

Maclin,  Sackfield.  Mentioned 1020 

McMahan,  M.  V.  Mentioned 217 

McMahon,  B.  V.  B.  Mentioned 540 

McMartin,  James.  Mentioned - 828 

McMichael,  R.  V.  Mentioned 123 

McMillan,  James  W. 

Mentioned 25, 34, 58, 63, 133-135, 256, 258, 320, 424, 451, 453-455, 776 

Reports  of 

Donaldsonville,  La.  Expedition  to,  and  skirmish,  Sept.  21-25,  1862...  141 

Saint  Charles  Court-House,  La.  Expedition  to  vicinity  of,  and  skir- 
mish, September  7-8,  1862 f 135 

McMullen,  William.  Mentioned 721,725 

McNeill,  H.  C. 

Correspondence  with  Charles  Russell 1072 

Mentioned 2^7 

Macon  Bayou,  La.  Skirmish  at,  May  10,  1863 4 


1-206 


INDEX. 


Page.  ;i 

McPheeters,  G.  P.  Mentioned  161, 169, 178 

McRae,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 734 

McRae,  General.  Mentioned 501 

McRae,  W.  D.  L. 

Correspondence  with 

Ruggles,  Daniel 787,789  I 

Slocum,  John  J 787 

Mentioned 790  [ 

McStea,  Value  & Co.  Mentioned 540 

Me  Waters,  J.  A.  Mentioned 142,773 

McWilliams’  Plantation,  La.  Skirmish  at,  April  13,  1863.  (See  Porter’s 
and  McWilliams ’ Plantations.) 

McWillie,  M.  H. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 940 

Mentioned 857,914 

Maddox, . Mentioned 1128,1129,1135  1 

Madero,  Evaristo.  Mentioned  1067 

Madigan,  John,  jr.  Mentioned 109 

Madison,  George  T.  Mentioned 606,942,978 

Madisonville,  La.  Skirmish  at,  July  27,  1862.  (See  Pontchartrain  Lake,  La. 
Operations  around,  July  25- August  2,  1862.) 

Magee,  Horten  & George.  Mentioned 540 

Magee,  James  M. 

Mentioned 36, 37, 268 

Report  of  expedition  to  Hermitage  Landing,  La.,  March  24,  1863 268 

Magee,  R.  S.  Mentioned 189 

Magoffin,  Samuel.  Mentioned 396  < 

Magruder,  George  A.  Mentioned 217, 222, 881  j 

Magruder,  J.  M.  Report  of  skirmishes  on  Comite  River,  La.,  Mar.  9-10, 1863.  280  ' 

Magruder,  John  B. 

Assignments  to  command 826,880 

Congratulatory  orders. 

Sabine  Pass,  Tex.  Attack  on  blockading  squadron  at,  January  21, 1863  . 238 

Saint  Joseph’s  Island,  Tex.  Affair  at,  May  3, 1863  1085  j 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 884,  i 

894, 918, 954, 999, 1004, 1030 

Arizona,  Governor  of 914 

Baird,  S.  M 1064, 1075 

Bankhead,  Smith  P 1066 

Bee,  Hamilton  P 922, 

933, 950, 964, 965, 973,  979,  991, 1004, 1006, 1012, 1013, 1016, 1024, 1056, 1077 

Bell,  H.  H 221,222,224 

Cushing,  E.  H 897 

Davis,  Jefferson 211 

Debray,  X.  B 225,897,909 

Flewellen,  J.  P 886,890 

Forshey,  C.  G 885,1001 

Hardeman,  P 946, 960, 989 

Haynie,  H.  H 952 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 220, 879, 886, 894, 895, 897, 900, 902, 903, 922, 936, 972 

Houston,  Samuel 933 

Jackson,  A.  M 905,912 


INDEX. 


1207 


Page. 


Magruder,  John  B.— Continued. 

Correspondence  with  900 

Luckett,  N 905,911 

Lynn,  Arthur  gg- 

Mason,  C.  957 

Nichols,  " * i <157 

Nuevo  Leon  and  Coahuila,  Mexico,  Governor  of ^ 

Pemberton,  John  * * 970j  9g^  1003 

Reily , James. ~ - *1027, 1034, 1053, 1074, 1079 

Scurry,  William  949 

Shea,  Dan.  1036, 1043, 1 078 


Smith,  E.  Kirby 


227 

34 

236 

337 


....  1022,1034,1041,1063 

Sulakowski,  V 9^q  gg3 

Taylor,  Eichard. - - " " 952!  974 

Texas,  Governor  of  . ...  857, 897, 931, 932, 967 

War  Department,  C.  S 1017, 1020 

Webb,  Henry  926 

Mentioned  Wmiam  G ' 204;  221-223;  '226;  237, 332^  m,  552, 659, 684, 

'754  769,774,  775,  779,  826,  857,  858,  868-870,  879-881,  883,  890,  897,  905, 
908-9 10*  912-914,  921,  926,  940,  946,  950-952,  955,  956,  959,  968-971,  980, 
1000,  1001,  1017,  1027,  1030,  1034,  1035, 1048, 1056, 1066, 1079, 1084, 1085 
Proclamation  declaring  blockade  of  Galveston  raised 

RePGalveston,  Tex.  Recapture  of,  by  Confederate  forces,  Jan.  1, ^1863  210,211 
Sabine  Pass,  Tex.  Attack  on  Blockading  Squadron  at,  Jan.  21, 1863..  237 

Staff.  Announcements  of 

Statement  of.  Surrender  of  Galveston 

Mahan,  John.  Mentioned 

Maher,  Thomas.  Mentioned.. 

Mahon,  Edward.  Mentioned 

Mail  Facilities.  (See  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  422.) 

MalArinu°yPIdghl-Sa«er/es ; 1st,  135-138, 168, 173, 234, 236, 319-321, 330, 334- 

336,338,340,347,353,356,628,650,712. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 12th,  111,139,140,361,  382-385 . 626 s627 
713,714, 1108;  13th,  628,  713  ; 14th,  39,  40,  43,  45, 

71,  74,  133,  135-138,  282,  628,  646,  713,776;  15th,  525,  570,  628,  699,  , 

21st,  673, 712  ; 22d,  319,  374,  377,  626, 627, 714 ; 24th,  282,  713 ; 26th,  31  , 
383-385,  626,  627,  714;  2Sth,  677,  699,  713. 

Maja,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Major,  J.  F.  Mentioned 

Malabar,  Steamer.  Mentioned 9 10,.v 

Mallory,  S.  R.  Mentioned ’ 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Navy  Department,  C.  S.)  ^ 

Malone,  James  C.,  jr.  Mentioned 

Manassas,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 

Manchac  Pass,  La.  (See  Pass  Manchac , La.) 

Mandeville,  George  S.  Mentioned 319  3&5 

Manley,  John  W.  Mentioned 

Manly,  John  H.  ^ 

Correspondence  with  Joseph  J.  Cook 214*218  837 

Mentioned ’ ’ ^3 

Mann,  Edward  D.  Mentioned 


..  660 
19, 1049 
..  961 


42 


542 


1208 


INDEX. 


Manning,  Charles  H. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862. 

Manning,  J.  C.  Mentioned 

Mansfield,  John  B.  Mentioned 


Page. 

45, 40, 59, 60 

63 

476 

322 


Mansfield,  Samuel  M.  .Mentioned - 626,714 

Many,  Edward.  Mentioned 194 

Marigny,  M.  de.  Mentioned 791,795,839,921 

Marks, . Correspondence  with  John  Marks 660 

Marks,  John.  Correspondence  with 

Lambert, 

Marks, 


- 660 

660 

Marks,  Leon  D.  Mentioned 6,11,18 

Marmaduke,  J.  S.  Mentioned 1082 

Marmion,  Captain.  Mentioned 930 

Marsh,  Lucius  B.  Mentioned 634,646,649,713 

Marsh,  O.  M.  Mentioned 180 

Marshall,  Simon.  Mentioned 36,37 

Martial  Law. 

Alabama 859 

Louisiana 740,771,772,806,841 

Mississippi 771,772,806 

Texas 220, 829, 974, 975, 1006, 1018, 1021 

Martin,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 140 

Martin,  G.  W.  Mentioned 805, 891 

Martin,  James.  Mentioned 212,216,974 

Martin,  It.  C.  Mentioned 755,756,767,798,799 

Martin,  T.  D.  Mentioned 750 

Marvin,  S.  G.  Mentioned - 154,155,158 

Mary  A.  Boardman,  Steamer.  Mentioned 202,203,209 

Mary  T.,  C.  S.  S.  (See  J.  A.  Cotton , C.  S.  S .) 

Mason,  C.  M. 

Correspondence  with  John  B.  Magruder 935 

Mentioned , 217, 219, 826 


(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  Paul  0.  Hubert.) 
Massachusetts,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  Navy  Department,  U.  S . 412, 413 
Massachusetts  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light— Batteries : 2d,  20, 22, 25, 26, 31 , 35, 39, 43, 45, 46, 51, 52, 56, 57, 

59,  60,  62,  63, 66, 68, 72, 100, 134,  320, 359-362, 365,  366,  381-383, 448,  628, 650, 

714;  4th,  39,  43-45,  50-52,  56,  58-60,  62-64,67,70-72,75,111,234,236,628, 

650,  651,  714  ; 6th,  25,  26,  31,  35,  39,  43,  45,  51,  52,  56,  59,  60,  64,  65,  72,  167, 

168,  234,  236,  319-322,  324,  329,  450,  502,  546,  628,  650,  712 ; 12th,  673,  713 ; 

13th,  713. 

Cavalry— Battalions  : 2d  {Magee),  25,  26,  36,  39,  44,  51, 132, 167-169, 193-195, 

197,  239,  257,  268,  269,  324,  361,  628,  655,  659,  712,  713.  Regiments  : 2d,  259, 

647,  694,  703. 

Infantry— Regim en ts : 4th,  330,  342,  673,  713;  26th,  139,  449,  628,  646,  713; 

30th,  20,  21,  24, 26, 27, 43,  44, 51, 52,  56,  59-63,  66, 67,  74,  409,  628, 712 ; 31st, 

25, 319, 330, 332, 346-351,  354,  356,  465, 626, 628,  713, 714 ; 38th,  319, 330,  332, 

347, 349-354,  357,  714  ; 41st,  256,  263,  361,  382,  383,  626,  627,  714;  42d,  195, 
199-208,  223-227,  619,  628, 646,  713 ; 47th,  634,  646, 649,  713  ; 48th,  256,  673, 

712:  49th,  673,  712;  50th,  645,  673,  712,  728;  52d,  196-199,  383,  626,  627, 

714;  53d,  319,  330,  332,  346-348,352-355,714. 

Massey,  William.  Mentioned 540 


INDEX. 


1209 


Pane. 


Massie,  J.  C. 


Mentioned 831,832 


905 

188 


Mastin,  W.  F.  Mentioned 

Matagorda,  Tex.  Affair  near,  November  20, 1862.  Report  of  X.  B.  Debray . . 

Matanzas,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Mathews,  Oliver.  Mentioned 126 

Mathews,  R.  B. 

Correspondence  "with  William  Preston * * 

Mentioned 

Matthews,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 358>  371» 373 

Matthews,  Jesse.  Mentioned 930 

Maury,  Dabney  H. 

Assignments  to  command 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A 

War  Department,  C.  

Mentioned - 1056’1077 

Maxey,  S.  B. 

Correspondence  with  Franklin  Gardner - 

Mentioned 275, 934, 965, 971, 1000, 1032, 1037, 1061. 1070, 1071, 1076, 1081 

Mentioned 939 


1123 

1123 


1'056 

1056 

1059 


Mav,  Andrew  J. 


502 

916 

574 

194 


May,  Henry.  Mentioned 

May,  John  F.  Mentioned 

Mayer,  A.  H.  Mentioned — - 

Mayer,  C.  Mentioned *' 

Mayo,  George  Upshur. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 84® 

Reports  of  condition  of  batteries  at 

Port  Hudson,  La.,  October  24,  1862  - 844 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  October  31,  1862 848 

Mazereau,  A.  * 

Correspondence  with 

Bland,  Ben ^ 

Putnam,  James  495 

Mentioned 495 

Meem,  J.  G.,  jr.  Mentioned 1009 

Meigs,  General,  Steamer.  Mentioned - 109 

Meigs,  M.  C.  Mentioned 493,671,725,1099 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Quartermaster- General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.) 

Me jaii,  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 427,479,516,533,549 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 776 

Mentioned 424,479,516,588,618,643,1101 

Melancon,  Elvi.  Mentioned — 79,r> 

Meilon,  T.  A.  Mentioned 11,18 

Memminger,  R.  W.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton.) 
Memnonium,  Sanford,  Steamer. 

Loss  of,  December  10, 1862.  Communications  from  Erastus  Cooke 608 

Mentioned 608,1096 

Menard,  M.  Mentioned 826, 829, 839, 865 

Meneley,  William  M.  Mentioned * 939 

Mercer,  W.  Newton. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler — 438,565 

Mentioned 


472 


1210 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Mercier,  Henri.  Mentioned 581 , 

Merino.  General.  Mentioned 685  j 

Merrimac,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 42 

Merritt,  Mr.  Mentioned 729 

Merritt,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 599, 606, 683 

Merritt,  Robert  B.  Mentioned 645 

Messer,  Carlos  P.  Mentioned 645,712,728 

Metcalf,  J.  H.  Mentioned 45,70 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  Frank  S.  Nickerson.) 

Mexican  Consulate.  Communications  from  Benjamin  F.  Butler 471}, 

(See  also  note,  p.  497.) 

Mexico. 

Articles  of  agreement  with  Confederates 993,997,998 

Hart,  Simeon,  detailed  as  agent  for  purchase  of  supplies  in 866 

Relations  with.  Communications  from 

Bee,  Hamilton  923, 966, 

973,  979,  991,  992,  998, 1006, 1007, 1016, 1024, 1051, 1127, 1129, 1132-1135 

Benavides,  Santos 1940 

Buchel,  A 923,924 

Carleton,  James  H — 578,681,687,  /08 

Chihuahua,  Governor  of 701 

Fergusson,  David — 674, 682, 686, 687 

Olivier,  L 974 


Tamaulipas,  Governor  of 975, 

994, 996, 1006, 1007, 1025, 1044, 1126, 1128, 1130, 1133 

West,  Joseph  634, 635, 6o8 

(See  also  Bee  to  Anderson , p.  881 ; Luckett  to  Dickinson,  p.  960 ; Magruder  to 
Cooper,  p.  1030.) 

Miami,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 428, 537, 548 

Michigan  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 6th,  26,  39,  43,  45,  51,  52,  56,  57,  59,  60,  62,  66-68, 106, 

137,  138,  234,  236,  259,  281,  282,  284,  406,  502,  628,  646,  647,  713. 

Miles,  Eldridge  G.  Mentioned 236 

Miles,  William  R. 

Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles 

Mentioned 276,  408, 999, 1000, 1071, 1076 

Miller,  Private.  (21  st  Indiana.)  Mentioned 450,451 

Miller,  Private.  (2 d Battn.  Mass.  Cav.)  Mentioned 37 

Miller,  George  W.  Mentioned ®49 

Miller,  H.  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Clark,  Thomas  28^ 

Pemberton,  John  269, 1023 

Mentioned 269, 279, 285, 672, 769, 1023, 1024, 1033, 1038 

Reports  of  expedition  to  Ponchatoula,  La.,  and  skirmishes,  March  21-30, 

1863  286'289 


Miller,  John  C. 

Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles 

Mentioned 

Miller,  W.  C. 

Correspondence  with  Franklin  Gardner 

Mentioned 

Millett,  J.  H. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862 


777 

805 

981 

962 

81,84 

86 


INDEX. 


1211 


Page. 

Milliken’s  Bend,  La. 

Affair  at,  August  18,  1862 

Expedition  from,  December  25-26,  1862.  Communications  from 

Blanchard,  Albert  ^ 

Cohscript  Bureau,  C.  S.  A ' 

Davis,  Jefferson 9 952  • 

Sparrow,  Edward ^ 

Taylor,  Richard ' 

War  Department,  C.  ’ ^ 

Mills,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Miltenberger,  A.,  & Co.  Mentioned 

Miltenberger,  Ar.  Mentioned 

Milton,  Fla. 

Expedition  to,  June  14-15, 1862.  Reports  of 

Arnold,  Lewis  G ^ 

Cassidy,  Michael 

Heuberer,  Charles  

Reconnaissances  to,  August  7-10, 1862.  (See  Pensacola,  Fla.  Meconnais- 
sancts  front,  August  7-10,  1862.) 

Milton,  John.  Mentioned ^ 

Miner,  W.  J.  Mentioned * 

Minor,  William.  Mentioned 

Minter,  J.  F.  Mentioned 825,968,973,1009,10/4 

Mire,  Camille.  Mentioned " '9’ 

Mississippi,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned ’ 4 **’ 

Mississippi,  Steamer.  Mentioned ’ ’ 

Mississippi,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned ‘ ‘ ' ’ , , * 

252, 254, 255, 260, 262, 272-274, 276, 277, 428, 461, 564, 1025, 1114, 1115 

“S‘i„ 

Military  departments  embracing 746,7/1,  '84,82 

Militia.  Communications  from  Daniel  Ruggles 

Operations  in.  (See  .... 

Southern  Mississippi. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.) 

Mississippi,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles 822 

Mississippi  River. 

Naval  operations  on  the.  Communications  from 

Adiutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A 905 

Army  Headquarters ^’q/u 

Buckner,  S.  ' 

Butler,  Benjamin  iiiq 

Farragut,  D.  * 

Garduer,  Franklin 956,958,959,972,999, 1003,1039 

Huggins,  662 

Pemberton,  John  C 955,957,958,972,1000,1029,1037 

Porter,  W.  53J 

Ruggles,  Daniel 

Weitzel,  G 545 

Youngblood,  J.  962 

(See  also 

April  18-May  1,  1862.  New  Orleans,  La.  Operations  against,  and  cap- 
ture of. 

May  12-13,  1862.  Natchez,  Miss.  Surrender  of. 

18- July  27,  1862.  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations  against  and 
about. 


1212 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Mississippi  River — Continued. 

Naval  operations  on  the. 

(See  also 

July  27-Aug.  6.  1862.  Baton  Rouge,  La.  Operations  about. 

Aug.  9,  1862.  Donaldsonrille,  La.  Bombardment  of. 

10,  1862.  Bayou  Sara,  La,  Affair  at. 

18,  1862.  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.  Affair  at. 

Fair  Play,  Steamer.  Capture  of  the. 

23,  1862.  Bayou  Sara,  La.  Affair  at. 

29,  1862.  Port  Hudson,  La.  Engagement  between  U.  S.  S.  Anglo- 
American  and  batteries  at. 

Sept.  7,  1862.  Port  Hudson,  La.  Engagement  between  TJ.  S.  S.  Essex 
and  batteries  at. 

Nov.  27,  1862.  Lone  Star,  Steamer.  Capture  of  the. 

Jan.  20-July  4,  1863.  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations  against  and  about. 

Feb.  3,  1863.  Baker,  Berwick  Bay,  and  Moro,  Steamers.  Capture  of, 
by  the  Queen  of  the  West. 

24,  1863.  Indianola,  U.  S S.  Capture  of. 

Mar.  7-27,  1863.  Port  Hudson,  La.  Operations  against  and  about.) 
Operations  on  west  bank  of  tbe,  Mar.  17,  1863.  Report  of  T.  W.  Parmele..-  266 
(See  also  report  of  Gardner',  pp.  275,279.) 

Mississippi  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light— Ba tteries:  Brookhaven,  804,  841,  1033,  1062;  English’s, 
804,841,971,  1033,  1062;  Pettus  Flying,  18,78,79,82,85,795,801,1033; 
Seven  Stars,  409,  804,  845,  934,  1032,  1061.  Regiments:  1st,*  9,  11, 15, 19, 

278;  ( Batteries ),  A,  7,  169 ; B,  935,  1032, 1061 ; F,  841,  845,846,  935,  1032, 

1061 ; H,  176,  177,  178,  804 ; K,  9:15,  1032, 1061. 

Cavalry — Battalions : Garland’s,  289, 841, 949, 971, 1033, 1062 ; Hughes’,  280, 

841,  949,  971,  1033,  1062,  1070  ; McLaurin’s,  1062.  Companies : Black- 
burn’s, 801 ; Cage’s,  1033, 1062, 1076 ; McLaurin’s,  804  ; Norman’s,  841, 

949, 1033, 1062 ; Rhodes’,  949, 971, 1033, 1038, 1062 ; Stockdale’s,  189, 841, 

949,  1033,  1062,  1076;  Terrell’s,  36,  189,  841,  949,  1033,  1062.  Regiments: 

1st,  291, 400,  401, 949, 1033, 1062 ; 28th,  7, 15, 19,  751. 

Infantry — Battalions : 6th,  7, 11, 18.  Companies : Lewis’,  804, 841, 971, 1033, 

1062.  Regiments:  1st,  935, 1032, 1061 ; 3d,  11,  18,  739;  4th,  841 ; 6th,  18, 
1005,1033;  15th,  18,  78.81,  82,89,1033;  22d,  18,78,82,83,92,105;  31st, 

18, 78, 82,  84, 85, 88, 89  ; 39th,  18, 93, 935, 1032, 1061, 1120. 

Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana,  Department  of.  (Confederate.) 


Constituted,  and  limits  defined 820 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  1,  827 ; No.  3,  840. 

Pemberton,  John  C.,  assigned  to,  and  assumes,  command 820,827 

Subdivisions  of. 

First  District. 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined - 840 

Ruggles,  Daniel,  assigned  to  command 840 

Second  District. 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 840 

Smith,  M.  L.,  assigned  to  command 840 

Third  District. 

Beall,  W.  N.  R.,  assigned  to  command ' 840 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 840 


Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc.  (See  Port 
Hudson,  La.) 


Batteries  designated  when  practicable. 


INDEX. 


1213 


Page. 

Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana,  Department  of.  (Confederate.)— Cont’d. 
Subdivisions  of. 

Third  District. 

Orders,  General,  series  1863 : No.  5,  934. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  17,  948;  No.  98, 1037;  No.  123, 

1070;  No.  125,  1071;  No.  128,  1076. 

Mississippi,  District  of  the.  (Confederate.) 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc.,  July  31,  1862 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined - - - ' 

Designated  Department  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana 

Orders,  General,  series  1862  : No.  2,  805.^  ^ ^ 

Ruggles,  George  D.,  assigned  to  command  of ^ 

Van  Dorn,  Earl,  assigned  to  command  of 

Missouri  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries  ■ 1st  (Bledsoe),  1033,  1062. 

Infantry — Regiments : 1st,  18.  ^ 

Mitauk,  Mr.  Mentioned ’ ^ 

Mitchell,  Alfred.  Mentioned 49~ 

Mitchell,  Henry.  Mentioned ^ 

Mittanck,  Fr.  Mentioned i^'irn'ann  wa 

Mobile,  Ala. 

Affairs  at.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 

Davis,  Jefferson _ 

Forney,  John  ™ 

Luttrel,  Ned 

Pemberton,  John  ’ ’ „ ~ 

War  Department,  C.  ^ 

Brigade  organization  of  troops  at 

Defenses  of. 

Communications  from 

Alabama,  Governor  of 888, 

Beauregard , G.  T ^ 

Buckner,  Simon  

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 4 * 

Leadbetter,  Danville 867 > 963>  1010> 1014> 1029 ’ 1080 

Mobile,  Ala.,  Committee  of  Safety 889 

War  Department,  C.  S 898,902,1077 

Sketches  of  obstructions  proposed  for  Alabama  River 1020 

Martial  law.  Communications  from  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office,  C.  S.  A. . 859 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  lrom  Simon  B.  Buckner 10/0 

„ , 937,938,971 

Supplies  for ’ 

Mobile,  Ala.,  Committee  of  Safety  of.  Correspondence  with  Alabama,  Gov- 
ernor of ffp 

Moise,  E.  W.  Mentioned 'f? 

Moise,  T.  S.  Mentioned 825, 86b,  867 

MoUneux,  Edward  L.  Mentioned 256’  383> 385’  626» ' j4 

Monarch,  U.  S.  .S.  Mentioned - - 3 ’ 

Monongahela,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 251, 252, 262, 273, 274,276, 1069 

! Monroe,  Coxswain.  Mentioned 908 

Montague,  C.  Mentioned ’ 

Montebello,  Ship.  Mentioned - 4 ' 

Montfort,  Benito.  Mentioned 1105,1107 

Montgomery,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 522 


1214 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Montgomery, . Mentioned 1017,1079,1132 

Montgomery,  J.  E.  Mentioned 763,765,766 

Montgomery,  Jonathan.  Mentioned 540 

Montgomery,  Peter  D.  Mentioned 284 

Montgomery  & Hall.  Mentioned 541 

Montgomery  & White.  Mentioned 541 

Montreuil,  Auguste.  Mentioned 472 

Moore,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 999 

Moore,  Benjamin  G.  Mentioned 1123 

Moore,  B.  F.  Mentioned 18,81,89 

Moore,  J.  Mentioned 149 

Moore,  J.  C.  Mentioned 1033 

Moore,  Thomas  O.  Mentioned 299, 


424,  502, 503, 556-558, 735, 740,  775, 796, 807, 822, 824, 890, 910, 1081 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Louisiana,  Governor  of.) 

Moore,  Webster  P.  Mentioned 332,339 

Moore,  William  J.  Mentioned 658 

Moore  8c  Browder.  Mentioned 541 

Morelle,  . Mentioned 453 

Moreno,  Francesco.  Mentioned 1036 

Morey,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 354 

Morgan,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 117 

Morgan,  Elizabeth.  Mentioned 540 

Morgan,  George  W.  Mentioned 555 

Morgan,  Harriet.  Mentioned 540 

Morgan,  John  H.  Mentioned 799 

Morgan,  Joseph  S.  Mentioned 609 

Morgan,  Mary  M.  Mentioned 540 

Morgan,  Rachel.  Mentioned 540 

Morgan,  Sarah.  Mentioned 540 

Morning  Light,  Steamer.  Mentioned 137,194-196,266,370,379,1102 

Morning  Light,  U.  S.  Ship.  Mentioned 225 

Moro,  Steamer. 

Capture  of,  by  the  Queen  of  the  West,  February  3,  1863 

Mentioned 755 

Morris,  Henry  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Fox,  Steamer,  Captain  of 562 

Roe,  F.  A 568 

Mentioned 133, 142, 258, 309, 560, 562, 568 

Morris,  Josephus.  Mentioned - 451,452,454,456 

Morrison,  Arthur.  Mentioned 228-230, 574 

Morrison,  J.  H. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 855 

Mentioned 288, 855 

(For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  John  C.  Pemberton.) 

Morse,  Joshua  C.  Mentioned 132 

Morton,  Charles  B.  Mentioned 256,634 

Morton,  John  E. 

Mentioned 334-336, 347, 356, 357, 712 

Report  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland,  La.,  April  12-13, 1663  336 

Moss,  B.  Mentioned 540 

Mott,  Mr.  Mentioned 815 

Moulker,  J.  E.  Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggle3 775 


INDEX. 


1215 


Page. 

Mound  City,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned lo9 

bouton,  Alexander.  Mentioned ,311 

bouton,  Alfred. 

Mentioned 167, 174, 175, 303, 332, 345,  389,  390, 

392-395,  452,  676,  677,  680,  827,  855, 859, 860, 1081, 1090-1092, 1094, 1105 

Reports  of 

La  Fourche  District,  La.  Operations  in,  October  24-November  6, 1862.  176 

West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  April  11-19, 1863 396 

Mouton,  J.  S.  Mentioned 499 

Mouwa,  . Mentioned 1^4>  4577 

Vloye,  Charles.  Mentioned 682,683 

Moye  6c  Brother.  Mentioned 685 

Mullen,  R.  W.  Mentioned 71 

Muller, . Mentioned 686 

Muller,  Henry.  Mentioned 682 

Mullet,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 396> 397 

Mullett,  Thomas. 

Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles 7®9 

Mentioned  . . 779 

Mulvey,  William.  Mentioned 3^7 

Mumford,  Frank,  Steamer.  Mentioned I19" 

Mumford,  William  B. 

Execution  of.  Communications  from  Benjamin  F.  Butler 469 

(See  also  proclamations  of  Governor  of  Louisiana,  pp.  504-510;  of  Jefferson 
• Davis,  p.  906  ; Stanton  to  Butler,  p.  465 ; Moore  to  Davis,  p.  753.) 

Mentioned 465, 469, 488, 509, 753, 754, 906 

Munitions  of  War. 

Exportation  of.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 

Banks,  Nathaniel  643, 1101 

(See  also  Banks  to  Halleclc,  pp.  618, 1099.) 


Supplies  of.  Communications  from 

Abert,  William  S 

Army  Headquarters 

Arnold,  Richard 

Baird,  S.  M 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 

Bee,  IL  P 

Blanchard,  Albert  G 

Brannan,  J.  M 

Buchel,  A 

Bulkley,  Charles  S 

Burgess,  John  D 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 

Chandler,  J.  G. 

Davis,  Jefferson 

Gardner,  Franklin 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 

Hubbell,  J 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 

Lovell,  Mansfield 

Magruder,  John  B 

Mobile,  Ala.,  Committee  of  Safety 
Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A . . . 


648 

671,702 

649,650 

1064,1075 

688,693,718,719 

923,1004 

790 

458 

923,924 

65*2 

1065 

458,513,514,525 

1101 

758,767,920 

985,1018,1037 

922,972 

1065 

766 

73a 

884, 894, 895, 897, 900, 952, 1004 

889 

876,878,922 


1216 


INDEX. 


Pace. 


Munitions  of  War — Continued. 

Supplies  of.  Communications  from 

Pemberton,  John  C 1024, 1055, 1070 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 691,872,1098 

Robinson,  Harai 652, 1103 

Russell,  Charles  

Taylor,  Richard 867, 872, 958, 1021 

Texas,  Governor  of 896 

War  Department,  C.  S 760,  768, 790,  808,  8Go,  922, 1035 

Washington,  T.  A 1028 

Willis,  Edward  606 

(See  also  Banka  to  Sherman,  p.  703 ; Banks  to  Hailed* , p.  1099.  Beauregard 

to  Lovell , p.  746  ; Bee  to  A nderson , p.  881 ; Bee  to  Dickinson,  pp.  973,  ( 

1013,  1024;  Bee  to  Magruder,  p.  979;  Butler  to  Stanton,  pp.  447, 

502  ; Carleton  to  West,  p.  599 ; Carleton  to  Thomas,  p.  681 ; Carleton 
to  Creel,  p.708;  Davis  to  Moore,  p.  786;  Fergusson  to  West,  pp.  674, 

682 ; Halleclc  to  Banks,  p.  702 ; Long  to  Lovell,  p.  756 ; Lovell  to 
Beauregard,  p.  741  : Lovell  to  Davis , p.  740 ; Lovell  to  Moore,  p.  739; 
Luckett  to  Dickinson,  p.  960  ; Mackey  to  Johnston,  p.  805 ; Magruder 
to  Cooper,  p.  1030 ; Moore  to  Davis,  p.  747 ; Moore  to  Randolph,  p. 

773 ; Olivier  to  Quinton,  p.  974  ; Pemberton  to  Taylor,  pp.  868,  963 ; 
Indorsement  of  Randolph,  p.  775  ; Seddon  to  Maury,  p.  1059;  Smith 
to  Irwin,  p.  709;  Sibley  to  Holmes,  p.  910;  Smith  to  Scurry,  p.  1062; 

Smith  to  Taylor,  p.  1C81 ; Taylor  to  Pemberton,  p.  859 ; Taylor  to 
Hubert,  p.  838 ; West  to  Fergusson , p.  635  ; Webb  to  Turner,  pp.  955, 

1017;  reports  of  Carr,  pp.  1022, 1043, 1061.) 

Murphey,  V.  S.  Mentioned 1068 

Murphy,  Cornelius.  Mentioned.. • 357 

Murphy,  Mathew.  Mentioned (l45 

Murray,  Acting  Assistant  Surgeon.  Mentioned 403 

Murray,  Benjamin  B.,  jr.  Mentioned 714 

Murrell,  John  W.  Mentioned 1069 

Music,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 34> 40 

Myers,  A.  C. 

Correspondence  with  David  E.  Twiggs 500,501 

Mentioned 5"’  969, 102b 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  also  Quartermaster- GeneraVs  Office,  C.  S.  A.) 

Myers,  J.  J.  Mentioned 

Myers,  John  T.  Mentioned 1‘^8; 

Myers,  T.  J.  Mentioned 

Napoleon,  Louis.  Mentioned 427 , 480, 481, 550, 639, 657, 980, 1004] 

Nassau,  Steamer.  Mentioned o72> 110;J 


Natchez,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Natchez,.  Miss.  Surrender  of,  May  12-13,  1862.  Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 

Dahlgren,  C.  

Navarro,  A.  Mentioned 

Navy,  C.  S.  Co-operation  with  Army.  (See 

May  18- July  27,  1862.  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations  against  and  about. 
June  29,  1862.  Ann,  Steamer.  Capture  of. 

July  27- Aug.  6,  1862.  Baton  Rouge,  La.  Opei'ations  about. 

Nov.  1-6,  1862.  Berwick  Bay,  La.  Naval  operations  on. 

Jan.  1,  1863.  Galveston,  Tex.  Recapture  of,  by  Confederate  forces. 

21,  1863.  Sabine  Pass,  Tex.  Attack  on  blockading  squadron  at. 
Mar.  7-27, 1863.  Port  Hudson,  La.  Operations  against  and  about.) 


533 


744 

730 

851 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Navy,  U.  S.  Co-opeimtion  with  Army.  Communications  from  r 47  548 

Butler,  Benjamin  ° ’4fi0 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 

(See  also  . , 

May  18-July  27,  1862.  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations  against  and  about. 

June  14-15,  1862.  Milton,  Fla.  Expedition  to. 

July  27-Aug.  6,  1862.  Baton  Rouge,  La.  Operations  about. 

Sept.  13-15,  1862.  Pass  Mancliac  and  Poncliatoula , La.  Expedition  to. 

Oct.  24-Nov.  6,  1862.  La  Fourche  District,  La.  Operations  in. 

Nov.  1-6,  1862.  Berwick  Bay,  La.  Naval  operations  on. 

pec  ,1862.  Bloomer,  Steamer.  Capture  of. 

17,  1862.  Baton  Rouge,  La.  Affair  near. 

29,  1862.  Plaquemine,  La.  Affair  near. 

31,  1862-Jan.  3,  1863.  Plaquemine,  La.  Affairs  at. 

Jan.  lj  1863.  Galveston,  Tex.  Recapture  of,  by  Confederate  forces . 

14,  1863.  Bayou  Teehe,  La.  Engagement  at. 

Feb.  12-18,  1863.  Atchafalaya  River  and  Bayou  Plaquemine,  La.  Opera- 
tions on. 

Mar.  7-27,  1863.  Port  Hudson,  La.  Operations  against  and  about. 

28,  1863.  Diana,  TJ.  S.  S.  Capture  of. 

Apr.  9-May  14,  1863.  West  Louisiana.  Operations  in. 

May  21- July  8,  1863.  Port  Hudson,  La.  Siege  of. 

Also  Banks  to  Holabird,  p.  719;  Banks  to  Halleck,  pp.  613, 618, 661, 1104, 

1105;  Banks  to  Lincoln,  1096;  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  447;  Butler  to 
Welles,  p.  568;  Roe  to  Morris,  p.  568;  Farragut  to  Irwin,  p.  659; 

Halleck  to  Banks,  p.  590;  Weitzel  to  Banks,  p.  637 ; Weitzel  to 
Irwin,  p.  655. 

Also  Mississippi  River.  Naval  operations  on  the.) 

Navy  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with  ^ 

Davis,  J efferson ’ ^ ^ 

War  Department,  C.  

Navy  Department,  U.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Butler,  Benjamin  

Cairo,  111.,  Senior  Naval  Officer  at 

Davis,  oh  - ;;;;;;;;;  ;;;;;"5;7;52r,  583 

Farragut,  D.G - 

Massachusetts,  Governor  of ’ 

4ol 

Porter,  David  

War  Department,  527,53d,  533 

Neafie,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

"VXSZ* 

Report  of  affair  at  Saint  Joseph’s  Island,  Tex.,  May  3,  1863 

Negroes. 

Employment  of,  as  laborers.  (See  Slaves  and  Slave  Property.) 

Free  in  Louisiana. 

Called  on  to  enlist  in  U.  S.  service 556,557 

Militia  organization.  Native  Guards 556,5;>7 

Recruitment,  organization,  etc.,  of.  (See  Colored  Troops.) 

Neill,  John  A.  Mentioned ^ 

Nelson, . Mentioned 

Nelson,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Nelson,  John  A.  Mentioned 

Nelson,  S.  O.,  & Co.  Mentioned 

77  R R-— VOL  XY 


1218 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Neptune,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 2H2, 213, 215-217 , 908, 974 

Netherlands  Consulate.  Seizure  of  specie  concealed  in 422,471 

Nettles,  T.  D.  Mentioned - — 389,390 

Nettleton,  Edward  P.  Mentioned 350 

Neville,  John.  Mentioned 338 

New  Brunswick,  Steamer.  Mentioned. 608,1102 

New  Hampshire  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 7th,  458;  8th,  168,169,172,173,234,237,319,330,332, 
339-342, 525, 628, 634, 713 ; 15th,  628, 646, 649, 713 ; 16th,  628, 634, 649, 713. 

New  Iberia,  La.  Destruction  of  salt-works  near,  April  18,  1863.  Report  of 

William  K.  Kimball 382 

New  London,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned — ..  111,139,403,461,564,637,638,787 

New  Mexico. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from  James  H.  Carleton 576, 

578, 665, 666, 669, 723, 724 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Caniffe,  H.  J 606 

Carleton,  James  H 574, 597 , 599, 715 

Diffendorfer,  Mr 599 

Rigg,  Edwin  A 598 

Smith,  E.  Kirby 1036 

West,  Joseph  R 598, 605, 720, 721 

Willis,  Edward  B 006 

(See  also 

Oct.  9-Nov.  25,  1862.  Fort  Union,  N.  Mex.  Expedition  from,  to  the 
Canadian  River  and  Utah  Creek,  N.  Mex. 

Jan.  4-May  8,  1863.  Indians  in  New  Mexico.  Operations  against .) 

Proposed  expedition  to.  Communications  from  S.  M.  Baird 1064,1075 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 004 

Carleton,  James  604,605,666 

New  Mexico,  Secretary  and  Acting  Governor  of 041 

State  Department,  U.  041 

New  Mexico,  Department  of.  (Union.) 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  85,  574. 

Orders,  General,  series  1863:  No.  3,  227. 

Union  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc. 

September  30,  1862 - 574 

May  10,  1863 • 725 

New  Mexico,  Secretary  and  Acting  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Carleton,  James  065 

State  Department,  U.  041 

New  Mexico  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 1st,  229, 230, 574, 576, 580, 721, 725. 

New  Orleans,  Steamer.  Mentioned H02 

New  Orleans,  La. 

Affairs  at.  Communications  from  Benjamin  F.  Butler 443,477 

(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  422.) 

Apprehended  attack  on.  (See  Butler  to  Halleclc,  p.  555;  Butler  to  Stanton, 
pp.  552,558,559.) 

Defenses  of.  Communications  from 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 703 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 663,696,699 


Weitzel,  Godfrey. 


460 


INDEX. 


1219 

Page. 


New  Orleans,  La.— Continued. 

Disarming  citizens  and  residents  of.  Communications  from  Benjamin  F. 

Butler 

Expedition  (proposed)  for  recapture  of.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A 810,839s 

Beauregard,  G.  793,799 

Huger,  J olin  792 

Buggies,  Daniel 806,807,817 

War  Department,  C.  — ®49 

Freedom  and  hospitality  of  oity  of,  to  French  naval  fleet.  Action  of  City 

Council  reversed 4^7 

Funds  recovered  from  Louis  H.  Pili6  turned  over  to  treasurer  of 563 

May  16,  1862.  Observance, of,  as  day  of  fasting  and  prayer,  forbidden  ....  426  - 

Operations  against,  and  capture  of,  April  18-May  1,  1862.*  Communica- 
tions from 

Barnard,  J.  G 413 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 547 

Porter,  D.  D 461 

(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  447 ; Porter  to  Butler,  p.  560 ; Stanton  to 
Butler,  p.  471.) 

Port  of.  Opening  of.  (See  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  422.) 

Provisions  for  the  poor  and  destitute.  (Sde  Gulf,  Department  of  the.) 

Sanitary  regulations,  etc.  Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 462 

Smith,  Robert  K 445 

Sherman,  Thomas  W.,  assumes  command  of  defenses  of 3,713 

Supplies  for.  (See  Proclamation,  Governor  of  Louisiana,  pp.  504-510.) 

“ Women  order  ” of  Butler 426 

New  Orleans,  La.,  Administrators  of  Charity  Hospital  of.  Correspond- 
ence with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 512 

New  Orleans  Banks. 

Currency  of.  Orders  governing  issue  of 426, 437, 438 

Funds  of,  transmitted  to  the  Treasury  of  the  United  States 491 

Seizure  of  coin  of,  ordered  by  Governor  of  Louisiana 750,751,753, 755 

Seizure  of  funds  in,  belonging  to  State  of  Louisiana.  (See  Butler  to  Stan- 
ton, p.  502.) 

Specie  belonging  to.  Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  F * 603 

War  Department,  U.  S 611 

Statement  of  condition  of,  monthly,  May  to  July  21, 1862,  ordered 526 

(See  also 

Bank  of  Louisiana. 

Citizens’  Bank.) 

New  Orleans,  La.,  City  Council  of. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 462- 

Resolutions  of.  Freedom  and  hospitality  of  city  tendered  to  the  French 

naval  fleet 427 

New  Orleans  City  Railroad  Company.  Order  of  Banks 625 

New  Orleans,  La.,  City  Treasurer  of.  Correspondence  with  B.  F.  Butler.. . 563 

New  Orleans  Daily  Picayune,  Editors  of.  Correspondence  with  B.  F.  Butler.  525 
New  Orleans,  La.,  Mayor  and  City  Council  of.  Correspondence  with  B. 

F.  Butler t 1 427 

Newsboy,  Steamer.  Mentioned 860 

‘Includes  bombardment  and  capture  of  Forts  Jackson  and  Saint  Philip. 


1220 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Newspapers. 

Action  of  Butler.  (See  respective  papers.) 

Regulations,  etc - 

Newton,  Frank.  Mentioned 

Newtown,  La.  Skirmish  at,  April  16, 1863.  (See  West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in, 
April  9-May  14,  1863.) 

New  Ulm,  Tex.,  Citizens  of.  Charges  preferred  by,  against  R.  H.  Stone. 

Communications  from  P.  Hardeman 

Report  of  William  J.  Wheeler 

New  York  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries : 18th,  256,  258,  319-323,  329-331,335,338,340,628,650, 
651,  713,1106;  21st,  651, 713;  25th,  231-233, 651, 673,  713 : 26th,  651, 713. 
Cavalry — Regiments  : 14th,  647, 713. 

Infantry — Regiments : 6th,  109-111,  126,  288,358,  370,  371,373,3/4,  377-381, 
570,626,627,714,  826;  75th,  159,  168,  169,  172,  174,  234-236,  319,  324,  628, 
645,712  ; 90th,  714;  91st,  128,  319,  372-374,  378,380,  570,  627,  645,  714; 
110th,  330,  628,  634,  713,  1009;  114th,  319,  324,  628,  634,  645,  647,  712; 
116th,  712;  128th,  406,  628,  646,  713;  131st,  319,377,  380,381,626,  627, 
714,  1119;  133d,  257,  319,  330,  332,  339-342,  627,  634,  713;  155th,  645; 
156th,  319,  330,  332,  346,  347,  349,  351-353,  608,  609,  628,  634,  714  ; 159th, 
256,  319,  366,  383-385,  626,  627,  709,  714 ; 160th,  234,236,  319,  628,  645,  646, 
712  ; 161st,  410,  627,  645,  712;  162d,  192-199,  256,  299,  330,  338,  353,  628, 
634,  655, 713 ; 164th,  645 ; 165th,  259, 281-285,  628,  646,  713 ; 170th,  645 ; 
173d,  256, 257, 319,  330-332, 339-344, 627, 634,  713 ; 174th,  257, 266, 267,  410, 
628,  634,  712;  175th,  256,  319,  330-332,  346-348,  355-357,  645, 714  ; 176th, 
714 ; 177th,  282,  628,  646,  713 ; 182d,  645. 

Niblett’s  Bluff,  La.  Expedition  to,  May  26-29,  1863.  (See  report  of  William 
H.  Emory,  p.  333.) 

Nichols,  Lieutenant-Colonel.  Mentioned 


772 

478 


989 

989 


217 


Nichols,  E.  B. 

Correspondence  with 

Debray,  X.  

Magruder,  John  ^57 

Mentioned 838 

Nichols,  Ed.  T. 

Correspondence  with  Rodney,  Miss.,  City  authorities  of — 47o 

Mentioned 48** 

Nickerson,  Frank  S. 

Correspondence  with  O.  W.  Trask - 

Mentioned 43, 56, 57,  64. 72, 259, 281, 282, 406, 646, 713 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5, 1862 69 

Nieto,  Colonel.  Mentioned 688 

Nims,  Ormand  F. 

Mentioned 362’ 650’ 714 

Report  of  campaign  in  West  Louisiana,  April  9-May  14, 1863  - 365 

Nina  Simms,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1018 

Nixon,  J.  O.  Mentioned 421 

Nixon  & Co.  Mentioned ^42 

Noblet,  Francis  W.  Mentioned 45,60,65,73,75 

Nocquet,  James.  Mentioned 80,84 

Nolan,  Mat.  Mentioned 23 

Norcross,  Frederick  M.  Mentioned 20,44,61 

Norman,  H.  T.  Mentioned 10,849 

Norman,  J.  M.  Mentioned 1062 


INDEX. 


1221 


• Page. 

Norris,  Hardman  P.  Mentioned 128,331,335,337,340,343 

North  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments:  42d,  57th, 794. 

North  Louisiana,  Militia  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 989 

Vick,  Thomas  E.,  assigned  to  command 98° 

Northern  Virginia,  Army  of.  Richard  Taylor  detached  from  command  of 

Second  Louisiana  Brigade 789 

Norton,  Captain.  Mentioned - 399 

Nott,  Charles  C.  Mentioned 714 

Nuevo,  Leon,  and  Coahuila,  Mex.,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  J ohn 

B.  Magruder - 4997 

Nugent,  Richard,  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

No.  1,  C.  S.  Launch.  Mentioned — 489 

No.  3,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 493> 779 

Nos.  291,  292,  293,  294,  C.  S.  Steamers.  Mentioned 984 

Nutt,  L.  M.  Mentioned 773 

Nutting,  George  G.  Mentioned - 319,348,355 

Oaths  of  Allegiance  and  Neutrality 479, 483, 484, 491, 492, 497, 498, .516',  553, 557 

O’Bannon,  A.  B.  Mentioned 947 > 948 

O’Bryan,  Daniel.  Mentioned 773 

O’Bryan,  G.  W.  Mentioned 144,239 

Ochiltree,  Thomas  P.  Mentioned 396 

Octorara,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 464,  517 

Odem,  W.  Mentioned 497 

Odium,  Frederick  H.  Mentioned : 238 

O’Donnell,  Thomas.  Mentioned 549 

Ogden,  F.  N.  Mentioned 10,463 

Ogden,  H.  D.  Correspondence  with  James  M.  Putnam 499 

Oglesbury,  Charles.  Mentioned 483 

Old  River,  La.  Skirmish  at,  February  10,  1863  

Olivier,  J.  G.  Mentioned 399 

Olivier,  L. 

Correspondence  with  J.  A.  Quinton 974 

Mentioned 973 

O’Meallie,  H.  H.  Mentioned 549 

Oneida,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 33,34,40,428 

Opelousas,  La.  Occupation,  of,  by  Union  forces,  April  20, 1863.  (See  West  Lou - 
isiana.  Campaign  in , April  9-May  14,  1863.  Beports  of 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P.  Dwight,  William,  jr.  Mouton,  Alfred. 

Cassidy,  Michael.  Grover,  Cuvier.  Nims,  Ormand  F . 

Closson,  Henry  W.  Holcomb,  E.  E.  Smith,  E.  Kirby. 

Day,  Nicholas  W.  Kimball,  W.  K.  Taylor,  Kichard.) 

Opelousas,  La.,  Commanding  Officer  of  C.  S.  Forces  at.  Correspondence 

with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 554 

Opelousas  and  Breaux  Bridge,  La.  Expedition  to,  April  17-21,  1863.  Re- 
port of  A.  Power  Gallway 343 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 876-878 

War  Department,  C.  S 876,922 

Oreta,  Steamer.  Mentioned 994 

Orleans  Parish,  La.  Property  in,  excepted  from  operation  of  sequestration 

order - 992 

Orr,  J.  A.  Mentioned - 48 

Osgood,  Charles,  Steamer.  Mentioned 944 


1222 


INDEX. 


Otis,  T.  C.  Mentioned 

Ould,  Robert.  Mentioned 

Owasco,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 
Ozier,  Charles.  Mentioned  . . 
Pablo,  Janero.  Mentioned... 


Page. 

362,372 

906 

203, 207, 209, 211, 213, 215, 216, 428, 908 

128 

228 


190 


Padre  Island,  Tex.  Affair  at,  December  7, 1862.  Report  of  H.  Willke 

Page,  Edward,  jr. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 444,  446, 464 

Mentioned 445, 464 

Page,  Thomas  G.  Mentioned 81, 98 

Paine,  Charles  J. 

Mentioned 254, 257, 266, 267, 409, 411, 645, 712 

Report  of  reconnaissance  to  mouth  of  False  River,  La.,  March  19,  1863  . ..  267 

Paine,  Halbert  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Breckinridge,  John  C t.  550,551 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 544,550,552,553 

Emory,  William  H 678 

•Weitzel,  Godfrey 546 

Mentioned 27, 53, 58, 133, 135-137, 250, 

297,  305,  320,  323,  324,  330-333,  335,  337,  347,  546,  634,  680,  713,  715,  1113 

Reports  of 

Bisland,  Fort,  La.  Engagement  at,  April  12-13,  1863  339 

Hamilton’s  Plantation,  near  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  June  24, 

1862 35 

Pakenham,  Edward  Michael.  Mentioned 557 

Palfrey,  John  C. 

Correspondence  with 


Jones,  E.  F. 


Weitzel,  Godfrey 

Mentioned 

Palmer,  James  S. 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 316 

Mentioned 21, 314, 317,  728 

Panola,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 428 

Pardon,  Irwin.  Mentioned 442 

Pargoud,  J.  F. 

Correspondence  with  Albert  G.  Blanchard 954 

Mentioned 983, 984 

Paris,  Burdett.  Mentioned 464 

Parish,  Surgeon.  Mentioned 393 

Parker,  Mr.  Mentioned 470 

Parker,  James  P.  Mentioned 11 

Parks,  William  P.  Mentioned 10,849 

Parmele,  Theodore  W. 

Mentioned • 254,257,634 

Report  of  operations  on  west  hank  of  the  Mississippi  River,  March  17, 1863.  266 

Parsons,  Benjamin  W.  Mentioned 

Partridge,  S.  H. 

Statement  of.  Capture  of  U.  S.  S.  Hatteras,  January  11, 1863 

Mentioned 

Parvin,  Washington  L.  Mentioned 

Pass  Christian,  Miss.  Expedition  to,  June  22,  1862.  Report  of  Neal  Dow.. 


37 


647 

647 

605 

112 


INDEX. 


1223 


Op- 


Cam- 


128 

141 

139 

672 

671 


812 

157 


11 

541 

847 

752 

990 


Pago. 

Pass  Manchac,  La.  . _ 7 r 

Expedition  to,  July  25-August  2,  1862.  (See  Pontchartram  Lake,  La 
erations  around,  July  25— August  2,  1862.) 

Expedition  to,  and  skirmish,  September  13-15,  1862.  Reports  of 

Butler,  Benjamin  

Ruggles,  Daniel 

Strong,  George  "*  ’* 

Scout  to,  and  operations  about,  February  8-11, 1863.  Communications  from 

Sherman,  Thomas  

. Trask,  O.  

Skirmish  at,  June  17, 1862. 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Butler) 

Report  of  Benjamin  F.  Butler 

(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  495;  Stanton  to  Butler,  p.  515.) 

Patterson,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Patterson,  D.  Mentioned * - ; 

Pattersonville,  La.  Skirmish  near,  April  11, 1863.  (See  West  Louisiana, 
paign  in,  April  9-May  14,  1863.) 

Patton,  J.  W.  Mentioned  

Patton  & Finney.  Mentioned 

Paul,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Paul  Jones,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Payne, . Mentioned 

Payne,  Huntington  & Co.  Mentioned onfi'o,'q'220  935 

Peabody,  Charles  A. 

Appointed  a provisional  judge  to  hold  court  in  Louisiana 

Mentioned 582'®«® 

Peabody,  George,  Ship.  Mentioned b7_ 

Peak,  Frank.  Mentioned  

Pearce,  Alanson.  Mentioned 

Pease,  Philo  C.  Mentioned - 

Pearl  River,  La.  Expedition  up  the,  July  25-August  2, 1862.  (S ee  Pontchar- 
train  Lake,  La.  Operations  around,  July  25- August  2,  1862.) 

Peck,  David  B.  Mentioned 

Peck,  Frank  H. 

I:::::;::::::::::::::::::::: 

Reports  of 

Bisland,  Fort,  La.  Engagement  at,  April  12-13,  1863  3^» 

Pontchartrain  Lake,  La.  Operations  around,  J uly  25-August  2, 1862. . 124 

Pedesclaux,  Ernest.  Mentioned 

Pegues,  J.  J.  Mentioned 

Pellevarjo,  John.  Mentioned 

Pemberton,  John  C. 

820  827 

Assignments  to  command ’ ° 

Co-operation  with  Smith 1044-1046,1049,1058,1059 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 809, 835 

Banks,  Nathaniel  732,740 

Beall,  William  N.  R 839, 841, 842, 859, 886, 901, 913, 1081 

Brown,  Milton ^ 

Fleming,  L.  J ^ 

Forney,  John  833,834,839,842 


79 

753 

110 


714 


491 


1068 

824 


1224 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Pemberton,  John  C. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with  * 

Gardner,  Franklin 269,914,933,942,955-959, 

965,971,972,  985,  990,999,  1000,1005,1023,  1024,  1026-1029,  1035-1037, 
1039,  1047,  1049,  1055,  1059,  1060,  1069-1071,  1074-1076,  1079,  1081 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 920, 921, 938, 1009 

Lovell,  William  S 852 

Magruder,  John  B 884 

Mayo,  George  Upshur 848 

Miller,  H.  H. 269,1023 

Morrison,  J.  H 855 

Powell,  E 1044 

Ruggles,  Daniel 898 

Smith,  E.  Kirby 1042, 1044-1047, 1049, 1050, 1058 

Smith,  M.  L v 853,926 

Taylor,  Richard 855, 859, 868, 873, 963, 1021, 1024, 1044, 1045 

Yillepigue,  John  B 843 

Waddy,  J.  R 859 

War  Department,  C.  S 864,922 

Mentioned 174, 242, 820, 855, 

885, 902, 937, 938, 944,  965,  971,  1005, 1032, 1042, 1047, 1059, 1060, 1069, 1071 
Report  of  expedition  to  Ponchatoula,  La.,  and  skirmishes,  March  21-30, 

1863  285 

Staff.  Announcements  of 827 

Penaloza,  J.  M.  Mentioned 851 

Pendleton,  E.  B.  Mentioned 218,881 

Pendleton,  H.  Mentioned 218 

Pendleton,  John  E.  Mentioned 80 

Pendleton,  W.  J.  Mentioned 218 

Pennington, . Mentioned 816 

Pennington,  Lewis  W.  Mentioned 146 

Pennington,  Thomas  C.  Mentioned 519 

Pennington,  W.  F.  Mentioned 1061 

Pennsylvania  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments:  47th,  714. 

Penny, . Mentioned 20,21 

Penobscot,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 1053 

Pensacola,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 428,461,562,1009 

Pensacola,  Fla. 

Abandoned  by  Confederates  and  occupied  by  Union  forces,  May  9-12,  1862. 
Operations  preliminary.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A 765 

Jones,  Samuel 764 

Affairs  at,  generally.  Communications  from 

Arnold,  L.  G 526 

War  Department,  C.  S 1036 

Defenses  of.  Communications  from 

Arnold,  L.  G 570 

Closson,  Henry  W 569 

Evacuation  of,  March  20-24,  1863.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters  1108 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P .• 677 

Dyer,  Isaac 698 

Reconnaissances  from,  August  7-10, 1862.  Report  of  Alexander  N.  Shipley.  126, 128 
Skirmish  near,  June  25,  1862  1 


INDEX. 


1225 


Page. 

Perce,  Le  Grand  W.  Mentioned 261,284,  i098 

Perea,  Jose  L.  Mentioned ^ 

Perkins!  S.'  A^'  2^==^^^ 

Perkins  & Co.  Mentioned ?12 

Per  Lee,  Samuel  R.  Mentioned " " i 54  725 

Perry,  David.  Mentioned ’ 1()& 

Perryman,  J.  L.  Mentioned 

Persons,  A.  W.  Mentioned ^ 

Persons,  J.  J.,  & Co.  Mentioned ^ 

Pesquira,  Ignacio.  Mentioned 12fi 

Peters,  De  Witt  C.  Mentioned..^ 2go> 

Peterson,  Thomas  L.  Mentioned 

Petit,  Jean.  Mentioned ° 

Petite  Anse  Island,  La.  Affairs  at,  November  21-22,  1862.  Report  of  T.  A. 

1088 

Pems,  j.  j.  739,758,760 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Mississippi)  Governor  of.) 
v F.A  Q99  719 

Phelps,  John  F.  Mentioned > > 

Phelps,  John  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 442,443,446,464,486,525,534-536,542 

Peck,  Frank  ^ 

Mentioned , ■ . - 53, 445-447, 464, 485, 486, 516, 532, 534, 765 

Resignation  of ’ ’ 

Phelps  & Jones.  Mentioned 

Philadelphia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 11  * 

Philips,  Philip.  Mentioned I'"* 

Philips,  Philip,  Mrs.  Mentioned  5U4,51U,  l 

Phillips,  William  D.  Mentioned 131 

Piaget,  A. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 

Mentioned 

Picayune,  The.  Order  of  Butler,  suppressing 53d 

(See  also  Butler  to  Editor  of,  p.  525.) 

Pickering,  John.  Mentioned * ^4^ 

Pickett,  J.  G.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Mansfield  Lovell.) 

Pickett,  John  T.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  C.  Breckinridge.) 

Pierce,  Alonzo  D.  Mentioned - 4^ 

Pierce,  Guy  C.  Mentioned 342 

Pierce,  James.  Mentioned 

Pierce,  Leonard,  jr. 

Correspondence  with 

Butler,  Benjamin  588,591 

Fergusson,  David 

Mentioned 585-587, 684, 967, 974, 1016, 1127, 1130, 1131 

Pierson,  W.  H.  Mentioned 540 

Pike,  William  S.  Mentioned 131,801,802 

Pilie,  Louis  H.  v 

Funds  recovered  from.  Communications  from  Benjamin  F.  Butler 563 

Mentioned °^4 

Pilsbury,  Edward.  Mentioned 542 

Pinckney,  C.  C.,  Schooner.  Mentioned 1025,1134 

Pin  Hook,  La.  Skirmish  at,  May  10,  1863  4 


1226 


INDEX. 


Page,  j 

Pinkney,  William  E.  Mentioned 6,10,19,80 

Pinos  Altos  Mines,  N.  Mex.  Skirmish  at,  January  29, 1863.  (See  Indians  in 
New  Mexico.  Operations  against , January  4 -May  8, 1863.) 

Pinta,  H.  C.  M.  S.  Mentioned 577,578 

Pishon,  Nathaniel  J.  Mentioned 598,601 

Pittsburg,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 311  j 

Plain,  Captain.  Mentioned 949  ij 

Planet,  Schooner.  Mentioned 585-587 

Plaquemine,  La.  Affairs  at  and  near. 

December  29,  1862.  Report  of  F.  A.  Roe 192 

December  31, 1862-January  3, 1863. 

Communications  from 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 196 

Benedict,  Lew 193, 196 

Bogart,  James  H 197 

Grover,  Cuvier 196,198 

Holcomb,  R.  E 198 

Sherman,  T.  W 193 

Reports  of  James  H.  Bogart 192, 193 

April  18, 1863.  Communications  from  E.  W.  Woodman 705 

Plaquemine  Bayou,  La. 

Expedition  to,  April  22-23, 1863.  Reports  of  Sidney  A.  Bean 344, 345 

Operations  on,  February  12-28,  1863.  (See  Atchafalaya  River  and  Bayou 
Plaquemine , La.  Operations  on,  February  12-28, 1863.) 

Plaquemines  Parish,  La. 

Agreement  with  loyal  planters  of - 594 

Property  in,  excepted  from  operations  of  sequestration  order 593, 602 

Plunkett,  William  R.  Mentioned 385 

Plympton,  P.  W.  L.  Mentioned 574,725 

Polignac,  C.  J. 

Assignments  to  command : 1023 

Mentioned 1023 

Polk,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 515 

Polk,  Leonidas.  Mentioned 877 

Fonchatoula,  La. 

Expedition  from,  July  5-8,  1862.  Report  of  Alfred  Bradley 120 

Expeditions  to,  and  skirmishes. 

September  13-15, 1862.  Reports  of 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 138 

Ruggles,  Daniel 141 

Strong,  George  C 139 

March  21-30, 1863. 

Communications  from 

Clark,  Thomas  S 289 

Gardner,  Franklin 1023, 1028 

Pemberton,  John  C 1023, 1024 

Reports  of 

Clark,  M.  R 285 

Clark,  Thomas  S - 282 

Du  Monteil,  F 285 

Miller,  H.  H 286-289 

Pemberton,  John  C 285 

Sherman,  Thomas  W 280 

Smith,  Abel,  jr -- 284 

(See  also  report  of  Banks,  pp.  258, 259.) 


INDEX. 


1227 


jnchatoula,  La.— Continued. 

Skirmish  at,  May  13, 1863.  (See  Amite  River  and  Jackson  Railroad,  La. 
Hons  on  the,  May  9—18, 1863.) 


Page. 

Ojpei’a- 


Dnd,  Preston,  jr. 

Correspondence  with  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 808 

Mentioned 80-,88'“ 

ontchartrain,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

ontchartrain  Lake,  La.  Operations  around,  July  25-August  2, 1862. 

C”iC“ni0JSfr°m  786,788,789 

S:rTwj  ixh:::::::::::::::::::::::::::: 787,™ 

Mullett,  Thomas ^ 

Buggies,  Daniel 

Slocum,  J.  

Report  of  Frank  H.  Peck 1 

(See  also  Butler  to  Williams , p.34.) 

'ope,  John.  Mentioned ...... ......  - - - - ------  - - •---••  .----•  •----.  •••••■  189, 8 

orter,  David  D. 

Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel  * 

Butler,  Benjamin  

Farragut,  D.G 

Navy  Department,  IT.  

Mentioned 15, 28, 127, 300-302, 306-308, 311, 313, 314, 428, 448, 449, 465, 517, 527, 

530,  531,  534,  548,  559,  560, 562,  563, 614, 693, 694, 700, 718-720, 1096, 1109 

’orter,  Henry  M.  Mentioned 49 

’orter,  J.  M.  Mentioned 71q 

’orter,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 70, 713 

’orter,  William  D. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler o3/,oo/ 

Mentioned 34’  41’§537’ 567 

3 orter’ s and  McWilliams’  Plantations,  La.  Skirmish  at,  April  13,  1863. 

(See  West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  April  9-May  14, 1863.  Reports  of 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P.  Grover.  Cuvier.  gerJ; 

Cassiday,  Michael.  Holcomb,  R.  E.  Smith,  E.  Rirby. 

Clossonf  Henry  W.  Kimball,  W K.  Taylor,  Richard. 

Day,  Nicholas  W.  Mouton,  Alfred 

Dwight,  William,  jr.  Nims,  Ormand  F. 

Also  Banks  to  Farragut,  p.  707.) 


Port  Hudson,  La. 

Bowen,  John  S.,  assigned  to  duty  at 

Batteries  at,  October  24,  1862. 

Memorandum  of  Louis  J.  Girard 

Report  of  George  Upshur  Mayo,  of  condition  of. 
Confederate  troops  at. 

Brigade  organization  of,  announced ■ 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

August  31,1862  

October  22, 1862 

January  31,  1863 

February  28,  1863 

March  31,  1863 

April  29,  1863 

April  30,  1863 

Defenses  of.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 
Beall,  William  N.  R 


...  801 

...  846 

...  844 

...  934 

...  804 

...  841 

...  965 

...  1000 
1032, 1033 
....  1059 

1061,1062 

....  809 

..  886,913 


1228 


INDEX. 


Pag 


Port  Hudson,  La. — Continued. 

Defenses  of.  Communications  from 

Breckinridge,  John  C 8l 

Davis,  Jefferson 9: 

Fauntleroy,  Chas.  M 94 

Gardner,  Franklin 913, 922, 933, 934, 942, 948, 965, 971, 101 

Pemberton,  John  C 841, 9:1 

Pond,  P.,  jr 81 

Rnggles,  Daniel 803, 8( 

Taylor,  Richard 8H 

Weitzel,  G - 6i 

Demonstration  on  land  front  against,  March  14-15, 1863.  (See  Port  Hudson, 

La.  Operations  against  and  about,  March  7-27,  1863.) 

Engagements  between  batteries  at,  and 

Anglo-American,  U.  S.  S.,  August  29,  1862. 

Essex,  U.  S.  S.,  September  7,  1862 

Union  fleet,  March  14-15,  1863.  (See  Port  Hudson,  La.  Operations  ij 

against  and  about,  March  7-27,  1863.) 

Expedition  toward,  March  17,  1863.  Report  of  William  Dwight,  jr 

(See  also  report  of  Banks,  p.  258.) 

Gardner,  Franklin,  assumes  command  at 9! 

Occupation  of,  by  Confederates,  August  15,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Breckinridge,  John  C i 


2, 


Van  Dorn,  Earl. 


7! 


261, 692, 1109, 1112, 11: 
1114,11: 

10( 


Report  of  John  C.  Breckinridge 

(See  also  report  of  Breckinridge,  pp.  80,  81.) 

Operations  against  and  about,  March  7-27,  1863. 

Buford  assigned  to  command  a brigade 

Casualties.  Returns  of  Confederate  troops 

Communications  from 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 

Chickering,  T.  E 

Collens,  Paul  W 

Farragut,  D.  G 61 

Gardner,  Franklin 271-273, 275, 276, 278, 1008-1010, 1018, 1021, 10; 

Grover,  Cuvier 61 

Hallett,  Joseph  L % 

Pemberton,  John  C 269, 1009, 1023, 1024,  10| 

Rogers,  G.  W IF 

Rowley,  William  W 2t 

(See  also  Banks  to  Halleck,  pp.  240,242;  Halleck  to  Banks,  p.  690.) 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Gardner) St 

Reports  of 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 251, 2Sj 

Gardner,  Franklin 269-21 

Hallett,  Joseph  L 2( 

Rowley,  William  W 2$ 

(See  also 

March  9-10,  1863.  Comite  River,  La.  Skirmish  on  the. 

17,  1863.  Port  Hudson,  La.  Expedition  toward. 

Mississippi  River.  Operations  on  west  bank  of  the 
19,  1863.  False  River,  La.  Reconnaissance  to. 

24,  1863.  Hei'mitage  Landing.  Expedition  to.) 

Ordnance  (heavy)  at,  March  27,1863 


10: 


INDEX. 


1229 


Page. 

>ort  Hudson,  La.— Continued. 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Gardner,  Franklin 1005 

Pemberton,  John  842,843,926,985,1005 

Ruggles,  Daniel,  assigned  to,  and  assumes,  command  of  forces  at  and  about . 800 

Siecre  of,  May  21-July  8,  1863.  Communications  from 

Banks,  Nathaniel  726,727,729-732 

Gardner,  Franklin 1081  ’ 1083 

Pemberton,  John  1080, 1081 

(See  also  Halleck  to  Banks,  p.  725 {May  12-13,  1863,  Reconnaissance 
from  Baton  Rouge , La.) 

Subsistence  stores  on  hand.  Reports  of  Joseph  P.  Carr. 

March  23,  1863  1022 

April  15,  1043 

April  30,  1863  1061 

Port  Lobos,  Mex.  Survey  of.  Communications  from  James  H.  Carleton 670 

Portsmouth,  U.  S.  Sloop.  Mentioned - 428,461,638 

Postlethwaite,  John  T.  Mentioned.. 10 

Post-Office  Department,  C.  S.  ' Correspondence  with 

Frizzell,  823 

War  Department,  C.  823 

Potter,  M.  M.  Mentioned 217 

Potts,  J.  P.  Mentioned 15 ' 

Powell,  A.  J.  Mentioned 496 

Powell,  E. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 1044 

Mentioned 1045, 1050 

Powell,  William  L. 

Mentioned 115-119, 770, 850, 1069 

Report  of  capture  of  steamer  Ann,  June  29,  1862  112 

Powers,  F.  P.  Mentioned 4061 

Pratt,  H.  P.  Mentioned - 4009 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  E.  Kirby  Smith.) 

Pratt,  James  A.  Mentioned..  353,354 

Pratt,  John  G. 

Assignment  to  command  with  Louisiana  Militia.. . - - - - 085 

Mentioned 705, 742, 756, 759, 798, 985, 991 

Preble,  U.  S.  Sloop.  Mentioned 34 

Preble,  Joseph.  Mentioned 45,71 

President,  C.  S.  (See  Jefferson  Davis.) 

President,  U.  S.  (See  Abraham  Lincoln.) 

Preston,  William. 

Correspondence  with 

Breckinridge,  John  4123 

Mathews,  R.  4123 

Mentioned 0, 18, 1120, 1121 

Prevost,  Leon.  Mentioned 617 

Prewitt,  Byron.  Mentioned  J 464 

Price,  Charles  P.  Mentioned 38*> 

Price,  H.  H.  Mentioned 82 

Price,  General,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 341 

Price,  Sterling. 

Correspondence  with  Earl  Van  Dorn 786 

Mentioned 724, 774, 784>  1037 

Prince,  Edward.  Mentioned 307 


1230 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Prisoners  of  War.  Treatment,  exchange  of,  etc. 


Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 467-469} 

Dozier,  J.  Ad 467 

Durant,  Thomas  J 467 

Buggies,  Daniel 519 

War  Department,  U.  S 450 


(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton , pp.  447,465.) 


References  *to 463, 565-567, 753, 754, 907, 908 

Prisoners,  Political.  Arrest,  treatment  of,  etc. 

Communications  from 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 723,1119 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 510, 511, 533, 554, 602 

Keller,  Fidel ' 511 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 753, 755 

War  Department,  C.  S 750 

References  to 112, 120-122, 154-158, 311, 312, 450-457, 465, 466, 469, 

503-510, 550, 551, 554, 558, 737, 738, 745, 757, 759, 760, 772, 773, 906, 907, 1119 
(See  also  Texas.  Resistance  to  Conscription  Act  in.) 

Pritchard  & Flower.  Mentioned 542 

Private  Property. 

Action  touching.  Communications  from 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 309, 694, 701, 703, 705, 732, 740, 1115, 1119 

Brother,  A 496 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 427,445-447,476,478,495,500,568,569,573,584 

Dow,  Neal 628 

Frizzell,  W.  W 823 

Hdbert,  Paul  O 822,824 

Hindman,  Thomas  C 783 

Lewis,  John  L 496 

Lovell,  Mansfield 459, 460, 741 

Mazereau,  A 495 

Ogden,  H.  D 496 

Page,  Edward,  jr 446 

Post-Office  Department,  C.S 823 

Roe,  F.  A 568 

Soul6,  Pierre 496 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 1121 

War  Department,  C.  S 459,741,751,823,864 

Webb,  Henry  L 956 

Referen  ces  to 20-23, 

• 305, 306, 373, 440, 479, 513, 514,  538-542,  549-553,  555,  592-595,  607,  640, 

643, 703, 716, 738, 744, 745, 758,  760,  761,  768,  774,  775,  875,  876, 907, 908 


(See  also 

Confiscation  Act. 

Dividends , etc. 

Houma,  La.  Operations  about,  May  11-18,  1§62. 
New  Orleans  Banks. 

Newspapers. 

Sequestration. 

Slaves  and  Slave  Property.) 


Provence,  David.  Mentioned 1061 

Prudhomme,  J.  A.  Mentioned 392 


Prussian  Consulate.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  A.  Reichard  and  John 
Kruttschnitt.) 


INDEX. 


1231 


Page. 

Puffer,  A.  F.  Mentioned * 

(For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  Benjamin  F.  Butler .) 

Pugh,  David.  Mentioned 172 

Purves,  George.  Mentioned 10 

Putnam,  James  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Brother,  A 

Mazerean,  A 


Ogden,  H.  D. 


496 

495 

496 

496 

111,495,496, 541 
714 


Sould,  Pierre 

Mentioned * 

Putnam,  O.  G.  Mentioned - 

Pyron,  C.  L.  Mentioned 214,217,851,1081,1082 

Qualey,  John  F.  Mentioned * 72t> 

Quarantine  Regulations.  Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 578,585 

Del  Kayo,  Joaquin 577 

Fisher,  John  A.  586,587 

McCormick,  Charles 

Pierce,  L.,  jr - 

War  Department,  U.  

(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  478;  Delray  to  Mason,  pp.  813, 814. ) 

Quarles,  W.  A.  Mentioned 

Quarrier,  Steamer.  Mentioned 7^7 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with  War  De- 
partment, C.  

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel  ta.Wl,7Wm 

Butler,  Benjamin  4 lOfift 

Quattlebaum,  P.  J.  Mentioned —T7 

Queen  of  the  Bay,  Vessel.  Mentioned. 

Queen  of  the  West,  U.  S.  S. 

Capture  of,  February  14, 1863 

Destruction  of,  April  — , 1863.  (See  report  of  Banks , p.  297 ; Banks  to  Grant, 
p.  303 ; Farragut  to  Grant,  p.  308;  Banks  to  Farragut , pp.  704, 707.) 

Mentioned 32> 38’  255> 2*>8’ ^ 

303,  308,  359,  388,  681,  704,  707,  1049,  1050,  1054,  1104, 1106, 1108, 1109 

Quiltz,  Major.  Mentioned 

Quincy,  Steamer.  Mentioned — 

Quinnebaug,  Steamer.  Mentioned **  * 

Quinton,  J.  A.  Correspondence  with  L.  Olivier 

Quitman,  Port,  La.  Evacuation  of,  April  27-May  8, 1862.  Communications 

from  Jefferson  Davis 

(See  also  note,  p.  740.) 

Rains,  G.  J.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Conscript  Bureau.) 

Ralli,  Harriet,  Brig.  Mentioned 

Ralph,  A.  J.  Mentioned > 

Ralston,  George.  Mentioned Aoy> 

Ramirez,  Santiago.  Mentioned 

Ramsey,  D.  W.  Mentioned 

Ramsey,  S.  D. 

Correspondence  with  John  L.  Logan » 

Mentioned 

Randal,  Horace.  Mentioned 

Handel,  James  M.  Mentioned 


585 

586 
567 

934 


872 


741 


499 


683 

1027 


408 

1082 

19 


1232 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Randolph,  G.  W.  ‘ Mentioned 116,  741 

747, 778, 794,  810,  817,  822,  839,  840,  848,  867,  872, 898, 906, 914, 940,  96* 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  C.  S.) 

Randolph,  John  H.  Mentioned 54( 

Randolph,  V.  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Forney,  John  H 116,  llg 

War  Department,  C.  S 115, 11C 

Mentioned L 116,118,119 

Rankin,  Sylvester.  Mentioned 154 

Ranney,  H.  J.  Mentioned 777,803 

Ransom,  George  M.  Mentioned 24,167,198 

Rawles,  Jacob  B.  Mentioned 650,713 

Read,  Abner.  Mentioned 139,403 

Read,  C.  Mentioned 672 

Reagan,  John  H.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Post-Office  Department,  C.  S .) 

Rector,  Henry  M.  Mentioned... 780,807 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Arkansas,  Governor  of.) 

Redding,  . Mentioned 122 

Red  River,  La. 

Defenses  of.  Communications  from  Governor  of  Louisiana 788 

Operations  on.  (See  Butler  to  Farragut,  p.  537 ; Porter  to  Butler,  p.  537.) 

Red  River,  Commanding  Officer  at  Mouth  of.  Correspondence  with  Frank- 
lin Gardner 275 

Reed,  Thomas  B.  (Major.)  Mentioned 11 

Reed,  Thomas  B.  (Surgeon.)  Mentioned 362 

Reeves,  Ezra  W.  Mentioned 385 

Reibaud,  Francisco.  Mentioned 643 

Reichard,  A.  Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 575 

Reid,  John  H.  Mentioned 812 

Reid,  John  M.  Mentioned 812 

Reid,  T.  J.  Mentioned 1032,1061 

Reil,  Pat.  Mentioned 190 

Reily,  James. 

Correspondence  with  s 

Magruder,  John  B 970, 982, 1003 

Sibley,  H.  H 968 

Mentioned 212, 213, 361, 389, 391, 392, 395, 669, 967, 970, 999 

Reilly,  E.  Mentioned 553,557 

Reinhard,  Frederick  W.  Mentioned 63 

Refugees,  Abandoned  Lands,  etc.  Communications  from 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 658 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 588, 591 

Fisher,  John  A.  G 58J| 

Hamilton,  A.  J 658 

Holabird,  S.  B 658 

Hunter,  Charles 522 

State  Department,  U.  S 522 

Registration.  Foreign  residents  required  to  register.  Order  of  Butler 571 

Reliance,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 266,309,720,1102 

Relief,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1102 

Renaud,  Clement.  Mentioned 376 

Renshaw,  W.  B.  Mentioned 147, 

149, 200-203, 206-210, 213, 215, 216, 222, 224, 517, 826, 836, 847 


INDEX. 


1233 


Page. 

182 

Reuss,  J.  M.  Mentioned 

Reynaud,  Admiral.  ‘ 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler ."^s^O.'llOO,  110! 

Rexford,  Willie  M.  Mentioned 

Rhett,  Thomas  G.  Mentioned ’ ~ 

Rhode  Island,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned bb4 

Rhode  Island  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 2d,  256, 257, 267 , 299, 619, 647, 673, 713, 714. 

Rhodes,  T.  C.  Mentioned 

Rice,  O.  F.  Mentioned 

Richard, Mentioned 

Richard  & Co.  Mentioned 

Richards,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Richardson,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Richardson,  A.  W.  Mentioned 

Richardson,  D.  C.  Mentioned 

Richardson,  James  P.  Mentioned 

Richardson,  Robert.  Mentioned llj A8 

Richmond,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned  .> ***  ’ ' ’ 

191 , 251, 252, 260-262, 272-274, 276, 277, 302, 428, 1009 

Richmond,  La.  Skirmish  near,  J anuary  29,  1863 - - - 

Ricks,  John  C.  (For  correspondence,  see  New  Orleans,  La.,  Administrators  of 
Charity  Hospital  of.) 

Rickson,  John.  Mentioned 540 

Riddick,  W.  L.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Albert  G.  Blanokard.) 

Ridley,  S.  J.  Mentioned 

Rigg.  Edwin  A. 

Correspondence  with  Joseph  R.  West 

Mentioned 597,598.725 

Riley,  A.  C.  Mentioned 

Riley,  Charles.  Mentioned — 

Riley,  J.  T.  Mentioned... 2f' 

Riley,  R.  H.  Mentioned 10  ^ 

Riley,  R.  K.  Mentioned 

Rio  Bonito,  N.  Mex.  (See  Bonito  Bio,  N.  Mex.) 

Rio  Grande.  Expedition  to  the  mouth  of  the,  March  2-30,  1863.  (See  Bee  to 
Dickinson,  pp.  1013,1016;  Bee  to  Lopez,  pp.  1132-1134;  Lopez  to 
Bee , pp.  1025,  1128,  1130,  1132,  1133 ; Magruder  to  Cooper,  p.  1030.) 

Ripley,  James  W.  Mentioned 493>  650> 

Rippy,  A.  S.  Mentioned 

Ritchie,  David. 

Mentioned 

Statement  of.  Saving  of  flag  of  U.  S.  revenue  cutter  Robert  McClelland  - . 499 

Rives,  G.  F.  Mentioned ^ 

779 

Roane,  J.  S.  Mentioned 

Robards,  W.  L.  Mentioned 39b 

Robert  McClelland,  U.  S.  Revenue  Cutter. 

Flag  of.  Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  

Ritchie,  David 49 

Mentioned  

120 

Roberts,  A.  C.  Mentioned 

Roberts,  Calvit.  Mentioned 1032 

78  R R— VOL  XV 


1234 


INDEX. 


Page 

962 


191 


(See  April  17- 


Roberts,  Edward  B.  Mentioned 

Roberts,  F.  G.  Mentioned 

Roberts’  Ford,  Comite  River,  La.  Skirmish  at,  May  2,  1863. 

May  2,  1863.  Grierson’s  Raid. ) 

Roberts,  George  T.  Mentioned . 40, 42, 49, 56, 57, 60, 69 

Roberts,  Isaac.  Mentioned 157 

Roberts,  John.  Mentioned  357 

Roberts,  Thomas  L.  Mentioned 580,581 

Roberts,  Willis  S.  Mentioned 77 

Robertson,  J.  W. 

Mentioned 18, 78, 81, 90, 94-06, 803, 1019, 1029 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862  93,95 

Robinson,  Mr.  Mentioned 962 

Robinson,  E.  W.  Mentioned  106 

Robinson,  Harai. 

Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 652,1103 

Holabird,  S.  B 1103 

Mentioned 327, 334, 375, 376, 688, 1099 

Report  of  number  and  approximate  strength  of  cavalry  companies  in  De- 
partment of  the  Gulf , 652 

Robinson,  J.  B.  Mentioned 451,453,454,457 

Robinson,  Sallie,  Steamer.  Mentioned 173, 195, 705, 1102 

Robson,  G.  B.  Mentioned 926,  927 

Roddy,  Robert.  Mentioned 109 

Rodgers,  John  I. 

Mentioned 362, 650, 714 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Porter’s  Plantation,  April  13,  and  engagement  at  Irish 

Bend,  La.,  April  14,  1863 366 

Rodin,  Mr.  Mentioned 427 

Rodman,  William  L. 

Mentioned . . . . 347-349, 354, 714 

Report  of  engagement  at  Fort  Bisland,  La.,  April  12-13,  1863 350 

Rodney,  Miss.,  City  Authorities  of.  Correspondence  with  Ed.  T.  Nichols..  475 
Roe,  F.  A. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Morris 668 

Mentioned 167,194,568 

Report  of  affair  near  Plaquemine,  La. , December  29,  1862  192 

Roe,  W.  B.  Mentioned 260,261,705 

Rogers,  F.  M.  Mentioned 189 

Rogers,  G.  W. 

Correspondence  with  T.  E.  Chickering 1115 

Mentioned 1115 


Rogers,  J.  M.  Mentioned. 


186 


Rogers,  William  H.  Mentioned 44,67 

Rollins,  Joseph.  Mentioned 81,100 

Roman,  A.  B.  Mentioned 795 

Roorthe,  L.  Mentioned 189 

Rose,  Elihu  E.  Mentioned 450-455 

Rosecrans,  W.  S.  Mentioned 308,590,899,1056 

Rosedale,  La.  Expedition  to,  February  19,  1863  3 

Roselius,  Christian.  Mentioned ....  532, 534 

Rosser,  Frothro  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

Rotchford,  Brown  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

Rouge,  Mr.  Mentioned 989 


INDEX. 


1235 


Page. 

Rouge,  Mrs.  Mentioned 989 

Rountree,  L.  C.  Mentioned 851> 884 * 979 

Rowley,  Charles  N. 

Mentioned 742,756,759 

Report  of  affair  at  Bayou  Sara,  La.,  August  10,  1862  129 

Rowley,  Ralph  A.  Mentioned 45, 64 

Rowley,  William  W. 

Correspondence  with  Joseph  L.  Hallett 262 

Mentioned 326, 363, 364, 611 

Report  of  operations  against  and  about  Port  Hudson,  La.,  March  7-22, 1863  . 259 

Roy,  Stanislaus.  Mentioned 477, 478 

Roy,  William.  Mentioned 135, 136, 450, 455 

Royal  Yacht,  Schooner.  Mentioned 219 

Rozier,  J.  Ad. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 467,468 

Mentioned 465 

Rugeley,  E.  S.  Correspondence  with  James  Perry  Bryan 930 

Rugeley,  James.  Mentioned. 930 

Ruggles,  Daniel. 

Assignments  to  command 798> 899 > 849 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A . ..  806, 810, 817, 821, 839, 890 

Beall,  William  N.  802,807,839 

Beauregard,  G.  T 7 42 

Blanchard,  Albert  G 82* 

Bragg,  Braxton 761,762,765,771 

Brown,  Isaac  N 746, 749, 751, 762, 765, 770 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 519 

Carter,  A.  G - 777 

Clark,  B.  891 

De  Baun,  J 786,788-790 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 891,894 

McRae,  W.  D.  L 787,789 

Miles,  W.  821 

Miller,  John  777 

Mississippi,  Governor  of 822 

Moulker,  J.  E - 775 

Mullett,  Thomas 789 

Pemberton,  John  C 898 

Smith,  M.  L 809 

Taylor,  Richard 892 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff 797,803 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 747, 761-763,  765, 771, 775-779, 785, 803, 804, 1120 

Villepigue,  John  B 763,766 

Whiteman,  J.  C 77,5 

Wingfield,  J.  792 


Witt,  A.  R. 


835 


Mentioned 16, 39, 40, 76-78, 80, 81, 88, 94, 98, 100, 104, 108, 546, 

741, 742, 746, 768, 786, 795, 800, 801, 809, 810, 817, 840, 893, 1121, 1124, 1125 
Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  16,  1120. 

Reports  of. 

Baton  Rouge,  La. 

Engagement  at,  August  5,  1862 99 

Skirmish  at,  and  evacuation  of,  August  20-21, 1862  129 


1236 


INDEX, 


Page. 


Ruggles,  Daniel — Continued. 

Reports  of. 

Pass  Manchac  and  Ponchatoula,  La.  Expedition  to,  and  skirmish, 

September  13-15,  1862 141 

Ruggles,  E.  S.  Mentioned 82 

Ruggles,  M.  B.  Mentioned  82 

Rundlett,  Isaac  H.  Mentioned 260,261 

Rungo,  C.  Mentioned 926 

Russell,  Charles.  Correspondence  with  H.  C.  McNeill 1072 

Russell,  D.  I.  Mentioned 157,158 

Russell,  Edmund  H. 

Mentioned - -• 259,260 

Report  of  campaign  in  West  Louisiana,  April  8-May  14, 1863  325 

Russell,  Green.  Mentioned 157 

Russell,  J.  O.  Mentioned 157 

Russell,  John  H.  Mentioned 24 

Russell  & Co.  Mentioned 156 

Russey,  James  H.  Mentioned 45 

Rust,  Albert. 

Correspondence  with  Franklin  Gardner 271 

Mentioned 265, 270, 274, 276, 985, 1005, 1032, 1033, 1035, 1036 

Rust,  Henry,  jr.  Mentioned -r 713 

Rynerson,  W.  L.  Correspondence  with  Edward  B.  Willis 606 

Sabine  Pass,  Tex. 

Affairs  at. 

October  29, 1862.  Report  of  A.  W.  Spaight 180 

April  18, 1863. 


Communications  from  William  H.  Griffin 402 

Reports  of 

Griffin,  W.  H 402 

Scurry,  W.  R - 402 

(See  also  Scurry  to  Turner,  p.  1053.) 

Attack  on  blockading  squadron  at,  January  21, 1863. 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Magruder) 238 

Report  of  John  B.  Magruder „ 237 

(See  also  report  of  Magruder,  pp.  211,  212,) 

Engagement  at,  September  24-25, 1862.  Reports  of 

Debray,  X.  B 143 

Spaight,  A.  W 144 


(See  also  Defray  to  Mason , p.  813.) 

Sachem,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 203, 211, 213, 251, 252, 276, 309, 718, 720 

Sadler,  C.  E.  Mentioned 1068 

Saffold,  W.  Mentioned 191 

Sagamore,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 231,232 

Sage,  Clinton  H.  Mentioned 713 

Saint  Bernard  Parish,  La. 

Agreement  with  loyal  planters  of 594 

Property  in,  excepted  from  operations  of  sequestration  order 602 

Saint  Charles,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1102 

Saint  Charles  Court-House,  La. 

Skirmish  near,  August  29, 1862.  Report  of  Stephen  Thomas 132 

Expedition  to  vicinity  of,  and  skirmish,  September  7-8, 1862.  Reports  of 

Frye,  Frederick 137 

McMillan,  James  W 135 

(See  also  report  of  Butler , p.  133. ) 


INDEX. 


1237 


Page. 

Saint  Joseph’s  Island,  Tex.  Affair  at,  May  3, 1863. 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Magruder) *98° 

Reports  of 

Hobby,  A.  M 

Hobby,  E.  E *. 

Neal,  Benjamin  F 

Saint  Mary,  Bark.  Mentioned 

Saint  Mary,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 175,860,868 

Saint  Mary’s,  Steamer.  Mentioned 184,365,370,371,380,382,383,584 


404 

405 
405  . 
562 


Mentioned 


261, 262, 370, 569, 775, 1102, 1115 


La.) 
Palfrey . 


Saint  Maurice,  Steamer. 

Saint  Philip,  Fort,  La. 

Bombardment  and  capture  of.  (See  New  Orleans , 

Condition  of,  etc.  Commuhications  from  John  C 

Memorandum  of  J.  G.  Barnard 4*3 

Non-combatants  excluded  from 44^ 

Salinas,  Jose  Ma.  Mentioned 

Salomon,  Louis  A.  Mentioned 

Sallie  Robinson,  Steamer.  Mentioned 


428, 435 


1040 

378 

173, 195,705,1102 

Samaniego,  Dr.  Mentioned 

Samorny,  H.  Mentioned ^)49 

Sanders,  A.  M.  Mentioned * 923,924 

Sanders,  R.  W.  Mentioned 177>  399> 400 

Sandidge,  L.  D.  Mentioned 82 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  Daniel  Buggies.) 

Sands,  Jack.  Mentioned 190 

Sanford,  Captain.  Mentioned 608 

Sanford,  Alfred.  Mentioned 4®4 

Sanford,  Memnonium,  Steamer.  (See  Memnonium  Sanford , Steamer.) 

Sanger,  George  J.  Mentioned 207 

Sangster,  Captain.  Mentioned 217,974 

Sanitary  Regulations.  New  Orleans,  La.  Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 482 

Smith,  Robert  K . 445 

Santa  Maria  Clara.  Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 563 

Sargent,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 311,611,718 

Sargent,  Lorenzo  D.  Mentioned 744 

Saulles,  A.  B.  de.  Mentioned 82 

Saunders,  Captain.  Mentioned 935 

Saure,  Peter.  Mentioned 443 

Savery,  John  E.  Mentioned 23b 

Savory,  W.  B.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 281,1102 

Sawtell,  Josiah  A.  Mentioned 743 

Sawyer,  Silas  W.  Mentioned 46,58,64,72 

Saxon,  Steamer.  Mentioned * 203-206,209,477 

Sayers,  Joseph  D . Mentioned ...  — 389, 395, 894, 897 , 911 

Scales,  D.  M.  Mentioned H23 

Schat-hi.  Mentioned 228 

Schlieter,  Henry  L.  Mentioned I87 

Schnaubert,  O.  L.  Mentioned 182 

Schreiber,  A.  Mentioned 329 

Sciota,  IJ.  S.  S.  Mentioned 142, 167 , 428, 568 

Scott,  E.  Augustus.  Mentioned 82,90,792 

Scott,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 800,801,1033 

Scott,  T.  L.  Mentioned 379 

Scruggs,  Donnegan  & Co.  Mentioned 542 


1238 


INDEX. 


Page.  j 

Scurry,  William  R. 

Assignments  to  command * 979  1 

Correspondence  with 

Burgess,  John  D •* 1065 

Griffin,  William  H : 402 

Magruder,  John  B 1027, 1034, 1053, 1074, 1079 

Smith,  E.  Kirby 1047, 1049, 1057, 1062, 1071, 1084 

Mentioned 211,214-217,224-227,403,606,  879,902,903,  910,933,  936,968, 

979, 987, 988, 1000, 1001, 1004, 1005, 1018, 1021 , 1034, 1064, 1065, 1079-1081 

Report  of  affair  at  Sabine  Pass,  Tex.,  April  18,  1863 402 

Seaborn,  James  B.  Mentioned 930 

Seal,  Mr.  Mentioned H2 

Searcy,  A.  Mentioned 181 

Seavey,  J ames  A.  Mentioned - 45, 71 

Seawell,  W.  B.  Mentioned 1027 

Secrist,  F.  Mentioned 030 

Secrist,  J.  Mentioned 030 

Seddon,  James  A.  Mentioned 617 

857, 910, 918, 952, 959, 963, 983, 984, 1004, 1028, 1030, 1031 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  C.  S .) 

Seeders,  R.  B.  Mentioned 1°1 

Seely,  Charles  D.  Mentioned 45,51,73,75 

Seger,  A.  B.,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 179,184,186 

Selden,  Henry  R.  Mentioned 574,725 

Selden,  Joseph.  Mentioned 1068 

Semmes,  O.  J. 

Mentioned 78, 82, 90, 102, 303, 390, 392, 395, 399, 707, 1094 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,1862 107 

Semmes,  Raphael.  Mentioned - 803 

Semple,  Charles.  Mentioned 94 

Sena,  J.  D.  Mentioned 574 

Senman,  C.  Mentioned 0251 

Sequestration.  Property  in 

East  Louisiana 602 

West  Louisiana.  (La  Fourche  District) 592 

Sequestration  Commissions. 

Appointments  of 693, 644 

Instructions  to.  Communications  from  N.  P.  Banks 697 

Sevique,  Alexander.  Mentioned 121 

Seward,  William  H.  Mentioned 311, 

317, 422, 471, 473, 497, 516, 518, 553, 557, 602, 613, 657, 676 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  State  Department,  U.  S.) 

Seymour,  Captain.  Mentioned 217 

Shaffer,  J.  W.  Mentioned 463, 470, 560, 562, 688, 691, 694, 718, 1098, 1099 

Shaffer,  William  L.  Mentioned 769 

Sharkey,  William  L.,  jr.  Mentioned 867,872 

Sharpe,  Jacob.  Mentioned 346, 347, 349, 352, 7 14 

Shaver,  P.  J.  Mentioned 955 

Shaw,  J.  C.  Mentioned 674 

Shea,  Daniel  D. 

Correspondence  with 

Cleveland,  H.  B 847 

Debray,  X.  B 909 

Magruder,  John  B 949 


INDEX. 


1239 


471 


1097 

462 

471 


Page. 

Shea.DanielD.-Contilined.  182,221,828,851,909, 1001, 1002 

Mentioned  . . 935, 1032, 1061, 1120 

Shelby,  W.B  Mentioned 905  1015  1059, 1060 

Sheliha,  V.  Mentioned ’ 

Shepley,  George  F. 

Appointed  Military  Governor  of  Louisiana 

(See  also  Stanton  to  Butler , p.  493.) 

Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel  

Butler,  Benjamin  

Men^ed^" 

Sheppard,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Sherive,  George.  Mentioned 

Sherman,  Sidney  A.  Mentioned 

Sherman,  Thomas.  Mentioned 

Sherman,  Thomas  W.  545  g46 

Assignments  to  command ’ 71  „ 

Assumes  command  of  the  defenses  of  New  Orleans,  La ’ 0 

Authorized  to  issue  and  approve  orders  during  temporary  absence  of  Banks. 
Correspondence  with 

BaX^han^l  P .’ .’  -V  193, 196. 615. 663, 672, 692, 696, 699, 702, 703, 715 

Benedict,  Lew ^ 

Menti^ne(^a.rl,- . 193, 196, 258, 298, 543, 545, 603, 627, 628, 646, 647, 711 , 713, 1112, 1 113 


847 

209 

217 

122 


Reports  of  , . , , n - Q 

Amite  River  and  Jackson  Railroad,  La.  Operations  on  the,  May  9-18, 


1863 


406 


300,311,312,636,762 

614 

327 

46,57 

494 


Ponchatoula,  La.  Expedition  to,  and  skirmishes,  March  21-30,  1863  . . 280 

Sherman,  W.  T. 

Co-operation  of  Banks  with.  (See  Halleck  to  Banks,  p.  636.) 

Mentioned? - 

Shetucket,  Steamer.  Mentioned - 

Shidle,  James  E.  Mentioned - 

Shields,  Private.  Mentioned * 

Shields,  James.  Mentioned 

Shields,  Thomas.  ...  77, 82, 90, 92, 739, 807, 949, 971 

Mentioned . r \ ’ 1fU 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862  ------  ^ 

Ship  Island.  Defenses  of.  (See  Banks  to  Halleck,  p.240;  Halleck  to  Banks, 
p.  690.) 

Shipley,  Alexander  N,  1103 

Reports  of  reconnaissances  from  Pensacola,  Fla.,  August  7-10,  1862 126, 128 

Shirland,  Edmond  D.  Mentioned ’747 

Shirley.  Captain.  Mentioned - • - - - 19  1121 

Shoemaker.  Rufus.  Mentioned 574725 

Shoemaker,  W.  R.  Mentioned * 

Shoener,  Joseph.  Mentioned 

Shoppman,  Private.  Mentioned 

Shorter,  Eli  S.  Mentioned 

Shorter,  John  Gill.  Mentioned - - J40, 1U15, 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Alabama , Governor  of .) 


37 

217 

946 


1240 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Shoup,  F.  A. 

Assignments  to  command 1048 

Mentioned 1048 

Shoup,  George  L. 

Mentioned , 154 

Report  of  expedition  from  Fort  Union,  N.  Mex.,  October  9-November  25, 

1862  154 

Showalter,  Dan.  Mentioned 686 

Sibley,  H.  H. 

Assignments  to  command 885, 911 

Charges  against.  Communications  from  Theophilus  H.  Holmes 843 

Correspondence  with 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 843, 910 

Reily,  James 968 

War  Department,  C.  S 819 

Court-martial  in  case  of.  Orders  promulgating  findings,  etc.., 1093 

Movement  of  brigade  of,  to  join  Taylor.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see 
West  Louisiana . Re-enforcements  for. ) 


Mentioned 194, 197, 212, 214, 239, 240, 303, 

376,  389,  392-396, 404, 576, 578,  599,  662,  665,  669,  676,  677,  680,  681,  832, 
833, 838,  843,  856,  860,  870,  879,  881,  884,  885,  894-897,  9.02-905,  909-913/ 
916,  922,  936,  943,  954,  962,  968-970,  982,  985,  999,  1092-1096,  1105,  1107 

Sill,  Mr.  Mentioned 112 

Simmons,  George  N.  Mentioned 327 

Simmons,  T.  J.  Mentioned 789 

Simms,  J.  H.  Mentioned  806 

Simms,  Nina,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1018 

Simonton,  John  M. 

Correspondence  with  Franklin  Gardner 1083 

Mentioned 279, 289, 934, 1032, 1061, 1062, 1074, 1076 

Report  of  atfair  on  the  Amite  River,  La.,  April  12,  1863  400 

Simpson,  Tom.  Mentioned 190 

Sitton,  T.  B.  Mentioned 228 

Skelton,  W.  M.  Mentioned 75, 450, 455 

Sketches. 

Fort  Jackson,  La 434 

Mobile,  Ala.,  defenses  of.  Proposed  obstructions. for  Alabama  River 1020 

Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Bird’s-eye  view  of,  and  vicinity,  July  5, 1862 29 

Profile  of  canal  across  Burey’s  Point,  opposite 30 

Skillman,  Captain.  Mentioned 605, 606, 635, 636, 675, 701, 708, 709, 1065 

Skinner,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 705 

Skip  with,  P.  H.  Mentioned 541 

Slatton,  Captain.  Mentioned 455 

Slaughter,  James  E. 

Assignments  to  command 1048 

Mentioned 848, 850, 1048, 1068, 1080 

Slaves  and  Slave  Property. 

Action  touching.  Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  F . . .*. 162, 

164, 439, 442,  443,  445, 446,  464, 485, 492, 526, 532, 553, 588, 602 

Page,  Edward,  jr 446, 464 

Peck,  Frank  H r 491 

Phelps,  J.  W 486 

Ruggles,  Daniel 821 


INDEX. 


1241 


Page. 

Slaves  and  Slave  Property-Continued. 

Action  touching.  Communications  from 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 171,172 

(See  also  Banks  to  Halleck , p.  618;  Banks  toHolabird,  p.  727 ; Butler  to  Mejan , 
p.  549;  Irwin  to  Chandler , p.  730;  Butler  to  Weitzel,  p.  587  ; Stan- 
ton to  Butler,  p.  515 ; Smith  to  Irwin,  p.  709 ; orders  of  Banks,  p. 

678;  proclamation  of  Davis,  pp.  906-908.) 

Emancipation  proclamations. 

September  22, 1862  621 

January  1,1863  666,667 

Employment  of,  as  laborers.  Communications  from 

Butler,  Benjamin  F ' 444,534,536,542 

Phelps,  J.W 534,535 

War  Department,  C.  S 841 

(See  also  report  of  T.  Williams,  pp.  26-28 ; Ellet  to  Stanton,  p.  529 ; Banks 
to  Dwight,  p.  706  ; Buggies  to  Smith,  p.  809 ; Beauregard  to  Harris, 
p.  812  ; orders  of  Butler,  pp.  592-594;  agreement  with  planters,  pp. 
594,595.) 

Slawson,  J.  B.  Mentioned 640 

Slocomb,  C.  A.,  Mrs.  Mentioned 640 

Slocum,  John  J. 

Correspondence  with  W.  D.  L.  McRae  . — 787 

Mentioned - 787,790 

Sloo,  Thomas.  Mentioned 640 

Smalley,  L.  D.  Mentioned 203 

Smith,  Captain.  Mentioned 45 

Smith,  A.  Mentioned 814 

Smith,  Abel,  jr. 

Mentioned 259, 281-284, 289, 646, 713 

Report  of  expedition  to  Ponchatoula,  La.,  and  skirmishes,  Mar.  21-30, 1863.  284 

Smith,  D.  Mentioned 405 

Smith,  E.  Kirby. 

Assignments  to  command — 948, 972, 1005 

Co-operation  of  Pemberton  with 1044-1046, 1049, 1058, 1059 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 972, 1045 

Cosby,  Charles  V 1055, 1056 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 1041, 1042, 1046, 1050, 1054 

Magruder,  John  B 1036, 1043, 1078 

Pemberton,  John  C 1042, 1044-1047, 1049, 1050, 1058 

Scurry,  William  R 1047, 1049, 1057, 1062, 1071, 1084 

Speight,  J.  W 1646 

Steele,  William 1014 

Taylor,  Richard  1047, 1051, 1065, 1081-1083 

Walker,  J.  G 1048,1051,1058,1083 

Washington,  T.  A 1028 

Mentioned 306-309, 318, 332-334, 

678,  680,  718,  948,  979,  984,  999,  1014,  1022-1024, 1036, 1043, 1044, 1046, 
1048-1051,  1053-1057,  1062,  1065,  1074,  1081, 1083, 1107, 1108, 1117, 1118 

Reports  of  campaign  in  West  Louisiana,  April  9-23, 1863 386, 387 

Staff.  Announcements  of 1009,1048,1062 

Smith,  Edward  C.  Mentioned 467,469 

Smith,  Elisha  B. 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 709 

Mentioned 634, 645 


1242 


INDEX. 


Page,  t 

Smith,  Fred.  E.  Mentioned 235 

Smith,  George  A.  Mentioned 1069 

Smith,  Henry  L.  Mentioned 418 

Smith,  Howard.  Mentioned 1121 

Smith,  Isaac.  Mentioned 81,98 

Smith,  James  B.  Mentioned 464 

Smith,  J.  N.  Mentioned 120, 122 

Smith,  John  Blair.  Mentioned 784, 788 

Smith,  Joseph.  Mentioned 230,725 

Smith,  Leon.  Mentioned 210- 


212, 214-216, 225, 227, 237, 816, 897, 908, 909, 931, 932, 974 


Smith,  Martin  L. 

Assignments  to  command 768,769,840 

Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jefferson 754,758 

Lee,  S.  Phillips 6, 7 

Pemberton,  John  C 853,926 

Ruggles,  Daniel 809 

Taylor,  Richard - 867 

Williams,  Thomas 6 

Mentioned  .12, 13, 15, 16, 18, 141, 476, 735, 742, 751, 752, 763, 768, 769, 811, 840, 853, 872 
Report  of  operations  against  and  about  Vicksburg,  May  18-July  27, 1862..  6 

Smith,  Marshall  J.  Mentioned 277,943,1062 

Smith,  Melancthon.  Mentioned 252,302,1114 

Smith,  Michael.  Mentioned 357 

Smith,  Morrill  B.  Mentioned 340 

Smith,  Patrick.  Mentioned 331,348,353 

Smith,  Ralph.  Mentioned 751, 755, 757 , 761 

Smith,  Robert  H.  Mentioned 770, 1069 

Smith,  Robert  K. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 445 

Mentioned - 441 

Smith,  S.  A.  Mentioned 1009,1049 

Smith,  Samuel,  & Co.  Mentioned 513 

Smith,  T.  B. 

Mentioned 18,78 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5, 1862 * 89 

Smith,  Thomas.  Mentioned 219,220 

Smith,  William.  Mentioned 1092 

Smith  & Johnson.  Mentioned 542 

Snodgrass,  John. 

Mentioned 18, 1033 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862 85 

Snow,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 45,71 

Snow,  William  A.  Mentioned 356,357 

Snow,  W.  K.  Mentioned 365,382 

Snowden,  C.  F.  Mentioned 541 

Snyder,  Captain.  Mentioned 074 

Soldiers’  Families.  Orders  of. 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 589 

Louisiana,  Governor  of • 589 

Solis  & Munis.  Mentioned 1075 

Soniat,  P.  Mentioned 443 

Son,  Mancos.  Mentioned 228 


INDEX. 


1243 


Page. 

94 
45, 68 


Communications  from  Benjamin  F.  Butler 447 


496 

496 

"””*’*”’*”* 447 , 495, 723, 734, 799 

( Union . ) West  Florida  detached  from 

Militia  District  of.  (Confederate.) 


547 


1862.  Ann,  Steamer.  Cap- 


Pass  Christian, 


985 

985 


1102 


771 


5,  1121 


Sorey,  R.  B.  L.  Mentioned  .. 

Soul6,  Harrison.  Mentioned. 

Soul6,  Pierre. 

• Arrest  of. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T ... 

Bland,  Ben 

Putnam,  James  M . - . 

Mentioned 

South,  Department  of  the. 

South  and  East  Louisiana, 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 

Pratt,  John  G.,  assigned  to  command 

Southern  Alabama.  Operations  in.  (See  June  29 
ture  of.) 

Southerner,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Southern  Mississippi.  Operations  in.  (See  June  22,  1862 
Miss.  Expedition  to.) 

Southern  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana,  Department  of. 

Designated  District  of  the  Mississippi 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  1,  510;  No.  2,  768;  Nos.  3, 

No.  9,  771. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  5,  769. 

Subdivisions  of. 

First  District. 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 

Buggies,  Daniel,  assigned  to  command 

Second  District. 

Beall,  William  N.  R.,  assigned  to  command 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 768 

Third  District. 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 

Smith,  M.  L.,  assigned  to  command 7^8 

Van  Dorn,  Earl,  assumes  command 
Southwestern  Army.  (Confederate.) 

Constituted 

Merged  into  Trans-Mississippi  Department - 97<i 

Smith,  E.  Kirby,  assigned  to  command 948 

Spaight,  A.  W.  Mentioned 143,813,815,816,832,83/ 

Reports  of 

Beaumont,  Tex.  Destruction  of  railroad  depot  near,  October  2,  1862 
Sabine  Pass,  Tex. 

Affair  at,  October  29,  1862 

Engagement  at,  September  24-25,  1862 

Taylor’s  Bayou,  Tex.  Affair  on,  September  27,  1862 

Spanish  Consulate.  (For  correspondence,  see  Imanuel  Callejon.) 

Sparkling  Sea,  Steamer. 

Loss  of,  January  9,  1863.  Report  of  John  A.  Grow ■ 

Mentioned 

Sparkman,  J.  M.  Mentioned 

Sparks,  C.  Mentioned..; 

Sparrow,  Edward. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 


768 

768 

768 


510 


948 


146 

180 

144 

145 


Mentioned 


231,673 
. 1027 

..  586 

808, 952 
963, 983 


1244 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Spaulding,  S.  R.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 608 

Speed,  Frederic.  Mentioned 411 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  Neal  Dow.) 

Speight,  J.  W. 

Correspondence  with  E.  Kirby  Smith 1046 

Mentioned 1083 

Spencer,  J.  H.  Mentioned 71 

Spit  Fire,  H.  M.  S.  Mentioned 225,647 

Spitzer,  Garrett  I.  Mentioned 45,68 

Spooner,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 81,84 

Sprague,  Homer  B.  Mentioned 385 

S.  R.  Spaulding,  Steamer.  Mentioned 608 

Stafford,  Leroy  A.  Mentioned 791 

Stafford,  Spencer  H. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 526 

Mentioned 162, 170, 587, 713 

Stanard,  H.  M.  Mentioned 217,881 

(For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  John  B.  Magruder. ) 

Stancel,  Jesse. 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 647 

Mentioned 658 

Stanley,  Private.  Mentioned 322 

Stanley,  William.  Mentioned 467-469 

Stanton,  Edwin  M.  Mentioned 47,311,447,450,466,471, 

493,  497,  527,  533,  534,  536,  553,  555,  557,  567,  577,  581-585,  588,  589,  592, 
595,  601,  612,  613,  642,  656,  657,  690,  702,  716,  725,  726, 760, 906, 1098, 1116 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  U.  S.) 

Stanton,  H.  W.  Mentioned 579 

Stanton,  J.  W.,  & Co.  Mentioned .. 540 

Stapp,  Mr.  Mentioned 154-158 

Star,  Steamer.  Mentioned 22 

Starke,  John.  Mentioned 43 

Starke,  P.  B.  Mentioned 11,19 

Starns,  B.  B.  Mentioned 121, 122 

Star  of  the  West,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 15 

State  Department,  U.  S. 

Correspondence  with 

Butler,  Benjamin  F .* 473,518,533,602 

Dayton,  William  L..* 657 

Hunter,  Charles 522 

New  Mexico,  Secretary  and  Acting  Governor  of 641 

War  Department,  U.  S 497, 522, 553, 557, 567, 612, 613, 641, 657 

Orders.  Trade  and  intercourse 612 

Statham,  W.  S. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Breckinridge 1122 

Mentioned 9,11,18,1121,1122 

Stedman,  Joseph.  Mentioned 207,646,713 

Steedman,  I.  G.  W.  Mentioned 1033 

Steele,  Frederick.  Mentioned 590 

Steele,  William. 

Correspondence  with  E.  Kirby  Smith 1014 

Mentioned 1014 

Sterling,  Robert.  Mentioned 10 

Stevens,  C.  S,  S.  Mentioned 393 


INDEX. 


1245 


Page. 

230 

Stevens,  B.  Mentioned 

Stevens,  Henry  K.  Mentioned 1094 

Stevenson,  Carter  L.  Mentioned 902,926,1024 

Stevenson,  John.  Mentioned 606 

Stevenson,  John  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Lapeyre,  J.  8®3 

War  Department,  C.  884 

Mentioned 

Stewart,  A.  M.  Mentioned 787 ’ 788 

Stewart,  C.  S.  Mentioned 4(^ 

Stewart,  Duncan.  Mentioned 787 

Stewart,  James  H.  Mentioned ^ 

Stewart,  James  M.  Mentioned 350 

Stewart,  S.  D.  Mentioned ^5 

Stillman,  Charles.  Mentioned - 1074 

Stith,  Mr.  Mentioned 4^7 

Stith,  D.  C.  Mentioned 4^ 

Stockdale,  J.  L.  Mentioned  ^44 

Stockdale,  Thomas  R.  Mentioned  . ~ 489>  4062> 1076 

Stockton,  Philip.  Mentioned - 4424 

Stoddard,  B.  Mentioned 4^ 

Stone,  Charles  P. 

Assignments  to  command - 74^ 

Mentioned 74^ 

Stone,  C.  W.  Mentioned 284 

Stone,  Eben  F.  Mentioned 256, 742 

Stone,  R.  H. 

Charges  against,  preferred  by  citizens  of  New  Ulm,  Tex.  Report  of  Will- 
iam J.  Wheeler ^89 

Mentioned 942,  982,  989 

Storey,  L.  J.  Mentioned 223 

Storrs,  Sam.  John. 

Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 665 

Mentioned 197, 198 

Story,  B.  S.  Mentioned 478 

Stowell,  B.  S.  Mentioned 207 

Stoy,  L.  W.  Mentioned 218 

Stratton,  Joel  A.  Mentioned 354 

Strickland,  Joseph.  Mentioned 385 

Stringfellow,  H.  M.  Mentioned 218 

Strong,  George  C. 

Mentioned - — 138, 139, 160, 653, 654 

Report  of  expedition  to  Pass  Manchac  and  Ponchatoula,  La.,  and  skirmish, 


September  13-15, 1862  139 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Benjamin  F.  Butler.) 

Strother,  D.  H.  Mentioned 644 

Strunk,  Samuel.  Mentioned 228 

Stuart,  James  D.  Mentioned 805 

Stuart,  J.  D.  Mentioned 1038 

Stuart  & James.  Mentioned 542 

Stucken,  Frank  V.  D.  Mentioned 951 

Suboureau,  Mr.  Correspondence  with  Nathaniel  P.  Banks 1101 

Subsistence  Stores.  Supplies  of.  (See  Munitions  of  War.) 


1246 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Sulakowski,  V. 

Correspondence  with  John  B.  Magruder 1022, 1034, 1041, 1063 

Mentioned , 179 

Suliger, . Mentioned 925 

Sullivane,  Clement.  Mentioned 19, 1121 

Sumter,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 33, 38, 40, 537, 538 

Superville,  A.  Mentioned  961 

Surget,  E.  Mentioned 396 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Richard  Taylor.) 

Swan,  Steamer.  Mentioned 231,233 

Swan,  Mr.  Mentioned 922 

Swanson,  W.  G.  Mentioned 948 

Sweaney,  J.  R.  Mentioned 18, 79, 1033  i 

Sweeny,  Captain.  Mentioned 755 

Swift,  Captain.  Mentioned 217 

Swift,  John  L.  Mentioned 362,630  ' 

Swiss  Consulate.  (For  correspondence,  see  J.  Piaget.) 

Switzerland,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 295, 302, 307, 312, 313, 316, 718 

Sykes,  Steamer.  Mentioned 355,726,727 

Talbot,  Judge.  Mentioned 846 

Tamaulipas,  Mex. , Governor  of. 

Correspondence  with 

Bee,  Hamilton  P 966, 1 • 

975, 992, 994, 996, 998, 1006, 1007, 1025, 1044, 1051, 1127-1130, 1132-1135 

Bnchel,  A ; 924 

Orders.  February  28, 1863  1126 

Tarleton,  John  B.  Mentioned 389,390,395 

Tarlton,  Whitney  & Co.  Mentioned 541 

Tassara,  Gabriel  Garcia  y.  Mentioned 567,568,581 

Tate,  Fred.  Mentioned 19, 772, 1121 

Tate,  W.  Mentioned 792 

Tattnall,  J.  R.  F.  Mentioned 770, 850 

Taylor,  C.  A.  Mentioned u 805 

Taylor,  Franck  E.  .Mentioned 361 

Taylor,  George  W.  Mentioned 44, 64 

Taylor,  James  G.  Mentioned 403 

Taylor,  J.  M.  Mentioned 82 

Taylor,  Joseph.  Mentioned 851,933 

Taylor,  Richard. 

Assignments  to  command 789, 802 

Co-operation  with  Gardner 922, 923 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 791,864,872,877,919 

Benjamin,  J.  P 188 

Blanchard,  Albert  G 954 

Butler,  Benjamin  F - 565 

Gardner,  Franklin 922, 1003, 1018, 1021 

Hdbert,  Paul  O 838,866 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 971 

Johnston,  Joseph  E - 958 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 874 

Magruder,  John  B 970, 985 

Pemberton,  John  C 855, 859, 868, 873, 963, 1021, 1024, 1044, 1045 

Buggies,  Daniel.. 802 


INDEX, 


1247 

Page. 


Taylor,  Richard— Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Smith,  E.  Kirby 1047, 1051, 1065, 1081-1083 

Smith,  Martin  L 867 

War  Department,  C.  S 872,962,983 

Instructions  to 791 

Mentioned 159, 179, 180, 185, 275, 297, 299, 308, 317, 332, 

386,  387, 398, 399, 404, 786,  789, 795,  804,  808,  810,  817,  819,  820,  822,  840, 
855, 866, 867,  874, 876, 877,  879,  880, 888,  910, 911, 922,  953, 954,  963, 968, 
1003, 1042-1047, 1049, 1050,  1053,  1054, 1084,  1092-1094, 1105,  1118,  1119 

Reports  of 

Diana,  U.  S.  S.  Capture  of,  March  28,  1863 290 

La  Fourche  District,  La.  Operations  in,  October  24-November  6, 1862 . . 174 

West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  April  9-23, 1863 388 

Taylor,  W.  A.  Mentioned 774,824 

Taylor,  Zachary.  Mentioned 220, 621 

Taylor’s  Bayou,  Tex.  Affair  on,  September  27,  1862.  Report  of  A.  W. 

Spaight 145 

(See  also  Debray  to  Davis,  p.  820.) 

Tchefuncta  River,  La.  Expedition  up  the,  July  25-August  2,  1862.  (See 
Pontchartrain  Lake , La.  Operations  around,  July  25-August  2, 

1862.) 

Teche  Bayou,  La.  Engagements  on. 

January  14,  1863.  Reports  of 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 233 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 234 

Winchester,  B.  F 1089 

(See  also  Banks  to  Halleck,  p.  646.) 

April  12-13, 1863.  (See  Fort  Bisland,  La.) 

Tennessee,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 31,957 

Tennessee  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Heavy— Battalions:  1st,  276, 278, 971, 1033, 1062.  Regiments:  1st,  19. 
Artillery,  Light— Batteries : Lookout  Artillery  (Barry),  1068;  Mc- 
Clung’s,  18, 801, 803 • Humes’,  1068. 

Cavalry — Battalions : 9th,  934, 949, 971,  1033,  1062.  Regiments:  Jackson’s, 

763, 1120. 

Infantry— Battalions ; 1st,  278, 1033, 1062.  Regiments  : 3d,  1033, 1062 ; 10th, 

278, 1033, 1062 ; 19th,  20th,  28th,  18, 78, 82  ; 30th,  278, 1033, 1062 ; 41st, 

1033, 1062 ; 42d,  934, 1032, 1061 ; 45th,  18, 78, 82  ; 46th,  48th,  49th,  934, 

1032, 1061 ; 50th,  1033, 1062;  51st,  278, 1033 ; 53d,  934, 1032, 1061 ; 55th, 

934, 1032,1061,1070. 

Tenney,  Joseph  F.  Mentioned 44,61,67,303,  705 

Terrazas, . Mentioned 686 

Terrazas,  Luis.  Mentioned 578, 634-636, 669, 674, 675, 682, 684, 687, 688, 709 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Chihuahua,  Mex.,  Governor  of .) 

Terrell,  V.  L. 

Correspondence  with  John  L.  Logan 408 

Mentioned 36, 408, 409, 1038, 1062 

Report  of  capture  of  the  steamer  Lone  Star,  November  27, 1862 189 

Terry,  F.  G.  Mentioned 79 

Teryaghi,  B. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Butler 479 

Mentioned 479 


1248 


INDEX. 


Texas.  ase‘ 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 656 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 200, 642 

Bee,  Hamilton  P ggl 

Davis,  Jefferson 371 

Gray,  P.  W 368 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 383 

Houston,  Samuel 933 

Magruder,  John  B 936, 974, 1000, 1030, 1077, 1073 

Scurry,  W.  R 1053 

Texas,  Governor  of 896, 952 

War  Department,  C.  S . 952 

Baylor,  John  R.,  assigned  to  command  of  northern  and  Indian  frontier  of.  858 

Coast  defenses.  Communications  from 

Debray,  X.  B 829, 831, 838, 856, 865, 878, 909, 910, 912, 957 

Forshey,  C.  G 885,1001 

Hdbert,  Paul  O 854, 855, 878 

Kellersberg,  J 834, 853 

Lubbock,  H.  S 830 

Magruder,  John  B 909, 913, 936, 939, 1004, 1005 

Nichols,  E.  B 957 

Shea,  Dan.  D 949 

Sulakowski,  V 1022,1034 

War  Department,  C.  S . 871 

(See  also  Corpus  Christi , Tex.) 

Conscription  Act  in. 

Enforcement  of 220, 

870,  881,  886,  887,  890,  900,  921,925-929,931,936,942,945,946, 
952, 955, 960, 974, 975, 978, 979, 981, 982, 987, 988, 1018, 1056, 1057 
Resistance  to.  Communications  from 

Bell,  A.  J 887,925 

Biegel  Settlement,  Tex.,  Citizens  of 928 

Flewellen,  J.P 886 

Hardeman,  P . 960, 989 

McCown,  J.  B 921 

Magruder,  John  B 890,931,936,946 

Webb,  Henry  L 942,955,978,982 

Webb,  William  G 926,946 

Wheeler,  William  J 989 

(See  also  Magruder  to  Lubbock , p.  974 ; report  of  Magruder , p.  220.) 

Defense  of,  general.  Communications  from  John  B.  Magruder 932 

Demonstrations  against,  proposed.  Communications  from 

Massachusetts,  Governor  of 412 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 413 

(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  552;  Butler  to  Halleck , p.  158.) 

Frontier  defenses  of.  Communications  from 

Bee,  Hamilton  P 950,951 

Hubert,  Paul  O 858 

Magruder,  John  B 1027, 1034 

Steele,  William 1014 

War  Department,  C.  S 871 

Hamilton,  A.  J.,  appointed  Military  Governor  of 595 

Martial  law 220, 829, 974, 975, 1006, 1018, 1021 

Military  departments  embracing 1, 500, 590, 948 


INDEX, 


1249 

Page. 


Texas — Continued, 

Militia 843, 858, 859, 904, 913, 925, 975, 1057, 1079 

Occupation  of,  suggested.  Communications  from 

Hunter,  Charles * 522 

State  Department,  U.  S 522 

Operations  in,  and  on  coast  of.  Communications  from 


Banks,  N.  533 

Bee,  Hamilton  P 881,933,964,965,1006,1013,1016,1056 

Brown,  R.  R 846 

Cleveland,  H.  B 847 

Cook,  Joseph  J 826 

Cushing,  E.  H 897 

Debray,  X.  B 813-815,820,825,826,832,836 

Hubert,  Paul  O 825,858 

Jones,  O.  G 895 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 894 

Luckett,  P.  N 960 

Magruder,  John  B 884, 886, 894, 895, 897, 931, 1030, 1077 

Rugeley,  E.  S 939 

Texas,  Governor  of - 843, 925 

(See  also 


Sept.  24-25,  1862.  Sabine  Pass,  Tex.  Engagement  at. 

27,  1862.  Taylor’s  Bayou,  Tex.  Affair  on, 

Oot.  2,  1862.  Beaumont,  Tex.  Destruction  of  railroad  depot  at. 

5,  1862.  Galveston,  Tex.  Capture  of,  by  Union  fleet. 

29,  1862.  Sabine  Pass,  Tex.  Affair  at. 

31  -Nov.  1,  1862.  Lavaca,  Tex.  Bombardment  of. 

Nov.  20,  1862.  Matagorda,  Tex.  Affair  near. 

Dec.  7,  1862.  Padre  Island , Tex.  Affair  at. 

24,  1862.  Galveston,  Tex.  Occupation  of,  by  Union  forces. 
Jan.  1,  1863.  Galveston,  Tex.  Recapture  of,  by  Confederate  forces. 
11,  1863.  Hatteras,  U.  S.  S.  Capture  of,  off  Galveston,  Tex. 


21,  1863.  Sabine,  Tex.  Attack  on  blockading  squadron  at. 

Mar.  2-30,  1863.  Rio  Grande,  Expedition  to  the  mouth  of  the. 

April  18,  1863.  Sabine  Pass,  Tex.  Affair  at. 

May  3,  1863.  Saint  Joseph’s  Island,  Tex.  Affair  at.) 

Refugees  from.  Organization  and  recruitment  of,  for  U.  S.  service 588, 

591, 592, 658, 1013, 1014, 1016, 1017 

State  troops  for  defense  of  northwestern  frontier  of,  to  be  under  command 

of  department  commander 818 

Union  sentiment  in 522 

Texas,  Department  of.  (Union.)  David  E.  Twiggs  assigned  to  command  ..  500 

Texas,  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Bee,  Hamilton  P.,  assigned  to  command 879 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc. 

October  31, 1862 851 

November  1, 1862.  Sub-district  of  the  Rio  Grande 851 

December  31, 1862.  Sub-district  of  the  Rio  Grande 920 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 802 

Designated  “ District  of  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona  ” 880 

Hubert,  Paul  O. 

Assigned  to  command 802 

Relieved  of  command 826 

Magruder,  John  B.,  assigned  to  command 826 

79  r r— yol  xy 


1250 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Texas,  District  of.  (Confederate.  ) — Continued. 

Orders,  General,  series  186*2 : No.  9,  879. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  20,  820 ; No.  26, 858. 

Texas,  Governor  of. 

Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jefferson 807 

H6bert,  Paul  O 858,925 

Magruder,  John  B 896,903,913,925,952,974 

War  Department,  C.  S 952 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  132,818;  No.  143,843. 

Texas  Legislature.  Resolutions  of  thanks.  Recapture  of  Galveston  by  Con- 
federate forces,  January  1, 1863  221 

Texas  Troops.  (Confederate.)  Mentioned. 

Arizona  Brigade — Battalions:  1st  Infantry  (Davidson),  1064.  Regiments: 

1st  (Hardeman),  931 ; 2d,  1053, 1054,  1064;  3d,  1053-1055,1064;  4th,  1064. 
Artillery,  Heavy — Regiments : 1st  ( Cook),  148, 212, 214, 215, 238, 837, 865, 935. 
Artillery,  Light — Battalions : Shea’s,  181, 182, 851.  Batteries  : Creuzbaur, 

851 ; Maclin’s,  684,  851 ; Neal’s,  851 ; Valverde,  389,  390,  395,  884,  894, 

897,  910,  911,1092;  Willke’s,  684,851,  933,961;  Wilson’s,  143,  145,  214, 
813-815, 1074. 


Cavalry — Battalions : 3d  ( Yager),  684, 851 ; 8th  (Taylor),  851, 933, 951 ; 12th 
(Brown),  188, 865, 949, 1018, 1021, 1080 ; 13th  ( Waller),  133, 137, 245, 388, 391, 
392, 394, 398, 680 ; 14th  (Dnff),  851, 933, 1014, 1021.  Companies : Benavides, 
R.,851;  Benavides,  S.,  851;  Brackenridge’s,  405,851;  Navarro’s,  851, 
951, 1064  ; Penalozm’s,  851 ; Rountree’s,  979  ; Spencer’s.  1057  ; Thomas’, 
1057 ; Trevino’s,  1057  ; Ware’s,  851.  Regiments : Frontier  (McCord),  933, 
950,951,1027,1034;  Lane’s,  346,1081,1082;  2d  (Pyron),  214, 238, 684, 851, 
878, 916, 933, 936, 1071 ; 4th  (Reily),  213, 389,  390-392, 857,  *78, 969, 983, 1003 ; 
5th  ( Green),  212, 388, 391, 392, 857, 878, 935, 983  ; 6th  (Stone),  902-904, 1027, 
1034, 1053, 1054 ; 7th  (Bagby),  212,  347,  389,  390,  397,  398,  910,  983,  1003, 
1091,1092;  23d  (Gould),  886,  1027,  1034,  1054,  1057,1071  ; 24th  ( Wilkes), 
824 ; 26th  (Debray),  143, 144, 148, 151, 837,  865, 942 ; 29th  (De  Morse),  895, 
896,  1057;  30th  (Gurley),  902-904,937,1053-1055;  33d  (Duff),  1077,1078, 
1080;  36th  ( Woods),  851,933,965,1057. 

Infantry — Battalions:  Bates’,  865;  Burnet’s  (Sharpshooters),  1032,1061; 
Griffin’s,  143,145,188,214,813,814:865,935,1053;  Spaight’s,  143-146,180, 
238,813,814,816,1071.  Companies : Ireland’s,  190,191,851.  Regiments: 
3d  (Luckett),  683, 684, 851, 933 ; 7th  (Bailey),  934, 1033, 1062  ; 8th  (Hobby), 
404,405,  851,1078,1085;  13th  (Bates),  1071 ; 20th  (Elmore),  143,  145,  148, 
214,  217, 813, 814, 816, 837, 865 ; 21st  ( Griffin),  402, 403. 

Miscellaneous : Waul’s  Legion,  794. 

Texas  Troops.  (Union.)  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Regiments:  1st  (Davis),  205,  406,591,  592,  628,  713. 

Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona,  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc. 


November  30, 1862  883, 884 

January  12, 1863  946 

February  28, 1863  1001 

March  31, 1863  1034 

Magruder,  John  B.,  assumes  command 880 


Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  1,880;  No.  45,  238. 

Orders,  General,  series  1863:  No.  24,  979  ; No.  28,  986;  No.  30,  990;  No. 

37;  220;  No.  39,  1005;  No.  56,  221;  No.  66,  1085. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  January  21,  956;  No.  35,  931 ; No.  37,936; 
No.  38,  939 ; No.  88,  1000  ; No.  91,  1004  ; No.  134, 1080 ; No.  264,  818. 


INDEX. 


1251 


Page. 

Thayer,  Edward  A.  Mentioned 236 

Thayer,  Richard  R.  Mentioned 45>68 

Thiers,  Louis  Adolphe.  Mentioned ^11 

Thomas, Mentioned 


156 

11,18 


Thomas,  Allen.  Mentioned 

Thomas,  Lorenzo.  Mentioned 385, 527, 559, 604, 634, 670, 674 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant- General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.) 

Thomas,  Stephen. 

Mentioned 161-163,167,170,174,184,235,236,587,712 

Reports  of 

Boutte  Station,  La.  Affair  at,  September  5,  1862 134 

Des  Allemands  Bayou,  La.  Affair  at,  September  4, 1862  134 

Saint  Charles  Court-House,  La.  Skirmish  near,  August  29, 1862 132 

Thomas,  W.  H.  Mentioned - 1009 

Thompson,  A.  P.  Mentioned.., 18,77,78,81,90,91,93,94,96-100,108,1033 

Thompson,  Charles  J.  Mentioned 68 

Thompson,  E.  T.  Affidavit  of 362 

Thompson,  E.  W.  Mentioned 168,650 

Thompson,  James  M.  Mentioned 129,773 

Thompson,  J.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton.) 

Thompson,  John.  Mentioned 81, 86 

Thompson,  J.  W.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Breckinridge 1125 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff. 

Correspondence  with 

Breckinridge,  John  799, 1124 

Ruggles,  Daniel 797,803 

Mentioned — - 138, 140, 548, 762, 765, 770, 1120 

Thornhill  & Co.  Mentioned 542 

Thornton,  Charles.  Mentioned 1123 

Thornton,  Charles  C.  G.  Mentioned 139,140 

Thornton,  Harry  I.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  W.  S.  Statham.) 

Thorpe,  Gould  H.  Mentioned 284 

Thresman,  O F.  Mentioned 540 

Throckmorton,  John  R.  Mentioned 95 

Thurber,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned % 236 

Thyssens,  F.  L.  J.  Mentioned 19 

Tickfaw  Bridge,  La.  Skirmish  at,  May  16,  1863.  (See  Amite  Biver  and  Jack- 
son  Railroad , La.  Operations  on  the,  May  9-18, 1863.) 

Time  and  Tide,  Steamer.  Mentioned 443, 1102 

Tinelli,  Louis  W.  Mentioned 714 

Tissot,  A.  L.  Mentioned 19 

Todd,  A.  H Mentioned 77,90 

Todd,  David  H.  Mentioned - 10,849 

Todd,  R.  B.  Mentioned 887,914 

Todd,  S.  M.  Mentioned 753 

Toledano,  E.  A.  Mentioned 1033,1061 

Topp,  H.  E. 

Mentioned 81, 84 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5, 1862 88 

Totten,  Joseph  G.  Mentioned 421,655 

Tower,  Z.  B.  Mentioned 571 

Townes,  R.  J.  Mentioned 221 

Trabue,  R.  P.  Mentioned 800,801 

Tracy,  E.  L.  Mentioned - 733 


1252 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Trade  and  Intercourse. 

Communications  from 

Bankhead,  Smith  P 1066 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 309, 615, 616, 629, 630, 643, 661, 672, 673, 690, 694, 1115 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 443,470,582,584 

Chandler,  J.  G 1102 

Davis,  J efferson - 863 

Hindman,  T.  C 782 

Holabird,  S.  B 673 

Lambert, 660 

Lapeyre,  J.  M . 863 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 755, 757, 759-761, 891-893 

Magruder,  John  B 986, 990 

Marks,  J 660 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 583 

Nuevo  Leon  and  Coahuila,  Governor  of 1067 

Ruggles,  Daniel 805,890,891 

Russell,  Charles 1072 

Stevenson,  John  A 861 

State  Department,  U.  S 612 

Tamaulipas,  Governor  of 1007 

Treasury  Department  U.  S . 311 

War  Department,  C.  S 863, 1059 

War  Department,  U.  S 591, 612 

Webb,  Henry  L 1017,1020 

Witt,  A.  R . 835 

(See  also  Banks  to  Halleck,  pp.  240,251,639,1109,1117;  Banks  to  Burrell, 
p.  201;  Butler  to  Stanton,  p.  422 ; Halleck  to  Banks,  p.  690, 1117 ; 
Stanton  to  Butler,  p.  493 ; Thompson  to  Buggies,  p.  797 ; Magruder 
to  Cooper,  p.  1030 ; Magruder  to  Anderson,  p.  900 ; Bee  to  Anderson, 
p.  881 ; Debray  to  Hdbert,  p.  815 ; Debray  to  Mason,  p.  814  ; Smith  to 
Irwin,  p.  709 ; proclamation  of  Governor  of  Louisiana,  pp.  504-510; 
order  of  Van  Dorn,  p.  771.) 

Permits.  (Confederate. ) 

Exportation  of  cotton 617 

Importation  of  salt 617 

Proposition  of  Banks  to  planters 616 

Trans-Mississippi  Department. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from  Jefferson  Davis 807 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 1 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  5,  802;  (Hebert),  No.  11,  824. 

Orders,  General,  series  1863 : No.  1,  1005  ; No.  3,  1009 ; No.  5, 1048  ; No.  6, 

1054;  No.  9,  1062;  No.  47,  1093. 

Polignac,  C.  J.,  assigned  to  duty  in 1023 

Smith,  E.  Kirby,  assigned  to,  and  assumes  command  of 972, 1005 

Walker,  L.  M.,  assigned  to  duty  in 1022 

Trans-Mississippi  District.  (Confederate.)  Orders,  General,  series  1862: 

No.  2,  780;  No.  4,  782;  No.  5,  783. 

Transportation.  Railroad  and  Water.  Communications  from 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 527 

Army  Headquarters 645,646,671,702,726 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 673, 688, 690, 693, 718, 1117 

Breckinridge,  John  C 800 

937 


INDEX. 


1253 


Page. 

Transportation.  Railroad  and  Water— Continued.  Communications  irorn 

Buckner,  Simon  93^ 

Butler,  Benjamin  537,559,571 

Edey,  Percy  

Emory,  William  

Farragut,  D.  G ^ 

Fleming,  L.  

Holabird,  S.  ----- 

Johnston,  Joseph  938,9 

Miller,  98* 

Morris,  Henry  

Navy  Department,  U.  527 

Pemberton,  John  937,938,963 

Porter,  David  ^27’ 

Porter,  W.  537 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A ^91 

Ruggles,  Daniel 803> 809 

Sherman,  T.  672 

Taylor,  Richard 873 

Thompson,  E.  

War  Department,  C.  770 

(See  also  'proclamation  of  Governor  of  Louisiana , pp.  504-510 ; Banks  to  Hal- 
leok , pp.  240, 294, 316 ; Banks  to  Grant,  pp.  303, 304 ; Butler  to  Hal- 
Itck,  pp.  158, 160, 161 ; Butler  to  Weitzel,  p.  162;  Butler  to  Stanton , 
p.  422;  Halleck  to  Banks,  p.  690,725.) 

Trask,  O.  W. 

Correspondence  with  Frank  S.  Nickerson 671 

Mentioned 283 

Treasury  Department,  TJ.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 491, 499, 513, 582 

War  Department,  U.  S 311 

Trepagnier,  N.  Mentioned <■ — • 81, 104 

Trow,  George  H.  Mentioned 351 

Trull,  George  G. 

Mentioned • — - • - — - 43, 56, 59, 60, 66, 651 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862  62 

Tubbs,  John  L.  Mentioned 935 

Tucker,  Major.  Mentioned 217 

Tully,  P.  R. 

Correspondence  with  H.  J.  Caniffe 606 

Mentioned 604 

Turnbull,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 626 

Turner,  Edmund  P.  Mentioned - 217,881 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  B.  Magruder.) 

Turner,  John  W.  Mentioned 48, 463, 503, 525 

Turney,  R.  Mentioned 640 

Twiggs,  David  E. 

Assignments  to  command 600 

Correspondence  with  A.  C.  Myers 500,501 

Letters  found  in  house  of,  forwarded  to  War  Department 500-502 

Mentioned 600, 501, 541 

Tyler,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 32 

Tyler,  H.  C.  Mentioned 806 

Tyler,  Thomas  R.  Mentioned - 44,46,57 


1254 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Ulffers,  H.  A.  Mentioned 317,318 

IJllman,  Daniel.  Mentioned 710 

Uncle  Ben,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 238,974 

Uncle  Tommy,  Steamer.  Mentioned 343, 344 

Undaunted,  Ship.  Mentioned _.  673 

Union,  Steamer.  Mentioned 705,730,1102 

Union  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of 

Baton  Rouge,  La.  Engagement  at,  August  5,  1862 51 

Bisland,  Fort,  La.  Engagement  at,  April  12-13,  1863  319 

Georgia  Landing,  La.  Action  at,  August  27, 1862 L72 

Irish  Bend,  La.  Engagement  at,  April  14,  1863 319 

Mentioned. 

Artillery — Regiments:  1st  ( Batteries ),  A,  234,  236,  319-321,  323,  324, 

328,  329,628,  647,650,712;  F,  242,  319-321,  329-331,  335-337,  340,  343, 
353,628,650,714;  L,  128,  320,  321,  359,  361,  362,  365,  366,377,  381,570, 

628, 650, 714 ; 2d  ( Batteries ),  C,  319, 320, 359, 360, 362, 366, 367, 384, 628, 
650,714;  H,  K,  628, 651, 714  ; 3d  {Batteries),  A,  576, 577, 722, 725  ; 5th 
{Batteries),  G,  256, 257, 409, 628, 650, 713, 728. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 1st,  574,577,725;  2d,  3d,  574  ; 5th,  574, 576, 577, 

725;  7th,  574,577.725;  10th,  574. 

Ordnance — Companies:  Shoemaker’s,  574,725. 

(For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States;  also  Colored  Troops.) 
Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Gulf,  Department  of  the 627, 628. 634, 645, 646, 650, 651, 711-714 

New  Mexico,  Department  of 574, 725 

Recruitment,  organization,  etc.  Communications  from 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 493 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 626, 634, 645, 646 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 493, 588, 591 

War  Department,  U.  S . . 494 

(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton,  pp.  422, 447, 521, 559 ; Butler  to  Halleck,  p.  555; 
Hamilton  to  Banks,  p.  658;  orders  of  Banks,  pp.  678,  699;  also 
Colored  Troops.) 

United  States,  Steamer.  Mentioned..... 608 

United  States  Consul,  Matamoras,  Mez.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see 
L.  Pierce,  jr.) 

United  States  Consul,  Monterey,  Mez.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see 
Myndert  M.  Kimmey.) 

Updegraff,  Joseph.  Mentioned 228, 574, 725 

Upton,  Daniel  P.  Mentioned 306 

Uranga,  Mr.  Mentioned , . . 606 

Urquhart,  W.  & D.  Mentioned 542 

Utah  Creek,  N.  Mez.  Expedition  to,  October  9-November  25,  1862.  (See 
Fort  Union,  N.  Mex.  Expedition  f rom,  Oct.  9 -Nov.  25,  1862.) 

Utterback,  Grandison.  Mentioned 81,98 

Vaca,  L.  M.  Mentioned  228 

Valdez,  Gabriel.  Mentioned 599 

Van  Benthuysen,  Major.  Mentioned 463 

Vance,  John  A. 

Mentioned 173, 237, 327 

Report  of  operations  in  La  Fourche  District,  La.,  October  24-Novem- 

ber  6,  1862 173 

Van  Dorn,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 515,752,763 


INDEX. 


1255 

Page. 


510,771,758 
769 


Van  Dorn,  Earl. 

Assignments  to  command 

Assumes  command  of  the  defenses  of  Vicksburg 

Correspondence  with 

Breckinridge,  John  7®6>  797, 1124 

Davis,  Jefferson 14,767,778,794 

Price,  Sterling 786 

Ruggles,  Daniel 747, 761-763, 765, 771, 775-779, 785, 803, 804, 1120 

Mentioned 9, 19, 76, 502, 530, 548, 551, 552, 555, 758, 761-763, 765, 766, 768, 769, 

771, 773, 778, 790-792, 794, 799, 801, 802, 817, 821, 822, 871, 1120-1122, 1125 

Reports  of 

Baton  Rouge,  La.  Operations  about,  July  27-Augnst  6, 1862  14, 15 

Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Bombardment  of,  June  28, 1862 44 

Operations  against  and  about,  May  18-July  27, 1862  16 

Staff.  Announcements  of - 4424 

Vangieson,  Virginius.  Mentioned 126 

Van  Petten,  John  B.  Mentioned 712 

Van  Zandt,  Jacob. 

Mentioned -----  265,373,645,714 

Reports  of 

Irish  Bend,  La.  Engagement  at,  April  14, 1863 380 

Vermillion  Bayou,  La.  Action  at,  April  17, 1863 380 

Van  Zandt,  K.  M.  Mentioned 1033 

Varuna,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 428 

Vaughn,  John  C.  Mentioned ‘ 885 

Vela,  Isidro.  Mentioned 966 

Vermillion  Bayou,  La.  Action  at,  April  17,  1863.  Report  of  J.  Van  Zandt. . - 380 

(See  also  West  Louisiana.  Operations  in,  April  9 -May  14, 1863.  Reports  of 

Faries,  T.  A.  Mouton,  Alfred. 

Grover,  Cuvier.  Nims,  OrmandF. 

Holcomb,  E.  E.  Smith,  E.  Kirby. 

Kimball,  W.  K.  Taylor,  Richard. 


Banks,  Nathaniel  P. 
Cassidy,  Michael. 
Closson,  Henry  W. 
Day,  Nicholas  W. 
Dwight,  William,  jr. 


Also  Banks  to  Augur,  p.  704.) 


182 


Vermont,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Butler,  Benjamin  

War  Department,  U.  S 

Vermont  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light -Batteries:  1st,  628,  651,  713;  2d,  124,  125,  199,  205,  650, 

714. 

Infantry — Regiments : 7th,  25-27,  39,  42,  43,  46-53,  56,  59,  60,  64,  66,  69,  70, 

74,  490,  628,  714;  8th,  132-135,  159,  161,  165,  234-236,  319,  565,  587,  628, 

634,  712. 

Vernon,  John  A.  Mentioned 

Vick,  Thomas  E. 

Assignment  to  command  with  Louisiana  Militia 98.) 

Mentioned 477>  478>  9®6, 991 

Vicksburg,  Steamer.  Mentioned 737 

Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Batteries  at,  October  31,  1862.  Report  of  George  Upshur  Mayo,  of  condi- 
tion of 848 

Bird’s-eye  view  of,  and  vicinity,  July  5, 1862  29 

Bombardment  of,  June  28, 1862.  Report  of  Earl  Van  Dorn 

(See  also  report  of  Smith,  pp.  8, 9.) 


14 


1256 


INDEX. 


Vicksburg,  Miss. — Continued. 

Canal  across  Burey’s  Point. 

Construction  of,  ordered 

Profile'  of.  Sketch 

(See  also  report  of  Thomas  Williams,  pp.  27, 28.) 

Defenses  of. 

Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 

Davis,  Jefferson 

Pemberton,  John  C 

Ruggles,  Daniel 

Report  of  William  S.  Lovell,  of  inspection  of 

(See  also  report  of  M.  L.  Smith,  pp.  7, 8.) 

Demand  for  surrender  of,  and  refusal 

Expedition  to,  June  20-July  24,  1862.  (See  Vicksburg,  Miss. 

against  and  about,  May  IQ- July  27,  1862.) 

Operations  against  and  about. 

May  18- July  27,  1862. 

Communications  from 


Page. 


25, 26 
30 


810,812 

920 

...  853,920,1009 

809 

852 

12,13  | 

Operations 


Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 19,527 

Autry,  James  L 13 

Beauregard,  G.  T 742, 746, 752 

Bragg,  Braxton 762 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 24,31,464,530,559 

Davis,  C.  H 517 

Davis,  Jefferson 754,767,778 

Edey,  Percy  F 561 

Ellet,  Alfred  W 498, 515, 521, 529 

Farragut,  D.  G 457,498,514,527 

Halleck,  H.  W 515,517,519 

Lee,  S.  Phillips 6, 13, 14 

Lovell,  Mansfield , 741,758 

Morris,  Henry  W 562 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 517, 527, 530 

Porter,  David  D 464, 527, 531, 560 

Ruggles,  Daniel 742,761-763,765,766,771 

Smith,  M.  L 7 

Thompson,  E.  T 562 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 510, 747, 761-763, 769, 771, 779, 1120 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  Mayor  of 12-14 

War  Department,  U.  S 494, 497, 518, 433 

Williams,  Thomas 6, 26 

(See  also  Butler  to  Stanton,  pp.  422,447,465,478,502.) 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Adjt.  and  Inspector  Gen.’s  Office,  C.  S.  A.) . 19 

Reports  of 

Smith,  M.  L 6 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 15 

Williams,  Thomas.  May  26-August  2 22, 26, 31 

(See  also 

May  26,  1862.  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.  Affair  at. 

June  9,  1862.  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.  Engagement  at. 

24,  1862.  Hamilton  Plantation , Miss.  Skirmish  near. 

28,  1862.  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Bombardment  of  . 

July  15,  1862.  Arkansas,  C.  S.  S.  Engagement  with. 

22,  1862.  Arkansas,  C.  S.  S.  Engagement  with.) 


INDEX. 


1257 

Pag©. 


Vioksburg,  Mias.— Continued. 

Operations  against  and  about. 

January  20-July  4,  1863.  Communications  from 

Pemberton,  John  C 1044, 1045, 1047, 1049, 1058, 1060, 1070 

Smith,  E.  Kirby 1046> lu50 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A 1069 

Bragg,  Braxton 902, 1120 

Forney,  John  

Gardner,  Franklin 1035-1037, 1039, 1070, 1074, 1076 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 8J9 

Lovell,  Mansfield ^ 

Pemberton,  John  C 920, 1035, 1037, 1069, 1071 

Ruggles,  Daniel 1120 

Smith,  Martin  L.,  to  remain  in  charge  of  immediate  defense  of 769 

Surrender  of,  demanded  and  refused,  May  18,  1862 7 

Van  Dorn,  Earl,  assumes  command  of  defenses  of 769 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  Mayor  of.  Correspondence  with  S.  Phillips  Lee 12-14 

Vidaurri,  Santiago.  Mentioned 683,709,882,923,924,973,1066,1067 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Nuevo  Leon  and  Coahuila , Mex .,  Governor  of.) 

Viejo,  Janero.  Mentioned 228 

Villepigue,  John  B. 

Correspondence  with 

Pemberton,  John  C 84 

Ruggles,  Daniel 763, 766 

Mentioned 761, 762, 800, 804, 859, 1120 

Villere,  Charles  J.  Mentioned 799 

Vincennes,  U.  S.  Sloop.  Mentioned 109,110 

Vincent,  William  G.  Mentioned 176,303,389,390,392,395,707,  827 

Vineyard,  S.  C.  Mentioned 40b 

Virginia.  Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 843 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 517 

Pemberton,  John  C - 832, 833, 843 

Virginia  Point,  Tex.  Embraced  in  District  of  Galveston 820 

Vogel,  Mrs.  Mentioned 540 

Voorhies,  W.  M.  Mentioned 1032 

Vorheis,  F.  R.  Mentioned 189 

Wachter,  Philip.  Mentioned 45,65,322 

Waddell,  W.  Mentioned 189 

Waddy,  J.  R. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 859 

Mentioned 827 

(For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton.) 


Wade,  W.  W.  Mentioned 

Wadsworth,  Thomas.  Mentioned 

Waggaman,  Eugene.  Mentioned 

Wagner,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Wagner,  Hammond.  Mentioned 

Wain wright,  J.  M.  Mentioned 

Walker,  George  E.  Mentioned 

Walker,  George  Washington.  Mentioned 


927 

930 

919,984 

989 

37 

200, 203, 206, 208, 211, 213, 215, 219, 225 

964,1015 

554 


1258 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Walker,  J.  G. 

Correspondence  with 

Hdbert,  Paul  0 1057 

Smith,  E.  Kirby 1048, 1051, 1058, 1083 

Mentioned 387, 1041, 1042, 1047, 1051, 1055,  1056, 1081-1083,  1093, 1096 

Walker,  L.  M. 

Assignments  to  command 1022 

Mentioned 1022 

Walker,  L.  Pope.  Mentioned 048 

Walker  & Co.  Mentioned 541 

Walker  & Snyder.  Mentioned  542 

Wallace,  H.  P.  Mentioned 1123 

Wallace,  John.  Mentioned 157 

Wallace,  Lewis.  Mentioned 762 

Wallace,  Thomas.  Mentioned 236 

Wallace,  W.  P.  Mentioned 94 

Waller,  Ed.,  jr.  Mentioned 133 

Walsh,  H.  H.  Mentioned 100 

Walsh,  John.  Mentioned. 236 

Walton,  Benjamin  H.  Mentioned 930 

Walworth,  E.  Mentioned 1009 

War  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 185, 765,  840, 877, 905, 918 

Alabama,  Governor  of 888, 898, 946, 1076, 1077 

Beall,  William  N.  R 841 

Benjamin,  J.  P 185 

Blanchard,  Albert  G 779,790 

Bragg,  Braxton 770 

Buckner,  Simon  B 1035,1036 

Clanton,  J.  H 1069 

Conscript  Bureau,  C.  S.  A 984 

Davis,  Jefferson 14,  741, 863, 871, 919, 920, 940, 984 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 876, 877 

Forney,  John  H 804,874,902 

Hart,  Simeon 866 

Hubert,  Paul  O 822,824,871 

Lee,  Robert  E 794 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 766, 768, 773, 775 

Lovell,  Mansfield 459, 741, 750, 751, 758, 760 

Me  Willie,  M.H 940 

Magruder,  John  B 857, 897, 931, 932, 967 

Maury,  Dabney  H 1059 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 1030 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 876, 922 

Pemberton,  John  C 864,922 

Post-Office  Department,  C.  S 823 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 872 

Randolph,  V.  M 115, 116 

Sibley,  H.  H 819 

Sparrow,  Edward 808,952 

Stevenson,  John  A 861 

Taylor,  Richard 872,962,983 

Texas,  Governor  of 952 


INDEX. 


1259 


Page. 

War  Department,  U.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Banks,  Nathaniel.  612,  629,  642,  657> GG9’  G7G 

Butler,  Benjamin  422> 

439, 447, 465, 471,  478, 485, 493-495, 500, 502, 515, 518, 521, 534, 543, 
548* 552,  559,  563,  573, 578, 581, 585, 588, 589, 591, 592, 602, 603, 611 

Ellet,  Alfred  39»  497>  498>  515» 521’  529 

Halleck,  Henry  494,515,518,519 

Hamilton,  A.  G9^ 

Navy  Department,  U.  S G27,  G3G> G 

Shepley,  George  471 

State  Department,  U.  S 497, 522, 553, 557, 567, 612, 613, 641, 657 

Treasury  Department,  U.  

Vermont,  Governor  of 47 

Ward,  G.  M.  Mentioned - 476 

Ward,  John  James.  Mentioned *GG8 

Ware,  J.  A.  Mentioned - 221,851 

Warley,  Ella,  Steamer.  Mentioned  ..1 G88 

Warnach,  Henry.  Mentioned 78 ' 

Warner,  Alexander.  Mentioned  383,384,714 

Warren,  John  Q.  A.  Mentioned 172 

Warren,  W.  F.  Mentioned 498 

Warren  & Crawford.  Mentioned - G42 

Washington,  U.  S.  Rev.  Cutter.  Mentioned 499 

Washington,  George.  Mentioned ^07, G2* 

Washington,  La. 

Occupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  April  20,  1863.  (See  West  Louisiana.  Cam- 
paign in,  April  9-May  14,  1863.  Reports  of 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P.  Dwight,  William,  jr.  M°ut°n,  Alfred. 

Cassidy,  Michael.  Grover,  Cuvier.  Nuns,  O rmand  h . 

Closson,  Henry  W.  Holcomh,  R.  E.  Smith,  E.  Kirhy. 

Day,  Nicholas  W.  Kimball,  W.  K.  Taylor,  Richard.) 

Skirmishes  at  and  near. 

April  22,  1863.  (See  report  of  William  Dwight,  jr.,  p.  367.) 

May  1,  1863.  (See  report  of  William  Dwight,  jr.,  p.  375.) 

Washington,  T.  A. 

Correspondence  with  E.  Kirby  Smith - 492^ 

Mentioned 601 

Waterman,  Leander.  Mentioned 3^5 

Watkins,  O.  M.  Mentioned 218, 221, 237, 238, 957, 974, 1054, 1074 

Watson,  John  C. 

Correspondence  with  William  H.  Emory 245 

Mentioned 679, 680 

Watson,  P.  H.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  U.  S.) 

Watt,  John,  & Co.  Mentioned 541 

W atts,  T . Mentioned 1 123 

Watts,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned... - 871 

Wave,  Steamer.  Mentioned 298, 368, 369 

W.  B.  Savory,  Steamer.  Mentioned 281, 1102 

Weatherly,  W.  E.  Mentioned 80 

Webb,  Frank,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 34, 40, 245, 255, 258, 297 , 307, 313 

Webb,  Henry  L. 

Correspondence  with 

Bloomfield,  B 942 

Magrnder,  John  B 955,978,981,1017,1020 

Webb,  William  G 945 

Mentioned 220 


12G0 


INDEX. 


Webb,  William  G. 

Correspondence  with 

Biegel  Settlement,  Tex.,  Citizens  of 928 

Magrnder,  John  B 926 

Webb,  Henry  L 945 

Mentioned 220, 929, 960 

Webster,  Daniel.  Mentioned 559 

Wechler,  Major.  Mentioned 19 

Weightman,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1124 

Weitzel,  Godfrey. 

Assignments  to  command 645 

Correspondence  with 

Allen,  Pickering  D 680 

Augur,  C.  C 243-248, 673, 676 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 326,327,626,636,637,655,681,727 

Butler,  Benjamin  F 162, 164, 171, 172, 460, 543-545, 587 

Butterfield,  F.  D 326 

Cooke,  A.  P 245 

Dana,  John  W 326 

Emory,  William  H 246-249 

Holcomb,  Richard  E 244,249 

Paine,  Halbert  E 546 

Palfrey,  John  C 428 

Mentioned 49  459. 

162,  173,  184,  185,  233,  241-243,  247,249,255,256,258,261,  270,294,296, 
298,  307,  313,  318,  320,  322,  326,  328, 330, 331, 335, 337-339, 341, 342, 348, 
354-356,  420,  436,  449,  450,  463,  518,  536, 544, 545.  547,  549,  564, 592, 601, 
603,  627,  628,  634,  645,  655,  658,  659,  692,  697,  712,  873,  1105-1107, 1113 

Reports  of 

Baton  Rouge,  La.  Engagement  at,  August  5, 1862 51, 53 

Diana,  U.  S.  S.  Capture  of,  March  28, 1863  290 

La  Fourche  District,  La.  Operations  in,  October  24-November  6, 1862.  166, 

167, 170-172 

Teche  Bayou,  La.  Engagement  on,  January  14, 1863 234 

West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in,  April  2-May  11, 1863 324, 325 

Welham,  W.  P.  Mentioned 540 

Welles,  Gideon.  Mentioned 2, 4, 21, 199, 237, 518, 583, 584, 591 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Navy  Department,  U.  S .) 

Welles,  H.  C.  Mentioned 44 

West,  Army  of  the.  (Confederate.) 

Beall,  William  N.  R.,  relieved  from  duty  in 758 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  47, 758. 

Van  Dorn,  Earl,  relinquishes  command  of.  (Temporarily) 758 

West,  J.  A.  A.  Mentioned 82, 102, 107, 391, 395, 1087 

West,  Joseph  R. 

Correspondence  with 

Carleton,  James  H 580, 598, 599, 605, 715, 720, 721 

Fergusson,  David 634, 635, 638, 674, 682, 687 

McCleave,  William 596 

Rigg,  Edwin  A 598 

Mentioned . 579,  597, 604, 681,  709 

West  & Villere.  Mentioned 541 

West,  Renshaw  & Cammack.  Mentioned.... 541 

Westerlage,  Mr.  Mentioned 836 


INDEX. 


1261 


"Pag©. 

Western  Department.  (Confederate. ) 


Bragg,  Braxton,  assumes  command  of - 771 

Limits  extended - 746, 766, 770, 784 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  89,  771. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  June  18,  1120  ; No.  30,  853;  No.  62,  899; 

No.  88,  758. 

Subdivisions  of.  (See  Gulf,  District  of  the , and  Mississippi,  District  of  the.) 
Western  Louisiana,  District  of.  (See  Louisiana,  District  of.) 

Westfield,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned  . . 200, 202-204, 206, 207, 209-211, 213, 428, 537, 847, 1064 
West  Florida,  Schooner.  Mentioned 583,584,591 

West  Florida. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from  Alabama,  Governor  of 946 

Operations  in.  (See 

June  14-15,  1862.  Milton , Fla.  Expedition  to. 

25,  1862.  Pensacola,  Fla.  Skirmish  near. 

Aug.  7-10,  1862.  Pensacola,  Fla.  Reconnaissances  from.) 

Transferred  to  the  Department  of  the  Gulf 547 

West  Louisiana. 

Campaign  in,  April  9-May  14,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 296, 

303, 304, 308, 309, 314, 317, 326, 327, 703-707, 711, 715, 720, 1119 

Cosby,  Charles  V 1055,1056 

Emory,  William  H. - 327,333 

Farragut,  D.  G 301,307,308,718 

Gardner,  Franklin - 1035, 1037, 1039, 1049 

Grant,  U.  S — - 300,  301,  314,  315 

Palmer,  James  S 316 

Porter,  David  D 312 

Scurry,  W.  R 1054 

Smith,  E.  Kirby 1041- 

1043, 1045-1051, 1054, 1057, 1062, 1065, 1081-1084 

Smith,  Elisha  B 709 

Walker,  J.  G 1057,1058 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 326,327 

Congratulatory  orders.  (E.  Kirby  Smith) 1047 

Court-martial  in  cases  of  H.  H.  Sibley  and  Alexander  Grant.  Orders 

promulgating  findings,  etc 1093 

Reports  of 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 294, 296,  298, 305,  306, 309,  311,  313, 314, 316, 318 

Cassidy,  Michael,  March  26-April  20,  1863 379 

Closson,  Henry  W 365 

Day,  Nicholas  W. , March  26-April  20,  1863  380 

Dwight,  William,  jr.,  March  26-May  1,  1863  367-370,374,375 

Emory,  William  H.,  March  13-May  2,  1863 330,  332, 333 

Faries,  T.  A 1089 

Grover,  Cuvier,  March  26-April  20,  1863  357 

Hall,  Thomas  S 364 

Hallett , J oseph  L , 363 

Holcomb,  Richard  E.,  March  29- April  20,  1863  376 

Kimball,  William  K.,  March  27-April  20,  1863 382 

Mouton,  Alfred,  April  11-19,  1863 396 

Nims,  Ormand  F 365 


1262 


INDEX. 


West  Louisiana— Continued. 

Campaign  in,  April  9-May  14,  1863. 

Reports  of 

Rodgers,  John  I,  April  13-14,  1863  366 

Russell,  Edmund  H.,  April  8-May  14,  1863 325 

Smith,  E.  Kirby,  April  9-23,  1863  386, 387 

Taylor,  Richard,  April  9-23,  1863  388 

Weitzel,  Godfrey,  April  2-May  11,  1863  324,325 

(See  also 


April  12-13,  1863.  Bisland,  Fort,  La.  Engagement  at. 

14,  1863.  Irieli  Bend , La.  Engagement  at. 

17-21,  1863.  Breaux  Bridge  and  Opelousas,  La.  Expedition  to. 

18,  1863.  New  Iberia,  La.  Destruction  of  salt-works  near. 

21,  1863.  Barre’s  Landing,  La.  Expedition  to. 

Ellen,  Steamer.  Capture  of. 

May  14,  1863.  Boyce’s  Bridge,  Cotile  Bayou,  La.  Expedition  to. 

21- July  8,  1863.  Port  Hudson,  La.  Siege  of.) 

Instructions  to  Taylor.  Communications  from  Adjutant  and  Inspector 

General's  Office,  C.  S.  A 791 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Augur,  C.  C 662 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P 636,696 

Farragut,  D.  G 659 

Holcomb,  R.  E 655, 658 

Louisiana,  Governor  of 755 

Ruggles,  Daniel 802,821  ' 

Storrs,  Samuel  John 665 

Taylor,  Richard * 802,838,866,873,919 

Weitzel,  Godfrey 637,655,673 

(See  also 

May  11-18,  1862.  Houma,  La.  Operations  about. 

12,  1862.  Fox,  Steamer.  Capture  of. 

June  20,  1862.  Des  Allemands  Bayou,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

22,  1862.  Des  Allemands  Bayou,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

Aug.  29,  1862.  Saint  Charles  Court-House,  La.  Skirmish  near. 

Sept.  4,  1862.  Des  Allemands  Bayou,  La.  Affair  at. 

5,  1862.  Boutte  Station,  La.  Affair  at. 

7-  8,  1862.  Saint  Charles  Court-House,  La.  Expedition  to  vicin- 
ity of,  and  skirmish. 

21-25,  1862.  Donaldsonville,  La.  Expedition  to,  and  skirmish. 

Oct.  24-Nov.  6,  1862.  La  Fourche  District,  La.  Operations  in  the. 

Nov.  1-  6,  1862.  Berwick  Bay,  La.  Naval  operations  on. 

Dec.  25-26,  1862.  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.  Expedition  from,  to  Dallas 
Station  and  Delhi,  La'. 

29,  1862.  Plaquemine,  La.  Affair  near. 

31,  1862-Jan.  3,  1863.  Plaquemine,  La.  Affairs  at. 

Jan.  14,  1863.  Teche  Bayou,  La.  Engagement  on,  and  destruction 
of  C.  S.  S.  Cotton. 

28,  1863.  Indian  Village,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

29,  1863.  Richmond,  La.  Skirmish  near. 

Feb.  10,  1863.  Old  River,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

12-28,  1863.  Atchafalaya  River  and  Bayou  Plaquemine,  La.  Op- 
erations on. 

14,  1863.  Queen  of  the  West,  U.  S.  S.  Capture  of  the. 


INDEX. 


1263 

Page. 


West  Louisiana — Continued. 

Operations  in. 

( See  also 

Feb.  19,  1863.  Rosedale,  La.  Expedition  to. 

March  17,1863.  Mississippi  River.  Operations  onthe  west  bank  of  the. 

28,  1863.  Diana,  U.  S.  S.  Capture  of  the. 

April  9-May  14,  1863.  West  Louisiana.  Campaign  in. 

May  4,  1863.  De  Russy,  Fort,  Red  River,  La.  Engagement  at. 

10,  1863.  Beauregard,  Fort , La.  Attack  on. 

Caledonia,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

Pin  Hook,  or  Bayou  Macon,  La.  Skirmish  at.) 

Property  in,  sequestered.  Order  of  Butler 592 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A 885, 911, 954 

Holmes,  Theophilus  922 

Q19 

Jackson,  A.  

Magruder,  Jolm  B 902, 903, 905, 967, 970. 999, 1077-1079 

Pemberton,  John  8^8 

Reily,  James - 968,970,982,1003 

Scurry,  W.  **^4 

Sibley,  H.  819'91» 

Smith,  E.  Kirby - 1U/A 

Taylor,  Richard 838,971,985 

War  Department,  C.  804 

(See  also  Magruder  to  Anderson,  p.  936;  Scurry  to  Turner,  p.  1053.) 

West  Louisiana  and  Texas,  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 

Hdbert,  Paul  O.,  assigned  to,  and  assumes  command  of 1 

Separated  into  District  of  Louisiana  and  District  of  Texas 802 

Weyman,  J.  B.  Mentioned  1021 

Wharton,  E.  C. 

Correspondence  with  X.  B.  Debray °2^ 

Mentioned. ^*8 

Wheeler,  William  J. 

Mentioned * * *; 9®9 

Report  of,  concerning  charges  against  R.  H.  Stone,  preferred  by  citizens  of 

New  Ulm,  Tex 989 

Whetmore,  Steamer.  Mentioned - 464 

Whitcomb,  G.  F.  Mentioned 44,60,67 

White,  J.  M.  Mentioned 963 

Whiteman,  Steamer.  Mentioned - 45, 57, 138, 775 

Whiteman,  H.  C.  Report  of  affair  at  Bayou  Sara,  La.,  August  23,  1862  131 

Whiteman,  J.  C.  Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles 775 

Whiteside,  James  E.  Mentioned 236,237 

Whitfield,  George.  Mentioned 82, 751 

Whitfield,  J.  F.  Mentioned 1027 

Whiting,  James.  Mentioned 137 

Whiting,  Jasper  S.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Adjutant  and  In- 
spector General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A.) 

Whitman,  G.  W.,  Steamer.  (See  Fox,  Steamer.) 

Whitside,  Samuel  M.  Mentioned 611 

Whittemore,  Horace  O. 

Mentioned 20, 21, 28, 43, 58, 59, 61 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5,  1862  66 

Whittemore,  James  B.  Mentioned 581 


1264 


INDEX. 


Wickliffe,  J.  C.  * 

Mentioned 78,81,84 

Report  of  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  August  5, 1862. 87 

Wickliffe,  N.  Mentioned 1068 

Wickliffe,  R.  C.  Mentioned 565 

Wier,  A.  R.  Mentioned 212,210,974 

Wiggins,  George.  Mentioned 184, 235, 245 

Wilbourn,  C.  C.  Mentioned 1062,1075 

Wilcox,  Mr.  Mentioned 930 

Wilcox,  J.  A.  Mentioned . 217 

Wilcox,  M.  B.  Mentioned 030 

Wilder,  William  H.  Mentioned 121 

Wilder,  W.  H.  Mentioned 648 

Wilkes,  F.  C.  Mentioned V 774,824 

Wilkins,  W.  W.  Mentioned 1062 

Wilkinson,  F.  D.  Mentioned 187 

Williams, . Mentioned 122 

Williams’  Bridge,  La.  Skirmish  at,  May  1,  1863.  (See  April  17-May  2,  1863. 
Grierson’s  Raid.) 

Williams,  General,  Steamer.  Mentioned 173 

Williams,  George  L.  Mentioned 467-469 

Williams,  John,  & Co.  Mentioned. .v 541 

Williams,  Thomas. 

Correspondence  with 

Butler,  Benjamin  F. 24-26, 31, 34 

Farragut,  D.  G 474 

Smith,  Martin  L ..... . 6 

Death  of,  announced 41 

Mentioned 14, 35, 39-44, 51, 52, 54-59, 62-64, 68, 70, 72, 74, 75, 

300, 423, 448, 458, 465, 478, 504, 514, 515, 518, 521, 529-531, 534, 538, 549 

Reports  of 

Baton  Rouge,  La.  Operations  about,  July  27-August  2,  1862 33,34 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations  against  and  about,  May  26-July  27, 

1862  22, 26, 31, 33 

Williamson,  George.  Mentioned 1062, 1081 

Williamson,  Henry  F.  Mentioned 712 

Willis,  Edward  B. 

Correspondence  with  IV.  L..Rynerson 606 

Mentioned 580,604,725 

Willke,  H. 

Mentioned 182, 221 , 828, 851 , 909, 910 

Report  of  affair  at  Padre  Island,  Tex.,  December  7, 1862  190 

Willson,  T.  Friend.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Franklin  Gardner.) 

Wilson,  George  R.  Mentioned 217 

Wilson,  Henry.  Mentioned 200 

Wilson,  James.  Mentioned 80 

Wilson,  J.  E.  Mentioned 123 

Wilson,  J.  F.  Mentioned 105 

Wilson,  L.  M.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Mobile,  Ala.,  Committee  of 
Safety  of.) 

Wilson,  William.  Mentioned 109,626,923,958 

Winans,  W.  P.  Mentioned 1068 

Winchester,  B.  F. 

Mentioned 398, 1087, 1088, 1090-1092 

Report  of  engagement  ou  Bayou  Teche,  La.,  and  destruction  of  Confederate 

gunboat  Cotton,  January  14, 1863 1089 


INDEX. 


1265 


x • Page. 

Winchester,  J.  R.  Mentioned 1°88~1onl 

Winchester,  Richard.  Mentioned ^ 

Winder,  E.  L.  Mentioned 10b8 

Wingfield,  J.  H. 

Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles 

Mentioned 24,971,1035 

Reports  of  skirmish  on  the  Amite  River,  La.,  July  24, 1862 122, 123 

Winona,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned * 428’ 

Winter,  Elisha.  Mentioned 139,140.713 

Wintter,  D.  Mentioned 11, 1& 

Wisconsin  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 4th,  20,  26,  27,  35,  39,  43,  51,  52,  56,  58,  /0-72,  *5,  /6, 

133,  135-138,  299,  319,  330,  332-334,  339-342,  344-346,  375,  376,  449,  628,  634, 

713,  1105 ; 6th  [4th],  776. 

Wissahickon,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 21, 42& 

71 

Wiswell,  J.  M.  Mentioned _ 

Witcher,  W.  I.  Mentioned *- 45^ 

Witcher,  William.  Mentioned 4o7 

Witham,  C.  H.  Mentioned - 

Withers,  John.  Mentioned 501 

Withers,  W.  T.  Mentioned 4^’  848 

Witt,  A.  R. 

Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles ®35 

Mentioned 18, 141, 1033, 1061, 108a 

Reports  of 

Amite  River  and  Jackson  Railroad,  La.  Operations  on  the,  May  9-18, 

1863 407 

Bonfouca  Bayou,  La.  Skirmish  at,  November  21, 1862 188 

Wolcott,  C.  P.  Mentioned 602 

(For  correspondence  as  Assistant  Secretary,  see  War  Department,  U.  S .) 

Wolfe,  Mr.  Mentioned H^' 

Wolfe,  Mr.  Mentioned ..675,687 

Wood,  Albert.  Mentioned 453>  454> 437 

Wood,  Belle,  Ship.  Mentioned 6'3 

Wood,  S.  H.  Mentioned 540‘ 

Wood.  S.  H.,  Mrs.  Mentioned - - ^4^ 

Wood,  William  E.  Mentioned 45’65 

Wood  & Low.  Mentioned 

Woodbury,  Haniel  P.  Mentioned 295,712,714 

Woodman,  Ephraim  W. 

Correspondence  with  T.  W.  Sherman '05 

Mentioned - ®77’ 743 

Woods,  George  A.  Mentioned 4^4 

Woods,  P.  C.  Mentioned.,. - 854 

Woodward,  . Mentioned 847 

Woodward,  T.  D.  Mentioned 182,909 

Wooster,  Charles  D.  Mentioned 342 

Worster,  George  W.  Mentioned 6/1,672 

Worth,  General,  Schooner.  Mentioned 835 

Wren,  William.  Correspondence  with  Mansfield  Lovell 460 

Wright,  Mr.  Mentioned 433 

Wright,  Enoch  T.  Mentioned 4®^>  4®3> 4^3 

Wright,  George. 

Correspondence  with  James  II.  Carle  ton 604 

Mentioned 604,605 

80  R R— VOL  XV 


1266 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Wright,  H.  C.  Mentioned K15 

Wright,  Uriel.  Mentioned 19 

Wright  & Allen.  Mentioned 544 

Wrotnoski,  L.  A.  Mentioned 235 

Wynkoop,  E.  W.  Mentioned 574 

Yager,  W.  O.  Mentioned 851,924 

Yancey, . Mentioned 686 

Yancey,  Stephen  D.  (For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  B.  Alagruder.) 

Yeatman,  R.  Mentioned 544 

Yerger,  William,  jr.  Mentioned 55,80,81,84 

York,  Zebulon.  Mentioned 949 

Young,  B.  C.  Mentioned 544 

Young,  Brigham.  Mentioned 544 

Youngblood,  J.  W. 

Correspondence  with  Franklin  Gardner 962,990 

Mentioned , 277  278 

Youngblood,  W.  C.  Mentioned 464 

Young  Harry,  Brig. 

Mentioned 1012,1134 

Wreck  of.  Communications  from  Hamilton  P.  Bee 1012 

Zapata,  Antonio.  Mentioned 967,977 

Zapata,  Octaviano.  Mentioned 994,995,997.1026,1052,1126,1133 

Zickendrath,  George.  Mentioned ' 540 

Zimmerman,  Charles  W.  Mentioned 200,203,209 

Zoelly,  Jacob.  Mentioned 540 

Zouave,  Steamer.  Mentioned 681 

Zubrian,  Mr.  Mentioned 607 

Zulauf,  H.  Mentioned  925 

Zuloago,  Pedro.  Mentioned 684 


o 


