# Cox, The March to the Sea; Franklin and Nashville: Franklin-Nashville campaign selections, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a University of Toronto (Robarts) scan; not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers and footnotes. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages only; page locators refer to unverified OCR page markers. Reports, returns, despatches and memoirs quoted or summarized by Cox are not separately inspected originals.

## title-and-preface

THE MARCH TO THE SEA CAMPAIGNS OF THE CIVIL IVAK.—X. THE MARCH TO THE SEA FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE BY JACOB D. COX, LL.D., LATE MAJOK-GENERAL COMMANDING TWENTY-THIRD ARMY CORPS AUTHOR OF "ATLANTA," ETC. NEW YORK CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 1882 COPYKIOHT BY CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 1882 TROW'S PRINTING AND BOOKBINDING COMPANY 201-213 East i<zth Street NEW YORK PBEFACE. THE class of readers which has been most in the author's mind in preparing the two volumes assigned him in the series, is that which includes the surviving officers and men who served in the late war. His aim has been to supple- ment their personal knowledge by the facts which are within the reach of recent research, and to give unity and sym- metry to the history of the campaigns here told, by examin- ing each in the light of the plans and purposes of the leaders on both sides. The limits assigned to the volumes have made it neces- sary to choose between the narration of incidents which would enliven the story, and that fulness of strictly military detail which seemed necessary to make the several cam- paigns clearly intelligible, and to enable the reader to judge, with some degree of satisfaction, the character of the opera- tions. The former course would perhaps have made the work more popular, but the latter has seemed likely to make it more useful and to meet the wishes of those for whom it has been chiefly written. It is still hoped, however, that the general reader will not find it difficult to follow the movements described, and that the effort to do so will give to such a broader understanding of what the great game of war really is. The maps in both volumes are, with two exceptions, re- vi PREFACE. duced copies of the official surveys made by the engineers of the army. For the originals the author is indebted to the courtesy of General Poe, TJ. S. Engineers. In reducing them it has not been possible to preserve all the details of the originals ; but the effort has been to give accurately what is most essential. The reader is presumed to make reference to an ordinary hand-atlas for the relations of the special theatre of operations to that of the whole war. To have illustrated the text by larger and more elaborate maps would have thwarted the purpose of the publishers to put the series within the reach of all. To General Drum, Adjutant-General, and to Colonel Scott, of the War Eecords Office, the author is greatly indebted for access to unpublished archives, and for official informa- tion without which it would have been impossible to reach the degree of accuracy which he hopes will be found to mark the more important parts of the narrative : it would be vain to expect to escape all error with our present means of investigation. A still greater debt of obligation, if possible, is due to Major E. G. Dawes, late of the Fifty-third Ohio, who has not only given the use of his valuable collection of books and documents relating to the war, but has thought no personal trouble too great in assisting to verify facts and trace events, and whose zeal in investigation has been a con- stant aid and stimulus. CINCINNATI, September, 1882.

## forces-november-1864

In the invasion of Tennessee, Hood would be accompanied by part of Jackson's division of cavalry, and Forrest, who was between Tuscumbia and Corinth, was ordered to join him with all his mounted force. At Florence, on November 6th, and before beginning his movement against Schofield, Hood had present with him 41,185 infantry and artillery, and 3,544 cavalry, making an aggregate of 44,729. About No- 1 Beauregard's Official Report. In this, however, he has underestimated Wheeler's cavalry. That corps reported at Lovejoy Station, August 1st, an " ef- fective " total of enlisted men of 6,283, and it does not appear to have suffered notably between that time and the opening of the new campaign. It was joined by a brigade from Jackson's division, and a Kentucky infantry brigade, which was mounted. These made about two thousand seven hundred enlisted men, and adding the usual proportion of officers to the whole list of "effectives," it gives Wheeler an actual force, in round numbers, of 10,000, instead of 7,000, as esti mated by Beauregard. Hood puts the number at 10,000 (Advance and Ketreat, p. 810). 12 THE MARCH TO THE SEA. vember 15tli lie was joined by Forrest with his cavalry corps, numbering 9,209 present, and increasing the aggregate to 53,938 officers and men present.1 After his conference with Beauregard, Hood had gone but one day's march from Gadsden toward Guntersville when he suddenly turned his columns to the west, making first for Decatur. He learned that Forrest had started upon a raid northward into West Tennessee, and that it was uncertain ho-Ri long it might be before that cavalry could join him. On October 7th, and before seeing Beauregard, he had asked General Taylor to send Forrest a second time into Tennessee to break the Nashville and Chattanooga Railway, if he could, or at least to occupy Thomas's forces so as to create a diversion in his favor. Forrest was at Cherokee Station, where he had been refitting and resting his com- mand, and both Taylor and he misapprehended Hood's wish to have a strong cavalry force with his moving column as 1 These figures are taken from the official returns in the Adjutant-General's office at Washington, and are distributed as follows : Infantry. Artillery. Cavalry. S. D. Lee's corps 11,784 Lee's 909 Jackson's division . . 3,152 A. P. Stewart's corps.. . 11,524 B. F. Cheatham's corps. 14,325 Engineers 484 Stewart's. . . 958 Cheatham's. 881) Jackson'fj . . . 321 Buford's " Chalmers's " Itoddey's " . 3,857 . 2,841 2.511 Escorts . . 392 Totals ... .. 88,117 3,068 12,753 This is exclusive of Forrest's artillery, and of about one thousand men made up of the Fifth Missis»ippi Cavalry and several battalions of State reserves which joined Forrest. Roddey's division was left in Alabama to hold the line of the Tennessee River. The "present sick" were reported at 2,000, and the present on " extra duty " at 8,267, but these last were, when necessary, put into action by the Confederates. B muregard's estimate of the " effective " force (deducting officers, etc.) was 27,285 infantry and artillery, and 7,700 cavalry, or an aggregate of 35,000. This is less than two-thirds of the number shown to be present by the official re- turns. See also Appendix A, 2.

## thomas-forces-october-1864

When the Fourth and Twenty-third Corps reported to Thomas, and even before the arrival of A. J. Smith with the divisions of the Sixteenth Corps, his official returns showed a force present for duty just about equal to that of Hood, though differently divided, being stronger in infantry and weaker in cavalry. The latter numbered 5,591, being less than half Hood's strength in that arm, but the infantry and artillery were 48,975. l When this force should be increased 1 These figures give the " present for duty" oa October 81st, and were distrib- uted as follows: Fourth Corps, 12,331; Twenty-third Corps, 10,624; cavalry, 6,591 ; District of Tennessee, 18,661 ; unassigued detachments, 7,359— total, 54,566. This does not include the District of Etowah under Steedman, which first appears in Thomas's report for November 20th, and which numbered 6,421.

## columbia

CHAPTER IV. MIDDLE TENNESSEE— PULASKI TO SPRING HILL. WHILE the events described in the last chapters were occurring in Georgia, the struggle in Middle Tennessee had reached a crisis. We have seen that before November 15th Forrest's cavalry had joined Hood, and that a portion of the Confederate infantry occupied Florence, covering the bridge that was laid there in preparation for the advance of the whole of Hood's army. General Thomas had committed to General Schofield the command of the troops immediately opposed to Hood, but it was the universal expectation that a rapid concentration of the National forces would be made in time to prevent the Confederate army from advancing far.1 In East Tennessee the enemy, under Breckenridge, made an attack upon General Gillem, who commanded a body of our cavalry there ; but this was simply a diversion intended to delay the concentration of our forces, like that made just before by Forrest, and had no further significance. Sher- man's march from Atlanta made it necessary for Hood to do promptly whatever he meant to do, and his cavalry began to make demonstrations toward Lawrenceburg and Waynes- boro as early as the 15th. The weather, however, had proven a formidable obstacle, delaying the rebuilding of the railroad between Tuscumbia and Cherokee Station, and 1 For organization of the armies of Thomas and Hood, see Appendix B. 64 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. delaying still more the wagon trains which were toiling through the mud in the effort to accumulate supplies suffi- cient to warrant the opening of an active campaign. The storms, of which only the edge reached Sherman near Ma- con, were continuous and severe in Tennessee, alternating between rains and severe frosts, covering the roads with a frozen crust over deep mire, just strong enough to make the utmost obstruction, without getting the solidity necessary to bear up the wagons and teams. Beauregard had left Hood on the 17th, after issuing the order which directed the latter to advance with the least possible delay, and on the 20th had reached West Point, Miss., whence he telegraphed to Hood to '-push an active offensive immediately." On that day, Lee's corps marched ten miles out from Florence, on a road between those lead- ing to Waynesboro and to Lawrenceburg, and on the 21st the whole of the army was in motion, Hood hoping by a rapid march to get in rear of Schofield's forces before they could reach Duck River. Schofield received word on the 20th from Hatch, who commanded his cavalry, that the ad- vance had begun, and as soon as it was evident that Hood was moving on the Lawrenceburg road, he sent back his surplus stores from Pulaski, and prepared to retreat to Co- lumbia. He had ordered Colonel Strickland, who was at the last-named place, to prepare a defensive line by which he could hold the town, or at least the crossings of Duck River at the railway and pontoon bridges. On the 21st the cavalry reports left no doubt that Hood was near Lawrence- burg, and the next morning Cox's division of the Twenty-third Corps was sent to Lynnville, about half way between Pulaski and Columbia, where it was joined in the evening by Wag- ner's division of the Fourth Corps. At this point they cov- ered an important cross-road coming in from Lawrenceburg MIDDLE TENNESSEE. 65 to the railway. Thomas's despatches to Schofield had all contained the strong wish that the troops might retreat as little and as slowly as possible, for on Sunday, the 20th, he had abandoned the expectation of seeing A. J. Smith's troops be- fore the following Friday. He expressed a hope that Pulaski might be held till then, but coincided in Schofield's opinion that, if Hood attempted to get in his rear, it would be neces- sary to retire to Columbia, covering the railway. The min- gled and continuous storms of snow, sleet, and rain were delaying Hood, and he was not yet so far North as to make it sure that he would not seek to reach the railway south of Columbia. On the 23d, Schofield's movement kept pace with Hood's, Cox's division being sent ten miles farther north to Hurricane, the crossing of the railway by the Mount Pleasant and Shelbyville road, and Stanley, with the whole of the Fourth Corps, was moved to Lynnville. But during the night Schofield received word that the cavalry on the Mount Pleasant and Columbia Pike were unable to resist the determined advance of Forrest, and before day- break of the 24th he put his little army in rapid motion for Columbia. Cox's division, having the shorter distance to travel, approached the town first, and hearing the noise of the cavalry combat on the converging road at the west, marched by a cross-road some two miles out of town, and reached that on which the fight was going on in time to in- terpose the infantry skirmishers, moving at double-quick, between Forrest's cavalry and the brigade of Colonel Capron, which was rapidly retreating into the place. The enemy was quickly checked and a line formed behind Bigby Creek. It was now a little after seven o'clock; in less than three hours Stanley's head of column came up, and a strong posi- tion was taken by the whole command, covering the town on the south. Hood did not succeed in getting the whole of 66 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. his forces up until the 26th, his utmost exertions having failed to move his army faster than ten miles a day. Scho- field was joined on the march by General Wilson, who took command of all the cavalry, which was slowly reinforced, and he was met at Columbia by General Kuger, with one of the brigades of the Twenty-third Corps, which had been left at Johnsonville. General Cooper, who had also been at Johnsonville, was ordered by General Thomas to march with his brigade from there to Centreville, a crossing of the Duck River, thirty miles west of Columbia, where it was thought Forrest's cavalry might try to pass that stream. Part of Ruger's command was scattered at several points on the river, within a few miles of Columbia, to protect cross- ings and fords on Schofield's right flank. Wilson, with the cavalry, was directed to operate on the left, covering the country in the direction of Lewisburg and Shelbyville as well as possible, besides watching the fords and crossings of the river above Columbia. Schofield's position was a strong one if the attack were made upon him in front, but it had the great disadvantage of a river at his back. No line north of the river could be occupied without abandoning the railroad bridge to destruc- tion, and this would be needed again as soon as a forward movement should begin. The river at the town makes a horse-shoe bend to the south, and the land on the north bank in the bend is low, and completely commanded by that on the south. Hood was too wary to make an assault of the lines, and contented himself with a sharp skirmishing engagement, while he prepared to turn Schofield's position by crossing the river some miles above. Thomas had given orders to General Granger, at Decatur, prior to the retrograde movement, under which that officer, on the same day that Schofield abandoned Pulaski, with- MIDDLE TENNESSEE. 67 drew his garrisons from Athens, Decatur, and Huntsville, and concentrated his division at Stevenson, a hundred miles east. The relations of this singular divergent movement will be considered later ; its immediate effect was to relieve Hood of any embarrassment as to his right flank in operat- ing against Schofield. The garrison at Johnsonville was ordered to remove the public property and retire to Clarks- ville, fifty miles northwest of Nashville. On the 24th, a careful examination of the country satisfied Schofield that he must expect Hood to try to turn his posi- tion, and he informed Thomas of his purpose to prepare an interior and shorter line, so that when it became necessary he could retire to this and send part of his force north of Duck River. Thomas still urged that the effort be made to cover the railway and pontoon bridges with a bridge-head, so keeping command of a crossing till he should be ready to advance ; and Schofield prepared to delay and obstruct Hood to the last moment, urging that the infantry rein- forcements be sent to him as fast as possible. The strong efforts which had been made had increased Wilson's cavalry to about seven thousand equipped, five regiments being sent forward from Nashville between the 24th and 27th of the month. These, however, did not reach him at the front till the 30th, and till that time his force remained inferior in strength to Forrest's, even if we deduct from the latter Rod- dey's division, which seems to have been detached, guarding Northern Alabama. During the night of the 25th Schofield ordered Cox to move two brigades of his division to the north side of the river, and take a position covering the pontoon bridge which was at the ford. On the 26th, this was strengthened by breastworks on indented lines, where the brigades and regi- ments were separately intrenched, taking advantage of every 68 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. irregularity of the ground and of groves of timber to pro- tect the force from the cross-fire of artillery which the en- emy would have from the higher ground on the south of the stream. Pits were also made for a line of skirmishers close Vicinity of Columbia, Tenn. to the river bank. The Fourth Corps troops were brought into the interior line which had been constructed on the other side, and the town and bridges were still held. Hood felt cautiously the new line in front of Columbia MIDDLE TENNESSEE. 69 but still did not attack, and the whole of his infantry being up, he began a movement to cross the river above. Forrest assembled most of the Confederate cavalry between Hood's right and the turnpike, and other roads leading from Lewis- burg to Franklin eastward of Columbia, trying the different fords. Wilson was actively at work to prevent the crossing, watching the country as far as Shelbyville. The indications of Hood's purpose were now so plain that Schofield felt ha could no longer delay, and moved the whole of his command to the north side of the river, in the night of the 27th, partly destroying the railway bridge, so that the enemy could not make use of it. He was also obliged to destroy the pontoon bridge, which was of heavy wooden boats, for which he had no means of transportation. He earnestly assured Thomas that he had held on as long as was at all safe, and he was plainly right, the only doubt being whether, in his zeal to give Thomas all the time possible for the intended concen- tration, he was not; taking too great a risk.

## spring-hill

Wilson heard, on the afternoon of the 28th, that Forrest had forced a crossing at Huey's mill, eight miles above Columbia.1 He tried to unite his forces as rapidly as possi- ble in front of the enemy, but Hurt's cross-roads, between Spring Hill and the Lewisburg pike, was the first point at which he was able to make any continued stand. At eight in the evening his information seemed to show that Forrest was moving eastward toward the Lewisburg pike, and that none of the enemy had gone toward the Franklin pike, in 1 The official reports and memoirs on both sides are full of differences as to the distance from Columbia to the place Where Hood's infantry crossed. The Con- federate accounts say nothing of Huey's mill, and do not distinctly fix the place of their pontoon bridge. By the courtesy of Capt. R. D. Smith, of Columbia, who was in Hood's army at the time, I am able to say definitely that the bridge was laid at Davis's ford, between five and six miles from Columbia. Some of the cavalry crossed at Huey's mill. 70 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. rear of Schofield. At one o'clock, however, he received in- formation that pontoons were laid at Huey's mill, and that Hood's infantry were crossing. This he immediately de- spatched to Schofield; but the messenger had to go by Spring Hill, and the way was long, so that the intelligence was only received at daylight in the morning. A brigade of infantry (Post's of Wood's division) was immediately sent upon a reconnoissance up the river, accompanied by one of Schofield's staff, with orders to observe and report the move- ments of the enemy. Stanley was ordered to march at eight o'clock with two divisions of his corps to Spring Hill, eleven miles, leaving Wood in support of Post's reconnoissance, and about a mile in rear of Cox's division, which was ordered to hold stubbornly the crossing at Columbia and the tongue of land in the bend of the river. Buger was ordered to hasten the blockade of the fords and roads below the town by fell- ing trees, and then to march also to Spring Hill. Stewart's brigade of cavalry, which had been watching the lower fords, had been ordered the preceding evening to proceed rapidly to join Wilson by way of Spring Hill; and Ham- mond's brigade, which was coining from Nashville freshly remounted, was ordered to stop at the same place and move as Wilson should direct. As another precaution Schofield had telegraphed Thomas, asking that a pontoon bridge be sent to Franklin, where the wagon bridge had been carried away by a freshet. Soon after daylight the Confederate artillery around the whole bend of the river opened upon the division en- trenched in the lower lands along the north shore, but the precautions that had been taken by building traverses and angles in the lines prevented any serious loss. The fire was returned from our batteries, and the renewal of the artillery combat at different times through the day, by MIDDLE TENNESSEE. 71 showing that Hood's cannon were in position, proved also that his whole army could not have moved. The truth was that Hood had left two divisions of Lee's corps, and the whole of his artillery, in Columbia, with orders to make strong demonstrations in the morning, and to force the crossing of the river later in the day. The roads by which he was leading Cheatham's and Stewart's corps were not thought practicable for the cannon. Scho- field needed time for Euger to complete his work at the fords below, and to ship by rail some artillery which had no horses and other material for which transportation was lacking. He judged also from the strong force of the ene- my in Columbia that Hood was not unlikely to move straight down the river upon his flank, when the two parts of the Confederate army could co-operate. He therefore modi- fied his order to Stanley, so as to place Kimball's division near Eutherford Creek crossing, about two miles from Wood, and let Stanley proceed to Spring Hill with Wag- ner's division alone. Euger was ready to march early in the day, and leaving one regiment as an outpost on the right, he hastened with the rest of his two brigades over Eutherford Creek, when he halted, by Schofield's orders, a short distance beyond the position of Kimball. The wagon trains of the army had been ordered to Spring Hill, and Stanley reached that place about noon, and just in time to prevent their capture by the enemy's cavalry. Forrest had, on the 28th, placed Buford's division upon the Lewisburg and Franklin turnpike, Chalmers's division at Holland's Ford, about seven miles east of Columbia, and Jackson's at Huey's mill, between Chalmers and Buford, while he himself, with his escort, and Biffle's demi-brigade attempted Da vis's Ford, two miles west of Chalmers.1 The 1 Jordan and Prior's Campaigns of Forrest, p. Oil). 72 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. two divisions of the National cavalry were broken into smaller detachments, part of them well out toward Shelby - ville, the nearest to the infantry being part of Capron's brigade, at Rally Hill, on the Lewisburg pike, where a branch turnpike turns off to Spring Hill. The resistance made to Buford was so vigorous that he could not get over the river, but Jackson and Chalmers forced a crossing after a sharp skirmish, and Forrest himself does not seem to have found any resistance. He soon struck the Columbia and Murfreesboro road, and turning Chalmers and Jackson to the east, drove Wilson's detachment beyond Rally Hill. The enemy was now between the main body of our cavalry and the parties watching the fords near the Lewisburg crossing. These were collected by Major Young (Fifth Iowa Cavalry) and under his lead they daringly cut their way through. Wilson now called in his detachments to- ward Hurt's Corners as rapidly as possible, but his despatch to Schofield at eight o'clock, giving the information already referred to, shows that he was misled as to Forrest's pur- poses. It is true that the latter was moving eastward with two-thirds of his command, but he was doing so only to clear the way for Buford, and at Rally Hill he was ill pos- session of the only macadamized road leading directly to Schofield's rear at Spring Hill. Wilson had been able to rally his whole command at Hurt's Corners, and checked the further advance of the enemy in the evening, but Buford joined Forrest in the night, and early in the morning the whole of the Confederate cavalry again advanced. Wilson made a brave and determined resistance, putting Croxton's brigade of Johnson's division in the rear, to contest every foot of the way. Capron's brigade of the same division, which had been badly worsted the evening before, took the advance on the Franklin road, and Hatch's division was MIDDLE TENNESSEE. 73 the middle of the column supporting Croxfcon. Forrest operated by flank movements, using his heavier force to turn the positions selected by Wilson, and by the mid- dle of the forenoon had gained Mount Carmel, where the Murfreesboro and Spring Hill road crosses the turnpike on which our cavalry was retiring. Here Coon's brigade of Hatch's division occupied a barricade which had been previously made by Capron, and the rest of the command moved through it. The enemy made two determined charges upon it, but were repulsed. Wilson continued, however, to retire slowly on Franklin, and Forrest, who now had possession of the direct road to Spring Hill, covering that by which Hood's infantry was moving, no longer pressed the pursuit ; but leaving a detachment in observa- tion, he moved directly upon Spring Hill, where Stanley arrived almost at the same moment with him, as we have seen. It is now plain that Wilson erred in adhering to the line of the Lewisburg and Franklin pike after Forrest gained Rally Hill. By doing so he allowed Forrest to cut him off both from Schofield's infantry, and from the two brigades of cavalry which were ordered to Spring Hill to reinforce him, and Schofield was left, during the whole of the critical day and night of the 29th, without the means of learning Hood's movements except from his infantry recon- noissances. The true line of action was manifestly to regain the road from Rally Hill to Spring Hill in the night of the 28th, or, failing that, to have made a rapid march by Mount Carmel to Spring Hill, so as to anticipate Forrest there. Hood did not cross Duck River with his infantry in the night, as had been expected, but Cleburne's division of Cheatham's corps, which was his head of column, crossed soon after daylight in the morning upon the pontoon bridge at Davis's Ford, followed by Bate and Brown. Stewart's VOL. X— 4 74 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. corps came next, the rear being brought up by Johnson's division of Lee's corps, which was temporarily reporting to Stewart. Hood himself accompanied the advance guard, but despite all his efforts it was three o'clock in the after- noon, or later, when Cleburne reached the Rally Hill turn- pike where it crosses Rutherford Greek, two and a half miles from Spring Hill. Ordering Cheatham to remain and hurry the crossing of his other divisions, Cleburne was di- rected to press forward and attack whatever force there might be at Spring Hill, where the noise of Stanley's artil- lery warned them that Forrest was meeting with opposition. But the distant firing at Columbia could also be heard, and the tenacity with which Schofield hung on to the line of Duck River apparently raised doubts in Hood's mind whether the National commander might not have received reinforcements enough to cut boldly between the now sepa- rated wings of his army. Post's reconnoissance had gone far enough to observe the movement, and it is probable that ifc had in turn been seen by Hood's command, and he would thus know that infantry was approaching his line of march. But whatever the reasons wThich induced it, Hood ordered Stewart to form his corps in line of battle south of Ruther- ford Creek, facing west, and this instruction necessarily im- plies the expectation of the approach of an enemy from that direction, or the purpose of himself making an attack upon the line which Schofield had prepared to receive him by putting Wood's, Kimball's, and Ruger's divisions within sup- porting distance of each other upon the extension of Cox's left. He may have thought that the resistance at Spring Hill would be slight when Cheatham reached the field, and that this corps sweeping down the turnpike towdrd Colum- bia would meet the convergent advance of Stewart in a gen- eral attack upon Schofield's flank. The advantages of the MIDDLE TENNESSEE. 75 defence in a broken and wooded country, and the prudent disposal of his force, by which Schofleld had now some miles of line facing the east, would possibly have made such an attack as disastrous as the one at Franklin next day ; but Hood did not attack there, and Stewart remained in line till Cheatham had been repulsed at Spring Hill, and was then ordered up when darkness had fallen and it was thought too late for further action that night. When Stanley had reached Spring Hill he found a part or Forrest's command already in the outskirts of the place. lie ordered Wagner to put Opdycke's and Lane's brigades in position to cover the village, and advanced Bradley's brigade to a wooded hill about three-fourths of a mile east of the turnpike, which commanded the approaches from that direc- tion. One battery of artillery had accompanied Wagner, but Captain Bridges, Chief of Artillery of the Fourth Corps, had followed Stanley's march with six batteries, leaving one with Wood's division. This had been done only to get them well forward en route to Franklin ; but on reaching Spring Hill, Captain Bridges had with wise precaution put his guns in battery on a commanding bench just west of the road, and where a little later they proved of great use and most fortunate in position. The enemy's cavalry made active eT- forts to reach the trains, which were parked by the roadside, and also to destroy the railway station a short distance west of the turnpike, and the protection of all these kept Opdycke and Lane fully employed. Bradley was engaged at the same time, but the affair was not serious until the arrival of Cle- burne's division on the field. This officer formed his com- mand along the Bally Hill road, and, advancing at right angles to it, attempted to reach the Columbia turnpike. He does not seem to have been fully aware of Bradley's position, for his extreme light (Lowiy's brigade) alone reached it, 76 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. and was received with so rude a shock that Cleburne was quickly forced to change front nearly at right angles in order to engage his opponent. Bate's division, which fol- lowed Cleburne, had formed in the same manner and took the same line of direction. It had nearly reached the Col- umbia road when Bate discovered that Cleburne had changed direction, and his orders being to form on the left of that division, much time was consumed in rectifying the line. Brown's division had followed Bate and had been sent forward on Cleburne's right. Bradley's position had been too isolated to be held by a single brigade against so extended a line of battle, and after his first sharp encounter with Cleburne he retreated in some disorder, he himself being severely woimded. The brigade was quickly re- formed on the right of Lane, at the southern edge of the village commanding the Columbia road, and a regiment was detached from Opdycke to strengthen it. Wagner's line was now a semicircle, reaching from the Columbia road around the eastern side of the place to the railway station on the northwest, Opdycke's brigade being stretched out till it was only a strong line of skirmishers. A regiment which was with the trains as a guard was also utilized, and advantage was taken of the ground to present the strongest front pos- sible. Cleburne and Brown followed up Bradley's retreat, but were met with so continuous a fire and on so long a de- fensive line, that they were made to believe they were in the presence of a superior force. The concentration of artillery fire upon them was so far beyond what they could expect from a single division, that it checked them as much, per- haps, by producing the conviction that they had most of Schofield's army before them, as by the severe losses caused by the terrible fire of shrapnel and canister. It was now growing dark, and Hood having reached the conclusion that MIDDLE TENNESSEE. 77 he needed Stewart's corps also, ordered this up from Ruther- ford Creek, with Johnson's division of Lee's corps which accompanied it. Jackson's division of cavalry occupied Thompson's Station, three miles north of Spring Hill, and the rest of Forrest's horsemen were in that direction. When Stewart arrived it was already night, and he was ordered to bivouac on the right and rear of Cheatham. Meanwhile Schofield had issued his orders that Cox's di- vision should continue to hold the bank of the river opposite Columbia till nightfall, if possible, and then, leaving a skir- mish line in position, should march to Spring Hill, followed in turn by Wood's and Kimball's divisions. The skirmishers were directed to remain till midnight unless driven off, and to join the rear guard of the army or follow it. The divi- sions were all to move by the left flank, so that whenever they should halt and face they would be in line of battle, and could use the road fences for barricades if attacked by Hood. The whole line would thus be shortened from the right till Kimball only should remain on that flank, when he also would march to Spring Hill. By this arrangement there was the least risk of confusion and the greatest readiness for any contingency which might arise. On hearing from Stanley that he was attacked by infantry, Schofield hastened to Ruger's division, which, it will be re- membered, was nearest to Spring Hill, and led its two bri- gades in person by a rapid march to Stanley's support. As he approached the village he found pickets of the enemy on the road, but these were driven off and he joined Stanley at seven o'clock. Whittaker's brigade of Kimball's divi- sion had also been ordered up, and followed Ruger closely. When it arrived it was placed on the right of Wagner's line, to cover the march of the rest of the column as it should approach. Learning from Stanley that some force of the 78 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. enemy was at Thompson's Station, Schofield immediately marched with Euger's division to that point to open the way to Franklin. At his approach Jackson withdrew his cavalry and Euger was placed in position there without a contest. Schofield now returned to Spring Hill, reaching the village at midnight, and meeting there the head of Cox's division which had moved from Duck Eiver in accordance with liis orders. It is necessary, to a complete understanding of the situa- tion, that we should go back a little and notice the efforts which Lee made to carry out Hood's orders, and force the crossing of Duck Eiver in the afternoon. He had kept up, at intervals, an annoying plunging fire upon Cox's troops in the bend of the river, but our rifled cannon, by greater range and better practice, had prevented the enemy's artillery from maintaining its positions or doing much damage. A line of skirmishers' pits on the very end of the tongue of land had •been made untenable, but a fringe of wood, a little further back, afforded a cover which gave complete command of the open ground to the edge of the river bank. About four o'clock the efforts of Lee to effect a crossing became more energetic. Some pontoons were brought to the south bank of the river, and, under cover of a rapid artillery fire, a few boats were run down to the water. Some troops were fer- ried over in these, and so long as they remained under pro- tection of the river bank, they could not be reached by our fire. As soon, however, as they appeared above its edge, and attempted to advance against the fringe of woods held by the Twelfth and Sixteenth Kentucky (part of Eeilly's brigade) they were met by the most determined resistance. The Sixty-third Indiana and One Hundred and Twelfth Illi- nois, of Henderson's brigade (temporarily commanded by Colonel Stiles), were sent forward to support the right of MIDDLE TENNESSEE. 79 Reilly's men, and the enemy was driven from the open ground to the cover of the river bank again, and made no further effort to cross the river during the evening. Soon after nightfall the line of pickets near the river was strengthened, the two Kentucky regiments, under command of Colonel White, were lef fc as their support, the Division Inspector-General, Major Dow, being with them, and having orders to bring them off at midnight. The division then marched to Spring Hill, where it was directed by General Schofield to take the advance and proceed at once to Frank- lin, twelve miles further. The other divisions followed in the appointed manner and without serious interruption. The pickets at the river were withdrawn, as directed, and overtook the rear of Wood's division a little beyond Spring Hill, and, under orders from that officer, protected the flank of the trains from the cavalry of the enemy on the remainder of the march to Franklin. Wagner's division was kept in position at Spring Hill till the trains and all the other troops were in movement, and Opdycke's brigade, which was the rear guard of the whole, did not march until six o'clock in the morning. About mid- night Hood was informed that troops were passing on the Columbia road, and sent Johnson's division of Lee's corps to extend Bate's line and stop the movement; but the night was dark and the country unfamiliar, and nothing came of it but a slight occasional skirmish, while our columns marched by in full view of the enemy's camp-fires, which were burning less than half a mile away. Here, as at Atlanta, Hood sought to shift the responsibil- ity for his failure upon a subordinate, and Cheatham was now selected to bear the burden. Hood charged him with tardi- ness and weakness in the attack upon Stanley, and asked to have him relieved from his command. This request was 80 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. withdrawn after the battle of Franklin, though without re- tracting the charge. But a commander who is personally with the head of column in such a movement and upon the field, has the means of enforcing his orders by direct com- mands to the divisions. Had his own confidence not wav- ered, and had he not begun to yield to the belief that much more than one division was before him, his own energy would have carried his subordinates with him, and would have made the assault as desperate, if need be, as it was next day. But he seems to have lacked the grasp of mind which enables a general to judge and to act with vigor in the presence of circumstances which throw doubt upon his plan, and he proved inferior to his opponent in a strategic contest, which has been generally regarded as one of the most critical and instructive conjunctures of the war. The circumstances, as narrated by the leading Confederate of- ficers who were present, show that Hood had an access of hesitation at the very moment when the success of his move- ment demanded that all doubts should be thrown to the winds and everything risked upon a desperate stroke.1 1 A paper read in December, 1881, before a society of Southern officers at Louis- ville, Ky., by General Cheatham, contains a very full array of the evidence which tustains the above view.

## franklin

CHAPTER V. BATTLE OF FRANKLIN. THE march of the National army from Spring Hill to Franklin was not seriously interrupted. Forrest's troopers made an occasional dash at the long wagon train, but only in one or two instances did they succeed in reaching it, and very few wagons were lost. After seeing his columns fairly started, Schofield rode forward and overtook General Cox with the advanced division just before the village of Frank- lin was reached. He had, about noon, urgently renewed his request to Thomas to send a pontoon bridge to the crossing of the Harpeth Eiver, but having received no answer, he spurred forward with his staff to see if it had arrived. It was not yet daybreak, and the division was ordered to mass by the roadside to allow the trains to pass into the town. The division commander and his staff had halted at the house of a Mr. Carter, at the edge of the village (a house soon to become the key-point of a fierce battle) and were trying to catch a few minutes' sleep upon the floor, when General Schofield returned, much disturbed at finding that no pontoons had come.1 He ordered General Cox to as- 1 In the correspondence on file in the War Eecords office, no response to the second request for pontoons is found, and General Schofield informs the author that he received none. The same files do not contain any explanation of the de- struction of the boats at Columbia, and it would therefore seem that General Thomas must have continued to assume that they were available, notwithstanding the strong implication of Schofield's despatches. See Appendix D. 4* 82 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. sume command of both divisions of the Twenty-third Corps, and, as soon as day should dawn, intrench them upon the best line which could be made right and left of the knoll on which the Carter house stood, to cover the crossing of the trains and the rest of the army. He himself, with Major Twining, his Chief Engineer, began immediately to plan such improvements of the river crossings as should enable him to get the trains and the artillery upon the north side of the Harpeth at the earliest possible hour. The village of Franklin is upon the south side of the river, which partly encloses it in a deep curve to the northeast. The northern bank is here considerably higher than the olher, and, upon a hill commanding the railway and wagon- road bridges, an earthwork called Fort Granger had been built more than a year before. The railway approaches the town from the south, parallel to the Columbia turnpike, and about five hundred yards east of it. For a thousand yards it runs close to the bank of the river and on the eastern edge of the village, then crosses without change of direction, for the river here makes a turn to the west, nearly at right angles to its former course. Through a part of the distance last traversed the railway is in a considerable cut, and this as well as the bridges and the reach of the river, is com- pletely under the fire of the fort. The Carter's Creek turn- pike runs southwest from the centre of the town. The line selected for defence was a curve which would be very nearly that struck with a radius of a thousand yards from the junction of the two turnpikes in the village. Its centre was a few rods in front of the Carter house on the Columbia road, and was upon a gentle rise of ground. Its left was at the railway cut close to the river, where was an- other knoll. Upon this line the Carter's Creek turnpike is about the same distance from the Columbia turnpike as the BATTLE OF FRANKLIN. 83 railway, and this constituted the proper front facing Colum- bia and Spring Hill, whence Hood was advancing. The third division of the Twenty-third Corps (General Beilly in Battle-Field of Franklin. 84 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. temporary command) was placed on the left, Eeilly's own brigade resting its flank on the pike, with Casement's and Henderson's brigades (Colonel Stiles in temporary com- mand of the latter) continuing the line to the railway and river. The front of Eeilly's own brigade was shorter than the others, for the two regiments which were left behind as pickets at Duck Eiver belonged to it, and these did not arrive till the line was occupied. They were then placed in second line, supporting the first and less than a hundred yards in rear of it. Euger's division was between the Col- umbia and Carter's Creek turnpikes, Strickland's brigade on the left, and Moore's on the right. Along the whole front the ground sloped very gently from the line, and was only obstructed by a small grove of locust trees a short distance in front of Euger, and by farm buildings, with orchards here and there in the distance. A range of high hills bounded this plain on the south, through a gap in which the Columbia road runs. The Twenty-third Corps immediately began the building of breastworks, and by noon a strong intrenchment had been completed, the lack of timber for revetment being the only thing which prevented it from being equal to those usually made during the campaign. An old cotton gin in Eeilly's line furnished timber for head -logs, and upon the knoll near the railway, at the Carter house, and in one or two other places, where the slope was siifficient, strong epaulements for artillery were constructed inside of and somewhat higher than the infantry parapet. At the Colum- bia turnpike the full width of the road was left open, for it was all needed to enable the doubled lines of wagons and artillery to pass, and a retrenchment crossing the road a few rods in rear was built to command the opening and its ap- proach. At the river it had been found that by scarping the banks, BATTLE OF FRANKLIN. 85 the ford, though a very bad one, could be used to some ex- tent. Some wooden buildings were dismantled to furnish planking for the railway bridge, and a wagon approach to this was made. The lower part of the posts of the county bridge were found to be good, and these were sawn oft' nearly level with the water, crossbeams and planking were laid upon them, and by noon the army was provided with two passable bridges. The artillery of the Twenty-third Corps passed over first of all at the ford, to gain time, and part of it was placed on the fort on the north bank, General Stanley being directed to send several batteries of the Fourth Corps to report to the commandant upon the line when they should arrive. The trench on the left, in front of Stiles, was placed close behind a thick-set hedge of osage orange, which was thinned out so as to make an impassable thorny palisade, and the material was used to make a slight obstruction in front of Keilly's brigades. In front of Ruger the locust grove was cut down for the same use, though the trees were much too small for the purpose. At General Cox's request for troops to cover the right flank, since his force was not sufficient to reach the river on that side, Kim- ball's division of the Fourth Corps was ordered to report to him as it came in, and was placed there.1 Wood's division of the Fourth Corps arrived and crossed to the north bank, Kimball had taken his place in the line, Wilson's cavalry was upon Wood's left, opposing the efforts of Forrest to cross the river in that direction, the town was full of wagons waiting their turn at the bridges, and some of them struggling through the ford. The wearied troops, which had fought and marched since daybreak of the preceding day, dropped to sleep as soon as their breast- 1 See Appendix D. 86 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. works were built, and caught such rest as they could pre- paratory to a more terrible struggle and another night of marching. On the Confederate side, Lee had sent forward the artil- lery from Columbia, as soon as it could be crossed over Duck River in the morning, and with it went ammunition for Forrest's men, who were getting short of it. The march in pursuit does not seem to have been hurried, and the sin- gle brigade, which was rear-guard, had no difficulty in hold- ing back the enemy. A more annoying task was to drive forward the stragglers. A number of new regiments had joined the army at Columbia, and in these were many inex- perienced recruits, who were not hardened to their work, and who had overloaded their knapsacks. It required the utmost exertion to prevent these men from falling into the enemy's hands, footsore and dispirited from fatigue as they were. To keep them up, Colonel Opdycke was obliged to order their knapsack straps to be cut, and to detail a pro- vost guard to hurry them on. About noon the rear-guard reached the hills at the border of the Harpeth Valley, from which the heavy columns of Hood's army could now be seen advancing rapidly. Op- dycke checked them for a time by opening upon them with artillery, but was then withdrawn and brought within the lines, where he was placed in reserve upon the west of the Columbia road, two or three hundred yards from the Carter house. Wagner placed the rest of his division (Lane's and Conrad's brigades) astride the Columbia turnpike, about half a mile in front of the principal line. The commandant upon the line was notified by General Schofield that Wag- ner's orders directed him to remain in observation only till Hood should show a disposition to advance in force, and then to retire within the lines to Opdycke's position and act BATTLE OF FRANKLIN. 87 as a general reserve. Wagner, on being shown the note conveying this notice, said that such were his orders. By three o'clock the trains were nearly all over the river, and Schofield had issued orders that the troops should also pass over at six o'clock if the enemy should not attack be- fore sunset. But the period of depression and recrimina- tion in Hood's army in the morning seems to have been fol- lowed by fierce excitement. Cleburne talked with Brown, as they rode along, complaining bitterly that Hood had cen- sured him, and telling of his determination to demand an investigation.1 Evidently all were keyed to a high moral tension, and were determined that at the next opportunity, their commander should not have it to say that his plans had failed from any lack of energy or courage on their part. Hood, himself, had resolved upon a desperate effort to destroy Schofield's army before any further concentration of Thomas's forces could be made. About three o'clock word was sent from Wagner's brigades in front that the enemy was forming at the foot of the hills in heavy force, and reiterating to General Wagner the direc- tions already given him, the commandant upon the line went to the knoll in Stiles's brigade, which afforded a better view of the whole field. General Schofield had moved his headquarters to the north side of the river, and was personally at the fort on the hill, which not only com- manded a view of the field, but was nearest the bridges by which communication was kept up, and where alone he could see the cavalry demonstrations on the left where For- rest and Wilson were already engaged. The village itself is on a plateau lower than the line intrenched, and from it 1 Statement of General Brown in General Cheatham's paper before referred to. Hood, however, in his Advance and lletreat, p. 294, speaks of a cordial under- standing with Cleburne before he entered the battle. 88 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. nothing whatever could be seen. General Stanley, who had been ill during the morning, had also his quarters on the north of the Harpeth, with Wood's division. A depression in front of Wagner's brigades and some scat- tered trees shut out Hood's lines from view at the Carter house, but from Stiles's position they were plainly seen, formed ap- parently in double and triple lines of brigades, with artillery in the intervals between the columns. Hood had placed Cheatham's corps upon the Columbia turnpike with Cle- burne's division on the east of the road, Brown's on the west of it, and Bate's in Echelon on Brown's flank. Stewart's corps was on the right (east) of Cheatham, the order of his divisions from Clebume's flank being French, Walthall, and Loring. Johnson's division was the only one of S. D. Lee's corps which had yet come up, and it was kept in reserve. Very few battlefields of the war were so free from obstruc- tion to the view. Here, along a mile and a half of front, the imposing array of the Confederate army could be seen ad- vancing at quick step with trailed arms, the artillery in the intervals galloping forward, unlimbering and firing as soon as they were within range.1 A section of artillery with Wag- ner's brigades first opened on the advancing enemy, but as they approached it limbered up and deliberately trotted within the principal line, in accordance with orders sent it by the Chief of Artillery. It was now four o'clock, and to the amazement of the thousands who were watching them, Wagner's infantry opened fire. There was a rattling fusillade for a few moments, Cleburne and Brown were checked for an instant, but the Confederate forces passed the flanks of Lane and Conrad, to right and left, a rush and a yell fol- 1 Hood eays he did not use artillery. That he is in error of recollection is abundantly shown by reports and printed statements on both sides. The writer speaks from his personal observation. BATTLE OF FRANKLIN. 89 lowed, and the two hapless brigades came streaming to the rear in a disorganized crowd, running rapidly to reach the parapets behind them. Orders were quickly sent down the line to withhold the fire at the centre till our own men should be in, but to make the utmost use of the artillery and small arms on the flanks. Opdycke was warned to be ready for a rush to the centre if the line should give way there, and the second line along the whole front was simi- larly prepared. A few moments later, the head of the flying mass was seen swarming over the works at the turnpike, and orders were sent for all reserves to charge. The men in the trenches, confused by the crowd trampling over them, and hearing Wagner's officers calling upon their men to rally at the rear, were carried away by the surging mass, and for the length of a regiment on the left, and more than that on the right, they fell away from the works. Neither Colonel White, commanding Eeilly's second line, nor Colonel Op- dycke waited for the word to charge, but were in motion before the order could reach them. White was nearest the parapet and reached it soonest, but his line did not reach quite to the turnpike. The Carter house and out-buildings on the right of the road obstructed the movement to the front, and Opdycke made part of his brigade oblique to the left till clear of the obstacles, and they then charged head- long upon the enemy. Part also went forward on the west of the houses, and Strickland's brigade rallying with them, the Confederates were driven back here also ; but that the gap was open longer here than on the left, was proven by the enemy's dead who were found fifty yards within the lines. Stanley, forgetting his illness, had mounted his horse at the first sound of the cannonade, and the commandants of the two corps met on the turnpike just as Opdycke and his 90 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. men were rushing to the front. Four guns, which had been placed a few yards to the left of the road, were in the enemy's hands, and were loaded with canister. These were turned upon the flank of Reilly's line, but the frightened horses had run off with the ammunition chests which contained the primers, and while the captors were unsuccessfully trying to fire the pieces, the reserve was upon them. Four other guns on the right of the road were also in the enemy's hands. There was a few minutes' fierce mSlSe, but the guns were retaken and all of the men in gray who were inside the parapet were dead or prisoners. Yet the successive lines of assailants charging the works allowed no respite. Colonel White received a severe wound in the face, but refused to leave the line till after nightfall, and Opdycke had joined personally in the thickest of the deadly tussle on the turn- pike. Our men, who had been driven back from the line, rallied by officers of all grades, returned to their posts, min- gling with those who were there, making a wall three or four deep, those in rear loading the muskets for those who were firing. While rallying these men Stanley was wounded, his horse was shot under him, and he was reluctantly per- suaded to return to his quarters for surgical help. Farther to the right, and in part of what had been Strick- land's brigade line, the Confederates of Brown's division held the outside of our parapet, so that when their com- rades were driven back they were able to prevent our men from reaching it again. These, seizing upon fences and such material as came to hand, made a new barricade within about twenty-five yards of the first, and across the narrow interval the battle raged with most persistent fierceness. It was hard to tell where either brigade line ended, for Op- dycke's men mingled with Reilly's on the one side, and with Strickland's on the other, and the three crowded the space BATTLE OF FRANKLIN. 91 where two had been. Officers and men had been conscious that with the centre broken, nothing but superhuman exer- tions could keep one wing, at least, of the little army from being driven into the river. They were equal to the occa- sion and they saved the day. But though the crisis of the engagement was at the centre, the fight was by no means all there. In other parts the veterans of the Atlanta campaign held their lines with- out flinching, though the assaults of Stewart's divisions rivalled those of Cheatham in their gallantry, and they made the most daring efforts to reach the bridges which were on that flank. Loring's men came upon the hedge in front of Stiles, and attempted in vain to tear it away, or to pass it. Henderson, who had been for some days ill, re- joined his brigade, and both he and Stiles directed the fir- ing, which, sweeping along the ground, mowed down all before it. The Confederate officers urged their men to the right, hoping to pass through the railway cut, but here they were met by the shrapnel and canister of the guns in the fort north 'of the river. The batteries in Stiles's line were also admirably handled, and the attack here had never a chance. On Casement's line, Walthall's and part of Loring's divi- sions made the assault, and as there was here no obstruc- tion in front of the trench worth naming, the possibility of carrying such a line when properly held was fully tested. General John Adams led his brigade, riding straight at the ditch, leaping it, and mounting the parapet, where his horse was killed astride of it, and he himself pitched headlong among Casement's men, mortally wounded. Scott, com- manding another of Loring's brigades, was wounded. In Walthall's division not only had Quarles fallen in leading his brigade to the assault, but the loss of officers was so great that, at the close of the battle, a captain was the rank- 92 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. ing officer in that brigade.1 It was only when the last of Stewart's reserves had tried all that courage and dash could accomplish, that they relaxed their efforts. Some asked for quarter in the ditch, and came in as prisoners ; some lay down in front of the hedge, and waited for darkness to enable them to crawl away undiscovered. The remainder fell back to a position near the extension of the line Wag- ner's brigades had occupied. Cleburne had led his division forward, on the east of the central turnpike, with a desperation that was born of the wounded feelings he had shown in the morning, and he fell among the first who were at the ditch when the rush of our reserves restored the line between the cotton-gin and the road. His three successive lines pressed forward to avenge his death, but only to leave a thousand gallant officers and men beside him. On the other flank, Bate had moved for- ward his division at the same time with Brown, deploying as he went. His left reached beyond the Carter's Creek road as he neared the intrenchments, but the shape of our lines, which there bent back to the river, made him travel on a large curve, and his assault was considerably later than Brown's. It struck the right of Ruger's division, and the left of Kimball's, but finding the works before him stoutly held, and that the cavalry which he expected to advance upon his flank were not doing so, his attack was not pressed as determinedly as that of Brown. The success which this division seemed to have at the first, and the fact that for some distance they continued to hold the outside of the works, encouraged them to the most desperate and persis- tent efforts there. General Strahl was with his brigade in the ditch, personally directing the fire of his men who got i Walthall's official report. BATTLE OF FRANKLIN. 93 a foothold in the outside of the slope, and making those in rear supply the front rank with loaded guns. As darkness came on, and it came quickly on that short winter day, the two breastworks, so little apart, were lines of continuous flame, as the men fired at the flash of each other's guns. On other parts of the field, there were, after dark, frequent vollies, as the Confederate generals strove to assist the central attack by strong demonstrations ; but here the roar was for a long time incessant and deafening. Others sug- gested to Strahl to withdraw, or to surrender, but he steadily repeated the command, " keep firing," till he was himself struck down. He called for Colonel Stafford, to turn over the command, and they tried to carry him to the rear, but on the way a second and a third ball struck him, killing him instantly.1 Colonel Stafford continued the contest with the same determination. Messengers were sent to General Brown to tell him of Strahl's death and ask for orders, but they found that he was already disabled by a wound, and the staff supposed Strahl to be in command of the division. Cheatham had sent in all of Brown's brigades, but Gordon had been captured in the first m§lee, Gist, as well as Strahl, was dead, and Carter was wounded. Hood was called upon for assistance, and he sent forward Johnson's division of Lee's corps, but this, too, was driven back by that terrible fire, leaving General Manigault wounded on tho field. On the National side the One Hundred and Twelfth Illi- nois was brought over from Stiles's brigade, and put in to assist Strickland. An effort was made to get this regiment forward over the little interval between the two breast- works, but it was not successful. The oblique fire from our 1 The details of the situation on the Confederate side at this point are chiefly drawn from a pamphlet by S. A. Cunningham, Sergeant Major, entitled Remi- niscences of the Forty-first Tennessee Regiment, 94 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. troops, on right and left, when they were not hotly engaged in front, was turned upon Cheatham's men, but it was nine o'clock before they gave up the contest, and those that were left were reformed on the line occupied by Stewart and Lee, though for more than an hour occasional volleys were exchanged. At eleven o'clock, the whole front being quiet, Schofield ordered the withdrawal of our troops to the north side of the river, but an accidental fire broke out in the vil- lage, making a bright background on which our lines could be too plainly seen by the enemy, and it was neces- sary to wait an hour till the fire was extinguished. Kim- ball's division then marched by the rear to the wagon bridge, Ruger's passed behind the lines to the railroad bridge, Opdycke's brigade was sent to follow Kimball, and Reilly's division crossed behind Euger, a line of skirmishers, under command of Major Dow, Inspector General, remain- ing in the trenches till all the rest were over and the plank taken from the wagon bridge, when these also crossed at the railway. The dead could not be removed, but the well disciplined ambulance corps, under Surgeon Frink, had taken off all the wounded who could endure transportation, except some who had crawled away into buildings and sheds and were not found in the darkness. Reilly's division car- ried off as trophies twenty-two battle flags of the enemy, and Opdycke's brigade ten.1 The battle had been peculiar, partly by reason of the late hour in the day at which it began, which prolonged the hard fighting far into the night, and partly from the char- acter of the weather. A day or two of sunshine had fol- lowed the continuous storms of the preceding fortnight, 1 Hood says that thirteen was the number of flags he lost, but the number stated above was officially reported by our division and brigade commanders and verified at the time. BATTLE OF FRANKLIN. 95 and the air had been still and hazy. The smoke of the battle did not rise or drift away, but settled on the field in a thick cloud, obscuring the vision far more than common. It was said that this had led to the mistake, on Hood's part, of supposing that his first advantage at the centre was much greater than in fact it was, and resulted in greater de- struction to the Confederate troops, by repeated assaults after all real chance of success was gone. The Confederate accounts of the condition of the field next morning are full of tragic interest. Before daybreak it was learned that the National lines were empty, and the plain was covered with torchbearers seeking their comrades and friends. Colonel Stafford was found in the ditch General Strahl and he had so stubbornly held. The dead lay literally in a pile about him. They had fallen about his legs and behind him, till when he at last received a fatal shot, he did not wholly fall, but was found stiffened in death and partly upright, seeming still to command the ghastly line of his comrades lying beneath the parapet. The color-bearer of the Forty- first Tennessee had fallen between the two lines of breast- works, but neither friend nor foe had been able to reach the flag till it was hidden by the night, and in the morning it was found where it dropped.1 But even civil war rarely furnishes so sad a story as that which the Carter family have to tell. The house was occu- pied by an elderly man and his two daughters. Their presence during the day had been respected and had kept their property from unnecessary disturbance, and the day was so far gone that they thought there was no need to leave their home. The battle, when it came, broke upon them so suddenly that they did not dare to leave, and they took 1 Sergeant- Major Cunningham's pamphlet. 96 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. refuge in the cellar. The house was in the focus of the storm which raged about it for hours. They said that while the horrid din lasted, it seemed that they must die of terror if it did not cease ; but when there was a lull, the suspense of fearful expectation seemed worse than the din, and ib was almost a relief when the combat was renewed. The long night ended at last, and with the first light the young women found relief in ministering to the wounded who had crept into the house and outbuildings, and in carrying water to those on the field. But, as they climbed the para- pet at the rear of the house, among the first they found was a young staff officer, their own brother, mortally wounded, lying, as he had fallen at sunset, almost at the door of his home. The withdrawal of Schofield's forces in the night left no op- portunity to reckon the Confederate losses. Hood says that his casualties, computed ten days after the battle by means of the returns of " effective strength," were found to be 7,547 since the opening of this campaign, and including the losses about Columbia and Spring Hill. This, however, excludes all the slightly wounded who had returned to duty, and all officers, and makes no account of the accessions he had by the return of absentees and the joining of recruits. It still acknowledges a loss of 6,300 in this battle, of which 700 were prisoners in our hands. It is very certain that the whole Confederacy was deeply impressed with the fright- ful carnage of their troops, and their writers, with common accord, spoke of the desperate fighting as remarkable even in this war of desperate combats. The partial returns acces- sible seem to show clearly that no one of the divisions en- gaged (except Bate's), lost less than eight hundred, and that Brown's and Cleburne's, at the centre, and Loring's, on our left, lost much more heavily. The long list of general BATTLE OF FRANKLIN. 97 officers killed and wounded gives terrible significance to the recriminations which the affair at Spring Hill had excited. We have seen that Brown and all four of his brigadiers were disabled or killed. In Cleburne's division, Granberry be- sides himself fell. In Loring's division they lost Generals John Adams and Scott. In French's, Cockrell ; in Walt- hall's, Quarles ; and in Johnson's, Manigault ; twelve gen- erals in all, besides Stafford, and a long list of colonels and field officers who succeeded to brigade commands. On the National side the losses were 2,326, of which more than one thousand were in the two brigades of Wagner, which were so unnecessarily compromised at the front. Near the centre, where the line was temporarily broken, the losses were naturally much heavier than on the flanks, where our men stoutly held the breastworks and fought under good cover. The result well illustrates the fearful odds at which the bravest troops assault a line of earthworks over open ground, even when a grave fault of a subordinate has given them an exceptional and unlooked-for advantage. General Wagner's place of duty was with the two brigades of his division which were exposed in front, and the order to bring them in without fighting had been sent through the Fourth Corps' head-quarters, and had been received by him. He was at the Carter house when the message came from the front that Hood was forming in line of battle, and, in a moment of excitement, forgetting himself and his orders, he sent back a command to fight.1 The overwhelming of the two brigades and the peril to the whole line were the necessary conse- quence. He rallied the disorganized brigades at the river, but they were not again carried into action. During the battle and in preparation for any contingency 1 This is stated to the writer by two officers who were present and heard it. VOL. X.— 5 98 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. which might arise, General Schofield directed General Wood to put the three brigades of his division in position to cover the flanks of the troops in front of the town, and to protect the bridges in case of need. Wood accordingly placed Post's brigade opposite Kimball's flank, below the town, Streight's near the bridges, and Beatty's above Fort Granger, all on the high ground of the north bank of the Harpeth; and these brigades maintained their position in the night till the rest of the infantry had passed through their lines and marched to Brentwood. General Wilson, with the cavalry, had, during the afternoon, a warm skirmish with Forrest, who tried in vain to cross the Harpeth beyond the left of Schofield's forces. Thomas sent a warm con- gratulatory despatch when the result of the engagement was announced to him ; but, as he thought three days would still be needed to prepare his concentrated army for aggressive operations, and as this was a longer time than Schofield could engage to hold the line of the Harpeth without rein- forcements, he directed the latter to retire upon Brentwood, and thence to Nashville.1 Despatches had been sent to General Cooper, who, it will be remembered, had been stationed at Centreville, on Duck River, with a brigade of the Twenty-third Corps, directing him to fall back on Franklin. But unavoidable delays occurred, and when he approached Franklin, the enemy was in possession. He was similarly anticipated at Brentwood, but by coolness and good conduct brought in his command safely to Nashville. 1 For correspondence between these officers on November 29th and 30th, see Appendix D.

## nashville

CHAPTER VI. BATTLE OF NASHVILLE. SCHOFTELD'S little army reached Nashville in the morning of December 1st, and was merged in the forces which Gen- eral Thomas was assembling there. General A. J. Smith, after many unforeseen delays, had arrived with his detachments from the Army of the Tennessee, consisting of three divi- sions, aggregating nearly twelve thousand men. Of these, something over nine thousand men reached Nashville early in the morning of November 30th, and the rest on the next day. The first intention of General Thomas had been to meet Schofield at Brentwood, ten miles in front of Nash- ville, with these troops, while Schofield marched the ten miles from Franklin to the same point ; but he concluded later to make the union at Nashville. When he received from Schofield and from Wilson the reports of Hood's move- ment of the 28th and 29th, by which the cavalry had been separated from Schofield, and Forrest was reported pushing eastward, he ordered Steedman to leave a garrison in Chatta- nooga and take his other available forces to Cowan, a station near Elk Eiver, on the Nashville and Chattanooga Railway. Steedman reached there on the morning of the 30th and put his troops in position ; but in the evening, Thomas, having learned of Hood's attack in force upon Schofield at Franklin, ordered Steedman to hasten to Nash- ville. The troops were accordingly put upon the railway 100 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. trains again, and most of them reached their destination safely on the evening of December 1st. One train, being delayed by an accident, did not arrive till the 2d, and was attacked by Forrest five miles south of Nashville, but the troops made their way through without serious loss, though the train was captured and destroyed. Of the 8,000 men who had been at Chattanooga on the 30th, Steedman brought with him 5,200, consisting of two brigades of colored troops, and a provisional division made up of soldiers be- longing to the army with Sherman, but who had arrived at the front too late to rejoin their own regiments. Most of the troops under General K. S. Granger, in North Alabama, and of those under General Milroy, at Tullahoma, were ordered to Murfreesboro, where the whole, amounting to about eight thousand men, were placed under command of General Kousseau, and remained until after Hood's defeat on December 15th and 16th. The block-house garrison, at the important railroad bridge on the Elk Eiver, was the only considerable detachment left along the line of the Chattanooga Road, between Murfreesboro and Stevenson. In Nashville, on November 30th, besides Smith's forces, Thomas had about six thousand infantry and artillery, and three thousand cavalry, mostly dismounted.1 The Chief Quartermaster, General Donaldson, had also armed and organized into a division the employes of his and the com- missary department, and these were prepared to serve as an addition to the garrison when needed. The new regiments which arrived were gradually assigned to the old divisions, 1 By the table in Appendix A, it will be seen that the cavalry " present for duty' were 10,884, of which 2,272 were not "equipped," i.e., were dismounted. I have not been able to procure the exact figures showing how many were with Wilson in the field, and what other small detachments there might be. The in- fantry would be the difference between 14,000 and the number at Murfreesboro. See Appendix A. BATTLE OF NASHVILLE. 101 and the additions to the list of Sherman's convalescents and returning men were united to those who had come with Steedman, making, by December 14th, a division of over five thousand men, under command of General Cruft. Accepting Hood's statements of his losses thus far in the campaign, the army which he led against Nashville con- sisted of about forty-four thousand men of all arms.1 His means of information were such that he had pretty full knowledge of the concentration Thomas was now effecting, and the motives which induced a march to Nashville arc matters of interesting inquiry. Beauregard, in his prelimin- ary report to the Confederate "War Department, said : " It is clear to my mind that after the great loss of life at Franklin, the army was no longer in a condition to make a successful attack on Nashville." Hood's own statement, which would be entitled to the greatest weight if his subsequent writings were not so full of evidence that they are labored apologies for his misfortunes, is that he expected reinforcements from Texas, and that he hoped by intrenching near Nashville he could maintain himself in a defensive attitude till these should arrive ; or that he might even take advantage of a reverse to Thomas, if the latter should be beaten in an attack upon his fortified line. The hope of aid from Texas was a forlorn one, for no organized body of Confederates had for a long time succeeded in passing the Mississippi Kiver. From other sources, however, we learn that the show of confidence and of success was relied upon to induce recruit- ing in Tennessee, and that the pretended Governor, Harris, was with Hood, endeavoring to enforce the conscription in that State. This, and the collection of supplies, give an in- telligible reason for occupying as much territory as possible, 1 See Appendix A. 102 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. and for an appearance of bravado which could hardly be justified on military grounds. Doubtless, too, Hood be- lieved that while his veterans might be forced to retreat, they could not be routed ; and he underestimated the dis- couragement that began to pervade them when they were taught, by the terrible lesson of Franklin, how hopeless was that dream of conquest with which their leaders had tried to inspire them when they crossed the Tennessee. Hood also says he learned that Schofield retreated in alarm ; but never was a greater mistake. Schofield's officers on the line had reported their perfect confidence in their ability to hold it, and the withdrawal from the Harpeth had been based solely on the probability of the position being turned before reinforcements could be sure to arrive. In truth, Hood's situation was a very difficult one, and to go forward or to go back was almost equally unpromising. He followed his natural bent, therefore, which always favored the appearance, at least, of aggression, and he marched after Schofield to Nashville. On approaching the town, he put Lee's corps in the centre, across the Franklin turnpike, for it had suffered least in the campaign, and was now his strongest corps. Cheatham took the right, and Stewart the left of the line, while Forrest, with the cavalry, occupied the country between Stewart and the river below Nashville. Attempts were made to repair the railway from Corinth to Decatur, and thence by Pulaski to Hood's rear. Hood tells us that he gained possession of two locomotives and several cars (perhaps at Spring Hill), and that these were used to help transport supplies. Thomas put his troops in position upon the heights sur- rounding Nashville, General Smith's divisions on the right, the Fourth Corps (General Wood temporarily commanding) in the centre, and Schofield's Twenty-third Corps on the BATTLE OP NASHVILLE. 10J left. Steedman, who arrived later, was first put on tlio Nolansville pike, about a mile in front of Schofield's lefb, but was placed on the extension of Schofield's line a day or two later, when Wilson, with the cavalry, were sent over the river to Edgefield, on the north bank. On December 2d, Hood sent Bate's division of Cheatham's corps to destroy the railroad between Nashville and Mur- freesboro. Bate reached Overall's Creek, ten miles from Murfreesboro, and attacked the block-house protecting the railway bridge there ; but the little garrison held out against a severe cannonade till General Milroy arrived with reinforcements from Murfreesboro, and drove the enemy off. Bate now took the road toward Nashville, and at Stewart's Greek and two other places in that neighborhood, found the block-houses evacuated, and burned them with the bridges they were built to protect. He also reported that he had torn up several miles of track. Forrest, mean- while, who had been directed to co-operate with Bate, had sent Buford's division against the block-houses nearest Nashville, and succeeded in reducing three of them near Mill Creek, beginning with one five miles from the city. On the 5th he united Jackson's division with Buford's, and moving toward Lavergne took two more block-houses. He now met Bate, who was moving in the opposite direc- tion, and turned the united forces upon Murfreesboro. Here, on the evening of the 6th, he was further reinforced by Sears's brigade of French's division, and Palmer's brigade of Stevenson's, and on next morning approached the town, reconnoitring the fortifications in person. Rousseau now sent Milroy against the enemy, with seven regiments, and these attacked vigorously the left flank of Forrest's infantry, while they were moving by his orders in the same direc- tion for the purpose of taking ground farther to the left. 104 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. Milroy's attack fell obliquely upon the extremity of Bate's line, which was quickly rolled up and put to rout, losing two pieces of ai-tillery. Bate admits 213 casualties in the in- fantry, but those of the cavalry are not given. Milroy took 207 prisoners, and his own losses in the affair were 30 killed, and 175 wounded. Meanwhile, Buford's division attempted to enter the town by another road, but was also defeated and driven off. Bate's division was now recalled to Nashville, and re- placed by a brigade under Colonel Olmstead (formerly Mercer's) so that Forrest retained three brigades of infantry as a support for his cavalry. He continued till the 15th to operate on the east of Nashville, and along the south bank of the Cumberland, part of his duty being to " drain the country of persons liable to military service, animals suita- ble for army purposes, and subsistence supplies." l On the 15th Jackson's division captured a railway train of supplies going from Stevenson to Murfreesboro, for the garrison there, who, it would seem, must have been in danger of running short of rations, since the breaking of their com- munications with Nashville. At Thomas's request, Lieutenant-Commander Fitch pa- trolled the Cumberland with gunboats above and below Nashville, to prevent the crossing of that stream by the enemy, and Wilson sent Hammond's brigade of cavalry to Gal latin to watch the north bank of the river as far as Carthage. From the time of Hood's arrival in front of Nashville, the President and Secretaiy of War became very urgent in their desire that Thomas should at once assume the aggressive. 1 Campaigns of Forrest, p. 634. Thomas's report puts the affair at Murfrees- boro on the 8th, but both Bate's report and Forrest's biographers say it was the 7th. BATTLE OF NASHVILLE. 105 At their suggestion, General Grant telegraphed on Decem- ber 2, advising Thomas to leave the defences of Nashville to General Donaldson's organized employes, and attack Hood at once. Grant's language was scarcely less imperative than an order, but Thomas was so desirous of increasing his force of mounted men that he determined to wait a few days. On the 8th, the weather, which had been good for more than a week, suddenly changed. A freezing storm of snow and sleet covered the ground, and for two or three days the alternations of rain and frost made the hills about Nashville slopes of slippery ice, on which movement was impracticable. As Hood's positions could only be reached by deployed lines advancing over these hills and hollows, everybody in Thomas's army felt the absolute necessity of now waiting a little longer, till the ice should thaw. This was not fully appreciated by the authorities at Washington, who connected it too closely with Thomas's previous wish for more time, and a rapid correspondence by telegraph took place, in which Thomas was ordered to attack at once or to turn over his command to General Schofield. He assembled his corps commanders and asked their advice, saying that he was ordered to give Hood battle immediately or surrender his command. To whom the army would be transferred was not stated, but it was matter of inference, and he de- clined to submit the despatch itself to the council of war, though one of the junior officers intimated a wish to know its terms. By the custom of such councils the opinion of officers is given in the inverse order of their grade ; but General Schofield, feeling the delicacy of his position as senior subordinate, volunteered his own opinion first, that till the ice should melt it was not now practicable to move. l 1 In the account of this meeting, the author follows a written statement of General Schofield. 5* 106 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. All concurred in this, and Thomas telegraphed Grant that he felt compelled to wait till the storm should break, but would submit without a murmur if it was thought necessary to relieve him. On the 13th, General Logan, who, it will be remembered, was temporarily absent from the Fifteenth Corps, was ordered to Nashville for the purpose of super- seding Thomas in command of the Department and Army of the Cumberland, and Grant himself was on the way there also, when the result of the first day of the battle of Nash- ville (December 15th) stopped further action in that direc- tion. As early as December 6th, the troops had been ordered to be ready to move against the enemy, and the plan of battle afterward adopted had been in substance determined. From day to day Hood appeared to be taking ground to the east, so as to bring himself more closely into support of Forrest's operations. This led to a suggestion to Thomas from his corps commanders to modify his plan which had looked to the use of the Twenty-third Corps to demonstrate on the left, and give more weight to an attack by the right. From the 8th to the 14th, it was definitely understood in camp that an attack would be made the moment the ice melted, and on the date last mentioned a warm rain made it certain the ground would be bare next day. The position of Hood had not materially changed for a week. Chalmers was operating with a division of cavalry along the Cumberland, for some miles below Nashville, as Buford was above ; but, while ordinary steamboat transportation was thus inter- rupted, the navy patrolled the river and prevented the enemy from crossing. Hood had sent a detachment of cavalry also, supported by Cockrell's brigade of infantry to the mouth of Duck Eiver, on the Tennessee, to blockade that stream also, if possible. In his anxiety to cover so large a territory, the BATTLE OF NASHVILLE. 107 Confederate general was too much extended, and in front of Thomas's right his flank was only covered by Chalmers's divi- sion of horse. To make some connection with the river on this side, he had built a number of detached works, but these were not completed, though he had put artillery in them, supported by detachments of infantry from Walthall's division. Eeports brought in by deserters indicated that he was intending to withdraw from his advanced lines since the 10th, but the same causes which prevented Thomas from moving, affected him also, and a change of quarters, to his ill-clad and poorly shod troops, would have been the cause of much suffering, if it were made during the severe weather of that week. On the morning of the 15th a heavy fog obscured the dawn and hid the early movements of Thomas's army. The ice had given place to mud, and the manoeuvres, like those of all winter campaigns, were slow. The modified order of the day directed a strong demonstration by Steedman on the extreme left, with two brigades ; one commanded by Colonel Grosvenor, Eighteenth Ohio, and the other (colored troops) commanded by Colonel Morgan, Fourteenth United States Colored. General Wood, with the Fourth Corps, and Gen- eral Smith, with the Sixteenth Corps, were ordered to form upon a position nearly continuous with the eastern line of the city - defences, extending from a salient on the Acklen place across the Hillsborough turnpike toward the Hardin turnpike in a southwest direction. Advancing toward the southeast these corps would make the principal attack obliquely upon the left of Hood's line. General Wilson, with three divisions of cavalry, was ordered to clear the Hardin and Charlotte turnpikes of the enemy (still farther to the west) and move forward on the right of Smith's corps. General Schofield, with the Twenty-third Corps, 108 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. constituted the reserve, and was placed in rear of Wood, to strengthen and extend the attack on the right. As Smith had occupied the fortifications on the right of the line about the city, these orders would be executed by wheel- ing the whole of both corps forward to the left, upon the salient at the Acklen place as a pivot, after Wood had taken ground to the right by the distance of say half a mile, so as to bring his left flank at the point named. Schofield, who had been in the fortifications still to the left of Wood, marched from his lines at daybreak, and passing through the works at the Hillsborough pike moved to the east into the position assigned him, as soon as the wheel of the right wing made room for him. The interior lines at the city were held by General Donaldson's men, while General Cruf t, with his division, occupied those from which Schofield and Steedman moved. Standing in the salient in Wood's line, which has been mentioned, the topography of the country about Nashville is clearly seen. On the left, toward the east, is a valley in which Brown's Creek flows north into the Cumberland. It rises in the high Brentwood Hills, which shut out the view toward the south a little more than four miles away, and its course is nearly parallel to the eastern line of Thomas's in- trenchments. On the right, but a little farther off, is Rich- land Creek, flowing northwest into the Cumberland. It rises also in the Brentwood Hills, not more than a mile west of Brown's Creek, and runs nearly parallel with it toward the city for some distance, when the two curve away to right and left, encircling the place, and marking its strong and natural line of defence. On the high ridge between the creeks is the Granny White turnpike. A mile eastward is the Franklin turnpike, diverging about thirty degrees. At nearly equal distances, on that side, the Nolensville and BATTLE OF NASHVILLE. 109 Murfreesboro turnpikes leave the city successively. Turn- ing toward the west from our station, the Hillsboro, the Hardin, and the Charlotte turnpikes successively go out at Map of Battle-Field of Nashville. 110 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. similar angles, all radiating from the centre of the town. The ground is hilly, rising into knobs and eminences two or three hundred feet above the Cumberland, but mostly open, with groves of timber here and there. Hood's line was over Brown's Creek, on the high ground from the Nolensville turnpike and the Chattanooga railway to the Franklin turnpike, then crossing the creek and mounting a high hill west of it, it extended to the Hillsboro road, where it turned back along a stone wall on the side of the turnpike. The detached works, of which mention has been made, were still to the southwest of this, and across Richland Creek. The relative places of his several corps were the same as when he first came before the town. His main line at his left, where it reached the Hillsboro pike, was about a mile in front of Wood, but he also occupied an ad- vanced line with skirmishers, only half that distance away, and terminating in a strong outpost on Montgomery Hill, at the Hillsboro road. Before six o'clock in the morning Steedman was moving forward under cover of the fog by the Murfreesboro road, on the extreme left, and about eight he attacked Hood's right between the turnpike and the railway. The vigor of the as- sault made it something more than a demonstration, and the rapid fire of both artillery and small arms attracted the at- tention of the enemy in that direction. The distance Smith's right wing had to move was found to be greater than had been reckoned on, and it was ten o'clock before McArthur's division had moved sufficiently to the left to open the way for Wilson's cavalry to advance upon the Hardin road. Johnson's division moved forward on the Charlotte turn- pike, looking also after the enemy's battery at Bell's Land- ing, on the Cumberland ; Croxton's brigade took the interval to the Hardin turnpike, Hatch's division continued the line BATTLE OF NASHVILLE. Ill to the flank of Smith's infantry, and Knipe's division was in reserve. Smith formed the Sixteenth Corps with Garrard's division on his left, connecting with the Fourth Corps, and McArthur's division on the right. The division of Moore was in reserve. On the other side Chalmers did what he could to oppose them, supported by Coleman's (formerly Ector's) brigade of infantry,1 but the odds was too great, and they were driven steadily back. Half a mile southeast of the Hardin road the first of Hood's detached works, con- taining four guns, was found. The batteries of McArthur and Hatch were brought to bear upon it from all sides, and, after a severe cannonade, McMillan's and Hubbard's bri- gades of infantry and Coon's of cavalry (dismounted) at- tacked and carried the redoubt.2 Stewart now recalled Coleman and directed him to report to Walthall, whose division occupied the stone wall bordering the Hillsboro turnpike. Walthall placed him on the extension of his line southward, upon some high points covering the Granny White road. This left the other redoubts to their fate, as Chalmers was far too much over-matched to make much re- sistance with his cavalry. He had been driven back so fast that his train, with his headquarters baggage and papers, had been captured. The next redoubt, about four hundred yards to the right, was carried by the same troops, and two guns in it were taken. Another four-gun battery, intrenched on a detached hill, was stormed and captured by the cavalry, and a two-gun battery by Hill's brigade of McArthur's divi- sion, though with the loss of Colonel Hill, who fell in the 1 This was of French's division, but French seems to have been absent, and his brigades were separately used as occasion required. Sears's had been recalled from Forrest, and was temporarily reporting to Walthall. 2 Smith and Wilson each claim for their men the honors in the attack of all these works, but in such a combined movement it is vain to discriminate minutely as to the exact credit due each brigade. 112 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. moment of success. Smith's corps now bore somewhat to the left, striking the extreme flank of the stone wall held by Walthall's division, driving Keynolds's brigade from it in con- fusion. At the same time, Schofield, who had followed the movement closely with the Twenty-third Corps, in accord- ance with Thomas's order, pushed Couch's division (formerly Cooper's) past Smith's flank, and beyond the last redoubt which had been captured. Now advancing on the line from the Hillsboro road, eastward, across an open valley half a mile wide, Couch assaulted and carried the left of a series of hills parallel to the Granny White turnpike. The as- sault was made by Cooper's brigade, and the rest of the division was quickly brought up in support, while Cox's division marched still farther to the right and occupied the continuation of the line of hills along Bichland Creek with two brigades, keeping the third (Stiles's) on the heights west of the creek to cover the flank. These last movements had occurred just as darkness was falling, and completed the day's work on the extreme right. It is now necesaary to go back and trace the progress of the Fourth Corps. General Wood had formed the corps with Elliott's division (formerly Wagner's) on the right, connect- ing with Smith's corps, while Kirnball's and Beatty's extend- ed the line to the left. The time occupied in the deployed movement of the right of the army made it one o'clock be- fore it was time for the extreme left to move. Wood then ordered forward Post's brigade of Beatty's division to attack Montgomery Hill, the high point half a mile in front of the salient of our line, on which was Hood's advanced guard. The assault was preceded by rapid artillery fire and was gallantly executed. The general advance of the line was now progressing, and Schofield's corps was ordered away by General Thomas to support the movement of the right flank. BATTLE OP NASHVILLE. 113 Wood met with a strong skirmishing resistance, but the lines went forward steadily, keeping pace with the troops on the right, till Smith's attack upon the south end of the stone wall along the Hillsboro road, which was held by Walthall. Kimball's division was opposite the angle in Hood's line where Walthall joined upon Loring, having Sears's brigade of French's division between them. Kimball pushed straight at the angle, and the right of the stone wall having already been carried, Walthall's brigades, under Johnston (formerly Quarles's) and Shelley, successively gave way. Elliott's division of Wood's corps lapped upon Gar- rard's of the Sixteenth, and the whole went forward with enthusiasm, capturing several guns and many prisoners. Hood's left was now hopelessly broken, and he made haste to draw back his shattered divisions upon a new line. Scho- field's advance had separated Coleman's brigade from Walt- hall, but it occupied a commanding hill (afterward known as Shy's Hill),1 and held on with tenacity till Walthall, helped by the gathering darkness, could form along its right across the Granny WTiite road. At the first news of the loss of the redoubts, Hood ordered Cheatham's corps (except Smith's, formerly Cleburne's division) from the right to the left, and his divisions, hurrying by the Franklin pike toward Overton's Hill, passed great numbers of stragglers streaming to the rear. Bate was ordered to relieve part of Walthall's division, so as to make a stronger line between Shy's Hill and the Granny White road, and Walthall closed to the right upon Loring. South of Shy's Hill, Lowry's (formerly Brown's) division extended the Confederate left in front of Schofield, and the whole worked diligently to intrench themselves. Lee's corps was drawn back till his right en- 1 This name is given the hill by General Bate, whose troops held it, in hono: of Colonel Shy who fell there. It seems to have had no special name before. 114 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. circled Overtoil's Hill, on which Clayton's division was placed, supported by Brantley's brigade, while Stevenson's and Johnson's divisions extended the line to the west till it united with Loring's division of Stewart's corps. On our left Steedman had kept his men active. He had attacked and carried an earthwork near the Kaines house early in the day, and had followed up the progressive move- ment of the army, harassing the enemy's right as it drew back. About nightfall there was a strong appearance of a pre- cipitate retreat of the enemy, and Thomas ordered Wood to move his corps farther to the left, reaching the Franklin turnpike, if possible, and to push southward upon it. This direction was a wise one if the enemy continued his retreat, for it prevented the crowding of the army upon a single road ; but had Thomas been sure that Hood would reform upon the new line, he would, no doubt, have continued the general movement of the day by extending his forces to the right. The darkness stopped Wood before he had reached the Franklin road, and he bivouacked where night overtook him, ready to continue the march in the morning. His right was near Smith's left, and his own left was diagonally toward the rear, in the works which Lee's corps had aban- doned on the hither side of Brown's Creek. For the results obtained, the losses had been astonishingly light. Wood reports only three hundred and fifty casualties in his corps, Smith's were about the same, and Schofield's not over one hundred and fifty. Those of Steedman and of Wilson were proportionately small, though the exact figures cannot be given, as the losses of the first and second days are not discriminated in any report but Wood's. Sixteen pieces of artillery and twelve hundred prisoners had been taken, and Hood's whole line had been driven back fully BATTLE OF NASHVILLE. 115 two miles. The work was not completed, but should the enemy maintain his position, the promise for the morrow was good. Hood now realized the mistake his over-confidence had led him into, by inducing him not only to extend his lines beyond what was prudent, but, worst of all, to allow Forrest to become so far detached that he could not be recalled in time for the battle. Sears's brigade had been brought back to the lines before the 15th, but two others were still with Forrest, and Cockrell's was at Duck Eiver. The Confede- rate commander set to work in earnest, however, to repair his mistake. The cavalry was too far away to join him in twenty-four hours, but orders were despatched recalling Forrest, and preparations were made to hold the new line another day. As his left still seemed his weak point, Hood ordered the whole of Cheatham's corps to that flank. Shy's Hill, which was held by Coleman's brigade, made the angle in the line, from which the sharply refused flank continued southward, Lowry's division and Smith's (formerly Cle- burne's) extending it to the Brentwood Hills. Bate's divi- sion was placed, as we have already seen, between Shy's Hill and the flank of Stewart's corps, facing north. Chal- mers's division of cavalry was close upon the left of the in- fantry, bending the line back, somewhat, toward the Granny White road. The Confederate line now rested upon high hills, Over- ton's and Shy's, between which the ground was lower, though rolling, and was broken by the upper branches of Brown's Creek, which ran in nearly straight courses north- ward, crossing Hood's position at right angles. Overton's hill was a broad, rounded elevation, and the works, in curv- ing southward around its summit, did not present any sharp angle to weaken their strength. Shy's Hill, however, though 116 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. high, was of less extent, and the lines of Bate and Lowry made a right angle there. Bate complained of the position, but Hood's engineers had established it, and Cheatham did not feel at liberty to change it. Indeed, it could not have been changed much, unless the whole Confederate army were to retreat. Coleman had been driven to Shy's Hill by Schofield's advance at dusk, and had all he could do to hold on to it at all. The extension of the Twenty-third Corps along the east side of Kichland Creek left only the hills directly south of Shy's unoccupied, and it was there alone that the advance of Thomas's right wing could be checked. The National skirmish lines were so close that the digging had to be done on the inside of the parapet chiefly, getting cover for the men as soon as possible. The hill on our side, held by Couch's division, was only three hundred yards from Shy's, and the work on the latter, built under tire, was weak. Farther south, the confronting hills, held by the rest of Cheatham's corps on the one side, and Schofield's on the other, were farther apart, and that in the Confederate line was considerably higher and well wooded on the top. A strong work was made upon it, revetted with timber, with embrasures for cannon, and a parapet high enough to defi- lade the interior ; but the fire of our sharpshooters prevented any abatis being made. General Thomas held a council with his corps commanders in the evening, but no new orders seem to have been issued, except some directions as to movements in the event of a retreat of Hood during the night. If he remained in posi- tion, the movements progressing at the close of the day would be continued. During the night the lines on the National side also were adjusted. In Schofield's corps, Couch's division, in making connection with Smith, opened a gap between it and Cox's division, which, after extending BATTLE OF NASHVILLE. 117 the two brigades, which were over Richland Creek, in single line, without reserves, was still unable to join Couch's left by as much as three hundred yards. The disadvantage of drawing in and contracting the extension of the right flank was so manifest, that, upon the report of the fact, Schofield applied to Smith for some of his reserves to complete the line, and at six o'clock in the morning, Colonel Moore re- ported with five regiments and a battery, and was placed there.1 Three of the regiments were put in the trenches already there, and two in support of the artillery in rear. At the same hour, Wood resumed the movement of the Fourth Corps, wThich had been interrupted in the evening, and Steedman advanced upon the Nolensville pike to the abandoned line of the Confederate works, where he half wheeled to the right and came up on Wood's left. The lat- ter first formed his corps with Beatty's division on the left of the Franklin road, and Kimball's on the right, with Elliott in reserve ; but finding a large space vacant between himself and the centre of the army, he moved Elliott's division for- ward into line continuous with Smith's corps. The left of the Fourth Corps, where it now connected with Steedman, remained across the Franklin road, and opposite Overton's Hill, where Hood's line bent back to the south. The Na- tional line, therefore, instead of being oblique to the enemy, and far outreaching it on the right, as on the previous day, was parallel and exterior to it from flank to flank, nowhere reaching beyond it, except where Wilson's cavalry was oper- ating beyond Schofield on the Hillsboro road. About noon, Steedman's troops formed a connection with Wood's, and the latter, by order of General Thomas, took direction of both. Along the whole line the skirmishers 1 In Smith's report this is spoken of by mistake as Moore's division, but it was, in fact, only part of his division. 118 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. were advanced close to the enemy's works, and various points were reconnoitred to determine the feasibility of an assault. Thomas did not order an attack upon the intrench- ments, but left the corps commanders to their own discre- tion in this respect. Wood concentrated his artillery fire upon Overton's Hill, Smith and Schofield maintained a se- vere cross-fire upon the angle at Shy's Hill, and at other points on the line the opposing batteries were warmly en- gaged. Finding that the enemy was strongly intrenched in Wood's front, General Thomas rode to Smith, and learned the results of the reconnoissance there, and, after examining for himself the position, continued on to Schofield's lines on the right. Schofield had ordered Stiles's brigade of Cox's division to leave its position in rear of the extreme right and march farther south, then, turning to the east, to push forward upon a wooded hill on the extension of the line of the division. Thence he was to keep pace with the advance of Wilson's dismounted cavalry, and attack with the rest of the line when it should go forward. The termi- nation of the Confederate continuous works in Cheatham's line, was the embrasured earthwork already referred to, with a recurved flank facing the south. A four-gun battery, of smooth twelve-pound guns, was in this fort, with four more in the curtain connecting it with Shy's Hill. The rifled guns of Cockerell's battery, on the west side of Eich- land Creek, were able to reach the embrasures of the work in front, while the shells of the smooth guns fell short in the efforts at reply, and the superiority of the National artillery was such that the Confederate gunners were forced to re- load their pieces, by drawing them aside with the prolongs, to the protection of the parapet. On learning the nature of the works in front of Schofield, BATTLE OP NASHVILLE. 119 and the extent of the enemy's line, Thomas ordered Smith to send one of his divisions to extend that flank, but on representations as to the condition of affairs in Smith's front, the order was withdrawn. "Wilson, however, was making good progress with his cavalry, which must now be traced. Johnson's division had not felt strong enough to attack the position of Chalmers, near Bell's Landing, on the 15th, and Wilson's movements had been made with the rest of the corps. The concentra- tion of Chalmers's division in the night, enabled Wilson to bring Johnson up in the morning, and he now had all three of his divisions in hand. Hammond's had pickets toward the Granny White turnpike, in rear of Hood's left, Hatch's division was ordered to move from his bivouac on the Hills- boro road, on the left of Hammond, and upon the enemy's rear. Johnson was moving across the country from near Bell's Landing. By noon, or shortly after, Wilson's skir- mishers formed a continuous curved line from Schofield's right around the enemy's flank across the Granny White road. It was at this time that Schofield ordered the move- ment of Stiles's brigade, which has been mentioned, and had suggested the desirability of sending a full division of in- fantry beyond Hood's flank, if one could be spared from the line. He did not think it wise to assault the heavy work in front of Cox's division, except in connection with a general advance. The situation at the angle on Shy's Hill, however, was opening the prospect of a successful attack there. The ad- vance of Wilson's dismounted cavalry from one wooded hill to another on the south, was making Hood uneasy, and his vehement exhortation to Chalmers, to hold his own, not being enough to overcome the odds against that officer, he was forced to withdraw Govan's brigade from Cheatham'a 120 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. line, and send it to Chalmers's support. Bate was ordered to extend his left, and occupy Shy's Hill, while Coleman, who had been there, was sent to fill Govan's place. Bate\s line was now a good deal stretched, and he found also that the earthworks built in the night were too far back from the brow of the hill, so that they did not command its slope. The fire upon it was too hot to change it, he could get no reinforcements, and he could only hold on to the last. Bate's own words best describe his situation in the afternoon : " The enemy, he says, opened a most terrific fire of artillery, and kept it up during the day. In the afternoon, he planted a battery in the woods, in the rear of Mrs. Bradford's house (this was in McArthur's line), fired directly across both lines composing the angle, and threw shells directly in the back of my left brigade ; also placed a battery on a hill diag- onally to my left, which took my first brigade in reverse. (This was in Cox's line.) The batteries on the hill, in its front, not more than three hundred yards distant (in Couch's line) had borne the concentrated fire of my Whitworth rifles all day, and must have suffered heavily, but were not silenced. These rifled guns of the enemy being so close, razed the works on the left of the angle for fifty or sixty yards." l General McArthur, from his position, was able to see something of the mischief done to Bate's line, and reported that an assault upon the angle was practicable. He pro- posed to move McMillan's brigade to the right, in front of the hill held by Couch, and to charge under the cover of Couch's guns, where the hillside gave most protection to an advance. Thomas approved the plan, and Smith sent to Schofield for directions to Couch to co-operate. Schofield 1 General Bate's official report. BATTLE OF NASHVILLE. 121 acceded to this, and directed Cox also to attack the hill in his front simultaneously, while Stiles should advance be- yond the flank with the cavalry. It was now near four o'clock, and Thomas was in person at Schofield's position, from which Shy's Hill, and the whole range south, to the Brentwood Hills, were in full view. The whole connection of events will be best understood if we now return to the left flank, where Wood had been making anxious examination of the enemy's position on Overton's Hill, and upon the report of a reconnoissanoe by Colonel Post, had determined to try the chances of an at- tack there. The assault from the Fourth Corps' position was assigned to Post's brigade of Beatty's division, sup- ported by Streight's. Thompson's colored brigade, of Steed- man's command, supported by Grosvenor's brigade, were to attack at the same time from the east. A concentrated artillery fire upon the hill preceded the assault, and at three o'clock the order to advance was given. A cloud of skirmishers ran forward to draw the enemy's fire and to annoy the artillerists in the works, and the brigades in line followed them. Nearing the intrenchments, they rushed forward, some of the men gaining the parapet, but they were received with so hot a fire, that they could not endure it, and after a short, sharp struggle they recoiled. Their re- treat was covered by the rest of Beatty's division and Steed- man's reserves, and by the artillery. These were so handled that the enemy did not venture from his works, and our wounded were brought safely off; but the casualties were probably half of all that occurred in the battle, adding an- other to the many proofs of the terrible disadvantage at which I a direct assault of a well intrenched line is usually made. Colonel Post was killed, and the loss in officers was heavy, for they exposed themselves fearlessly in leading their men. VOL. X.— 6 122 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. At the angle in the Confederate works held by Bate, at Shy's Hill, the circumstances were different. His lines, as we have seen, were enfiladed and taken in reverse ; his para- pet was levelled for some distance ; the closeness of Couch's batteries, the near approach of our skirmishers, the attenua- tion of Bate's troops, the cover for the approach of the as- sailing force under the hill-slope, all combined to neutralize the advantage of modern weapons, and to give the assault the preponderance of chances which justify it. While the fire upon the angle was kept up with increasing severity, McArthur ordered Colonel McMillan to form his brigade in the hollow before Couch's works, and when they should be half-way up the hill, the brigades to the left were to ad- vance in echelon, attacking the lower line before them. Wilson's dismounted cavalry had been advancing from the south, gaining position after position, and increasing their ardor as they advanced. Their numbers enabled them to outflank Govan's brigade, which Hood had sent to assist Chalmers in holding them back, and as they approached Schofield's position Stiles's brigade of infantry came in close support.1 The balls from this attacking force were now falling in rear of Bate and Lowry, and the men of Cle- burne's old division were vainly trying to form a line long or strong enough to match that which was coming from the south. Wilson had gone in person to Thomas, at Schofield's position, to report what his men were doing, and reached him just as McMillan's brigade was seen to rush forward upon the slope of Shy's Hill. At a sign from Schofield, Cox's division started also on the run, Doolittle's brigade in 1 In his report General Schofield expressed some disappointment that this bri- gade had not beeii able to get forward faster ; but Colonel Stiles's account of the matter and of the nature of the ground show that he accomplished all that could be expected of so small a force moving over rough, detached hills. BATTLE OF NASHVILLE. 123 advance. Wilson turned to gallop back to his command, but before lie could get half-way there, the whole Confede- rate left was crushed in like an egg-shell. McMillan swept unchecked over Bate's ruined line at Shy's Hill. The gallant Colonel of the Thirty-seventh Georgia did all that man could do to hold it, and dying at his post, gave to the height the name it bears. The arch was broken; there were no reserves to restore it, and from right and left the Confederate troops peeled away from the works in wild confusion. From the heavy earthwork in front of Doolittle one volley of cannon and small arms was fired, but in the excitement it was aimed so high as to do no mischief, and Cox's whole division was over the works before they could reload. At the same time Hatch and Knipe, with their divi- sions of dismounted men, rushed in from the right, and, abandoning their artillery, the Confederates west of the Granny White road crowded eastward, running for life. Some were killed, many were captured, and Smith's and Schofield's men met upon the turnpike at right angles, and were halted to prevent their organizations from being con- fused together. Hubbard's brigade, of McArthur's division, which followed McMillan's movement, met with more resistance, and suf- fered more severely; but though some of the Confederate regiments held tenaciously to their works, and surrendered in form, most of the troops broke their organizations entirely when the advance was taken up from centre to wings, and Wood's divisions now charged, with hardly a show of opposi- tion, over Overton's Hill, from which they had been driven back an hour before.

## nashville-results

Among the results of the two days' battle at Nashville had been the capture of about four thousand five hundred prisoners, and fifty-three pieces of artillery, besides small arms in great number. Among the prisoners were Generals Johnson, Smith, Jackson, and Rucker, and a number of regimental officers commanding brigades. The losses in killed and wounded on both sides were small, compared with the material results, though the demoralization of Hood's army, followed so soon by the close of the war, leaves us without the full returns which are necessary to 1 Sergeant-*Major Cunningham's pamphlet. The author has found the state- ments of Mr. Cunningham so accurate when he has the means of verifying them, that he does not feel at liberty to ignore them in this case. THE PURSUIT AFTER THE BATTLE. 127 determine the casualties on the Confederate side. Hood assembled the remnant of his army at Tupelo, Mississippi, and then gave furloughs to part of his men (particularly the Tennesseeans), and asked to be relieved from the com- mand of the army. He does not admit a loss from all causes, from December 15th to 30th, as great as the num- ber of prisoners taken by Thomas's army on the 15th and 16th, and claims that he reassembled at Tupelo an army of 18,500 effective muskets. These figures are nearly worth- less for any historical purpose. General Thomas's return of prisoners captured, and deserters received during No- vember and December, show the number to be over thir- teen thousand ; besides these he reports the capture of 72 cannon and 3,000 muskets. We shall meet with some of the veterans of Hood's army again in the Carolinas, main- taining their old corps organization ; but, for the time, they were scattered and demoralized, and seemed almost to lose the character of a disciplined army. Thomas's losses in the battle of Nashville were 3,057, of which less than four hundred were killed. The analysis of these figures shows that the Fourth Corps suffered a little less than a thousand casualties, of which two-thirds were in the unsuccessful attack upon Overton's Hill. Steedman's losses were over eight hundred, and nearly all of them seem to have occurred in the same assault, those of his second colored brigade (Colonel Thompson's) being fifty per cent, heavier than in any other on the field. The Sixteenth Corps lost 750, which appear to have been pretty evenly divided between the two days. It is noteworthy that the attack upon the angle at Shy's Hill was not a costly one, for the preceding preparation by the enfilading artillery fire, and the shape of the ground, which enabled McMillan to approach closely before exposing his men, show that 128 FRANKLIN AND NASHVILLE. success in such cases (when success is possible), follows the use of proper means. The total number of casualties in McMillan's brigade was 118, of which not more than two- thirds occurred in the final assault, and they were less than half of those which occurred in Hubbard's brigade, which went forward on its left against the works in the lower ground, and where Bate's centre and right, holding on with better cover, were able to inflict considerable loss before the crushing of the whole of Hood's left made their posi- tion untenable. The Twenty-third Corps was in reserve nearly all of the first day, and its only losses worth men- tioning were in Couch's division, when carrying the hill close to Shy's in the evening. The position was of inestima- ble importance for one so cheaply gained, for the casualties were only 150. Those of the other division in the final assault were less than twenty. As nearly always happens in a panic, the break of the enemy's line was so sudden and complete that the loss was almost wholly on one side. The loss in the cavalry corps was 329, and when distributed among the three divisions, it must also be regarded as trifling, and the larger part, even of this, undoubtedly oc- curred in carrying the redoubts on the 15th.
