# Richard B. Irwin, History of the Nineteenth Army Corps: Teche campaign passages, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of an Allen County Public Library scan (Internet Archive historyofninetee00irwi); not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers, map-caption debris and footnotes interleaved with the text. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages only: Chapter IX from Banks's return to New Orleans on March 24 to its end (OCR pp.88-93), Chapters X, Bisland (pp.94-103), and XI, Irish Bend (pp.104-120), and Chapter XII, Opelousas, to the rebuilding of the Vermilion bridge (pp.121-125).

## the-teche

Banks returned to New Orleans on the 24th of March, and the next day ordered Grover to embark and move down the river to Donaldsonville, and thence march down the Bayou La Fourche to Thibo- deaux. At the same time Emory was ordered, as soon as Grover's river transports should be released, to em- bark his command for Algiers, and thence move by the railway to Brashear. Meanwhile, on the i8th of March, Weitzel learned of the presence of the Quec7L of the West and Webb in the Atchafalaya, and as this seemed to indicate an intention to attack him, and the navy had no more light-draught gunboats to spare for his further security, to avoid having his hand forced and the game spoiled, he discreetly fell back on the 2 1 St to the railway bridge over Bayou Boeuf, and took up a position where he was not exposed, as at Brashear, to the risk of being cut off by any sudden movement of the enemy. On the 28th of March the Diaria was sent to recon- noitre the Confederate position and strength on the lower Teche ; but continuing on down the Atchafa- laya, instead of returning by Grand Lake as intended, and thus running into the arms of the enemy, she fell an easy prey. The (^alkouii went to her relief, but ran aground, and the Estrella had to go to the assist- THE TECHE. 89 ance of the Calhoun. Acting-Master James L. Peterson, commanding the Diana, was killed, and Lieutenant Pickering D. Allen, aide-de-camp to Gen- eral Weitzel, was wounded. With the Diana there fell into the enemy's hands nearly one hundred and fifty prisoners. This gave the Confederates three rather formidable boats in the Atchafalaya and the Teche. The movement of the troops was necessarily slow, as well by reason of the extremely limited facilities for transportation, as because of the state of the roads, but by the 8th of April every thing was well advanced, and on that day Banks moved his headquarters to Brashcar. Weitzel, who had been reinforced by the sicL,H'-train, manned by the ist Indiana heavy artil- ler\', h.ul already re-occupied his former front on Ber- wick Ba\'. I'Lmory was in bivouac at Ba\'ou Ramos, about live miles in the rear of Weitzel, and Groverat Bayou Bceuf, about four miles behind Emory. Thus the wliolc movement was almost completely masked from the Confederates, who from their side of the bay saw only Weitzel, and knew little or nothing of the gathering forces in his rear. So little, indeed, that Taylor, with his usual enterprise, seems to have thought tliis a favorable moment for attempting upon Weitzel the same operation that Weitzel had been so long meditating for the discomfiture of Taylor. Emory marched early in the morning of the 9th of April and closed up on Weitzel, who, an hour later, about ten o'clock, began to cross. No enemy was seen save a small outpost, engaged in observing the movement. This detachment retired before Weitzel's advance, without coming to blows. Weitzel at once sent his Assistant Adjutant-General, Captain John B. 90 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. Hubbard, with Perkins's and Williamson's troops of cavalry and one section of Bainbridge's battery to dis- cover the enemy's position. The Confederates were found to be in some force in front of Pattersonville, with their cavalry pickets advanced to within a mile of Weitzel's front. As soon as Weitzel had completed his crossing, and released the boats, Emory followed him. The four brigades bivouacked in front of the landing-place that night. The gunboats, having done the greater share of the ferriage, went back to the east bank for Grover. Grover, who had marched from Bayou Boeuf at nine o'clock, just as Emory was arriving at Brashear, came there, in his turn, early in the afternoon. The plan had been that Grover should embark immedi- ately, and, having his whole force on board by an early hour in the night, the boats should set out at daylight, so as to place Grover by nine o'clock on the morning of the iith in position for the work cut out for him. With few pilots, and the shores un- lighted, it was out of the question to attempt the navigation of the waters of the Grand Lake during the nio-ht. However, it was not until the nicrht of the iith that Grover was able to complete the embarkation of his division. To understand this it is necessary to observe that Emory and Weitzel, in making the passage of Berwick Bay, were merely crossing a short ferry, so that the boats engaged in the transfer could be loaded rapidly to almost any extent, so long as they remained af.oat, and being unloaded with equal facility, were in a few minutes ready to repeat the operation. In Grover's case, however, the infantry, artillery, cavalry, and stores THE TECHE. 91 had all to be taken care of at once, with every- provision for fighting a battle. For this the artillery was considered indispensable, and it was not without great trouble and long delay that the guns and horses were got afloat. Fate seemed to be against Grover, for after all had been accomplished, by the greatest exertion on his part, as well as on the part of his officers and the corps quartermasters, a fog set in so dense that the pilots were unable to see their way. This continued until nine o'clock on the morning of the 1 2th ; then at last the movement began. About noon, on the nth of April, Weitzel, leading the advance of the main column, moved forward. At once his skirmishers felt the skirmishers of the enemy, who retired slowly, without attempting any serious opposition. In the evening, Weitzel rested in line of battle a short distance above Pattersonville. Emory followed closely, and went into bivouac on Weitzel's left. The march had not been begun earlier, and the enemy was not pressed, because it was desired to keep him amused until Grover should have gained his rear, and Grover had not yet started. After the early morning of Sunday the 12th of April, had been spent in light skirmishing and in demonstrations of the cavalr)', designed to observe the enemy, and at the same time to attract and hold his attention, word came that Grover was under way. Hanks knew that the passing fleet must soon be in plain sight of the Confederates. Therefore, it was now necessary to move promptly, and to feel the enemy strongly, yet not too strongly, lest he should abandon his position too soon and suddenly spoil all. From this moment it is important to remember that, save in the event of complete success, no word could 92 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS, come from Grover for nearly two days. The first news from him was expected to be the sound of his guns in the enemy's rear. At eleven o'clock the bugle again sounded the ad- vance. The whole line moved forward, continually skirmishing, until, about four o'clock in the afternoon, the infantry came under fire of the Confederate guns in position on the lines known as Camp Bisland. The line of march led up the right bank of the Atchafalaya until the mouth of the Teche was reached, thence up the Teche, partly astride the stream, yet mainly by the right bank. At first Weitzel formed on the right, Emory on the left, but as the great bend of the Teche was reached, about four miles below Bisland, and by the nature of the ground the front became narrowed at the same time that in following the change of direction of the bayou the line was brought to a wheel, Weitzel took ground to the left in two lines, while Emory advanced Paine's brigade into the front line on Weitzel's right, placed Ingraham in his second line, and made a third line with Gooding. Then finding the enemy beyond the Teche too strong for the cavalry to manage single-handed, Banks called on Emory to reinforce the right bank. Emory sent Bryan across with the 175th New York and a section of the ist Maine battery, commanded by Lieutenant Eben D. Haley. They were to push the enemy back, and to conform to the advance of the main line. The day was hot, the air close, and the march over the fields of young cane, across or aslant the heavy fur- rows and into and over the deep ditches, was trying to the men, as yet but little accustomed to marches. THE TECHE. 93 Fortunately, however, there was no need of pressing the advance until Grover's guns should be heard. About half-past five in the afternoon a brisk artillery fire began, and was kept up until night fell ; then Emory moved the 4th Wisconsin forward to hold a grove In front of a sugar-house, near the bayou, well in advance of his right, in order to prevent the Confederates from occupying it, to the annoyance of the whole line. After dark all the pickets were thrown well for- ward in touch with those of the enemy, but the main lines were drawn back out of range, for the sake of a good night's sleep before a hard day's work.

## bisland

CHAPTER X. BISLAND. The works behind which the Confederates now stood to battle were named Camp Bisland or Fort Bisland, in honor of the planter whose fields were thus given over to war. The defences consisted of little more than aline of simple breastworks, of rather low relief, thrown completely across the neck of dr}* land on either bank of the Teche, tlie flanks resting securely on the swamps that border Grand Lake on the left and on the right extend to the Gulf. The position was well chosen, for five miles below Cen- treville, where the plantation of Mrs. Meade adjoins the Bethel Place, the neck is at its narrowest. The Teche, passing a little to the left of the centre of the works, enabled the guns of the Diana, moving freely around the bends, to contribute to the defence, while the obstructions placed below the works hindered the ascent of the bayou by the Union gunboats. The Confederate right was also somewhat strengthened by the embankment of the unfinished railroad to Opelousas. On the other hand, from the nature of the ground, low and flat as it was, the works were in part rather commanded than commanding ; yet the difference of level was inconsiderable, and for a force as small as Taylor's, outnumbered as his was, any slight disadvantage in this way was more than com- pensated by the shortness of the line. 94 BIS LAND. 95 Along the banks of the bayou were a few live oaks ; on either flank the swamp was densely wooded, mainly with cypress, cottonwood, and willow, with an out- lying and almost impenetrable canebrake, while be- tween the attacking columns and the Confederate position, on either bank of the bayou, stretched a field where the young shoots of the sugar-cane stood knee-high. This was crossed, at right angles with the bayou, by many of those wide and deep ditches by which the planters of Louisiana are accustomed to drain their tilled lowlands. Such was the scene of the action now about to be fought, known to the Union army as the battle of Bisland or Fort Bisland ; to the Confederates, as the battle of Bethel Place or Bayou Teche. During- the whole of the night of the 12th a dense fog [prevailed, but this lifting about eight o'clock on the nKjrning of Monday, the 13th of April, disclosed a da)' as bright and beautiful as the scene was fair. At an carh' hour the whole line advanced to within short musketry range, in substantially the same order as on the previous day. An attack by a detachment of Confederate cavalry upon the skirmishers of the 4th W'isconsin, in advance of the sugar-house, was easily tlirown off, and a later demonstration by the Confederate infantry upon Paine's position in the L;rove shared the same fortune. Emory moved first t!ie Sth Xt \v Hampshire, and afterwards tlie 133d and I 73(,1 Xew York, to the support of the 4th Wis- consin. At the same time Banks ordered Emory to send the- other four regiments of Gooding's brigade and the twt) remaining sections of the ist Maine bat- tery to reinforce Bryan with the 175th New York on the left bank of the Teche, in order to be prepared, 96 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. not only to meet a flank movement of the Confeder- ates from that direction, but also to carry the works on that side, should this be thought best. After these dispositions had been completed, the advance was steady and continuous, yet not rapid, until toward noon the last of the Confederates retired behind their breastworks and opened fire with musketry. The ditches already spoken of hindered the progress of the Union artillery, yet not seriously, while they afforded an efficient protection for the supports of the batteries and enabled the lines of infantry to rest at intervals : no small gain, for the sun grew very hot, and the march over the heavy windrows and across the deep ditches was exhausting. The Confederate gunboat Diana took position well in front of the works, so as to command completely the right flank of Emory and Weitzel as they ap- proached by a fire that, had it not been checked, must have enfiladed the whole line. Just as this fire was beginning to be disturbing it was silenced by a fortunate shot from one of the two 30-poundcr Par- rott guns, served by the ist Indiana, posted in rear of Weitzel's left and trained upon the Diana, under the personal supervision of Arnold. The third shot from this battery, aimed at the flash of the Dia?ias guns, exploded in her engine room ; then above the trees, whose leafage full and low hid the vessel, was seen a flash like a puff of vapor ; a rousing cheer was heard from the sharpshooters of the 4th Wisconsin and 8th New Hampshire, who had been told off to keep down the fire of the gunboat ; and the Diana was seen to pass up the bayou and out of the fight. All risk of an enfilade fire being thus removed, the BISLAND fi^PRlL IZ - 13 1363 Al:,0 CAi.LrZD FoRTBiSLAND ^R CAMPblSLAND AND BY THL C 0,N ^£JER A TE 5 BETHEL PLACE B ISLAND. 97 whole Union line quickly closed with the Confeder- ates, and the engagement became general with artil- lery and musketry. On both sides of the bayou the firing was brisk, at times even severe. Save where the view was broken here and there by the trees or became lightly clouded by the smoke of battle, the whole field lay in plain sight. As the course of the Teche in ascending turned toward the left, Gooding, on the east bank, had the wheeling flank, while Weitzel formed the pivot. Gooding went forward in gallant style, his men quickening their pace at times to a run, in order to keep the alignment with the main body on the w(!st b.ink. Perceiving on his extreme right, toward the lake, a fine grove or copse, Gooding threw out Sharne with the 156th New York to examine the wood with a view of attempting to turn the left flank of the Confederate lines. These, as it proved, did not f-xtcnd beyond the grove, but there ended in an un- finished redoubt. Indeed, nearly the whole of the Con- federate works on the east side of the bayou, although laid out long since, had been but recently and hastily thrown up. after it became known to Taylor that Banks was crossing: to attack him. In the wood, % 1 about five hundred yards in advance of the breast- works. Mouton had posted Bagby's 3d Texas regi- ment. Tile Texans held their ground so stififly that Gooding found it necessary to send his own regiment, the ;, ist Massachusetts, to the support of Sharpe. Mouton supported Bagby with the left wing of the 1 8th Louisiana and parts of Fournet's and Waller's battalions. Gooding's men carried the rifle-pits in the wood b)' a spirited charge, in which they took two officers and eighty-four men prisoners. His main line 98 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. in the open ground between the wood and the bayou was formed by the 38th Massachusetts, deployed as skirmishers, covering the front and followed, at a distance of about one hundred and fifty yards, by the 53d Massachusetts, in like order. Behind the 53d, two sections of the ist Maine battery were posted to command two parallel plantation roads leading up the bayou, while the third section was held in reserve. After the 31st Massachusetts had gone to the support of the right, the main line here was composed of the 175th New York. Shortly after five o'clock the 53d Massachusetts relieved the 38th, which had expended its ammunition, and was falling back under orders to replenish. When this was done, the 38th once more advanced and formed in support of the skirmish line. Meanwhile on the left of the Teche the main body moved forward in two lines of battalions deployed, Paine on the right and Wcitzel on the left, while In- graham, in column of companies, formed the reserve for both. Paine's first line on the right, nearest the bayou, was composed of the 4th Wisconsin and 8th New Hampshire, his second line of the 133d New York and the 173d New York. Mack's 20-pounders commanded the ba)'ou road, and Duryea went into battery in advance of the centre, between Paine and Weitzel. Weitzel's front line was composed of the Sth Ver- mont and 114th New York, with the 12th Connecti- cut, 1 60th New York, and 75th New York in the second line. The guns of Bainbridge and Carruth went into battery near the left flank, and working slowly kept down the fire of the Confederate artil- lery' in their front. When the fire of musketry be- came hot, Weitzel sent the 75th New York to try BISLAND. 99 to gain the canebrake on the left, in advance of the enemy's works, with a view of turning that flank. Of this movement Taylor says in his report that it was twice repulsed by the 5th Texas and Waller's battalion, under Green, and the 28th Louisiana, Col- onel Gray, aided by the guns of Semmes's battery and the Valverde battery. However, the counter-move- ment on the part of the Confederates, being begun in plain view, was instantly seen, and Banks sent word to Weitzel to check it. With this object, Weit- zel ordered the 1 14th New York to go to the support of the 75th. A brisk fight followed, without material advantage to either side. In truth, the canebrake formed an impenetrable obstacle to the combatants, who, wlicii oncc' tht^y had passed within the outer edge of tlu: tangle, were unable either to see or ap- pro.'icli oik: another, althougli the struggle was plainly \isil)l(: from llu.- front of both armies. The rcs(,'r\ (_■ of Parrott guns, manned by the ist In- diana and composed of four 30-pounders and four 20-poundc,Ts. was posted under McMillan to cover the left llank and the broken centre where it was pierced by tho l)a.you, as well as to watch for the return of th.e Diana to activity. Toward evening the remain- ing guns o{ the ist Indiana, two 12-pounder rifles under Cox, after being posted in support of the cen- tre, were- sent to the left to assist Bainbridge and Carruth, whose ammunition was giving out. B.anks. after gaining advanced positions in contact with the c-nemy. forbore to press them hard because, as has been seen, his whole purpose was to hold the Confederates where they stood until he could hear of Grover or from G rover. As the day advanced with- out news or the long-expected sound of Grover's lOO THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. guns, Banks began to grow impatient and to fear that the adventure from which so much had been hoped had somehow miscarried. He therefore became even more anxious than before lest the Confederates should move off under cover of the coming night. Accord- ingly, during the afternoon, although it had been his previous purpose not to deliver an assault until cer- tain that Groverheld the Confederate line of retreat, Banks gave discretionary orders to Emory and Weit- zel to form for an attack and move upon the Con- federate works if a favorable opportunity should present itself. The exercise of this discretion in turn devolved upon the commanders of the front line, that is, upon Weitzel and Paine, for Gooding, being out of communication, except by signal, with the troops on the west bank, was occupied in conforming to their movements. Paine and Weitzel, after conferring, resolved to attack, and, having made ever}- prepara- tion, only waited for the word from the commanding general. The day was waning ; It was already past four o'clock ; and Banks was still somewhat anxiously weighing the approach of night and the cost of the assault against the chance of news from G rover, when suddenly, straight up the bayou, and high above the heads of Banks and his men, a 9-inch shell came hurtling, and as it was seen to burst over thcj lines of BIsland, from far in the rear broke the deep roar of the Clifton' s bow-gun. Soon from below the obstruc- tions that barred her progress came a messenger bearing the long-expected tidings of Grover. At last he was on land and in march toward his position. With a sense of relief Banks recalled his orders for the assault and drew his front line back out of fire BISLAND. loi of the Confederate musketry so that the men might rest. To reHeve the exhausted skirmish line, the 4th Massachusetts and the i62d New York of Ingraham's brigade were sent forward from the reserve, leaving him only the i loth New York. By dawn the next morning, at all events, Banks calculated, the turning column would be in place ; accordingly during the night he gave orders to as- sault along the whole front as soon as it should be light enough to see. However, shortly after midnight, sounds were heard on the picket line, indicating some unusual movement behind the Confederate works. When, at daybreak, the various skirmishers moved forward in eager rival r)', thc\- found the Confederates gone. Captain Allaire, leading his company of the 133d New York, was the lirst to enter the works ; the regi- nieiu itself and the 8th Xew Hampshir<^. followed closel)-, and the colors of the; Sth were the first to mount the parapet, where they were planted by Paine. On the left bank, this honor fell to the 53d Massa- chusetts. I*)Ul in truth the surge was so nearl)' simul- taneous that the whole line of entrenchments on both sides of the; ba)'ou, from right to left, was crossed almost at the same instant. It w^as nine o'clock on Monday night when Taylor learned ot ( irover's movements and position, as nar- rated in the next chapter. Taylor at once began to move out of the lines of Bisland and to direct his attention to Gnn^er in order to secure a retreat, just l)efore daylight Green, to whom, with his 5th Texas, Waller's battalion, and West's section of Semmcs's battery, Taylor had given the more than usually deli- cate task of covering the rear, marched off the ground, I02 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. leaving nothing behind save one 24-pounder siege gun and a disabled howitzer of Cornay's battery. "Without losing an instant the pursuit of the retreat- ing Confederates was begun, Weitzel leading the way, and was conducted with vigor and with scarcely a halt, notwithstanding the energetic opposition of the Con- federate rear-guard, until early in the afternoon, just beyond Franklin, Emory's advance guard, under Paine, following the bayou road, ran into Grover's, under Dwight, approaching from the opposite direc- tion. Weitzel, having entered Franklin without op- position, kept the left-hand or cut-off road until he came to the burnt bridge over the Choupique, by which, as will presently be seen, the Confederates had escaped. Gooding, after occupying the works in his front, crossed the Teche by a bridge to the west bank and fell into Emory's column bcliind Ingraham. The Clifton, as soon as the obstructions could be removed, got under way and moved up the bayou abreast with the advance of the army. The losses of the Nineteenth Army Corps in this its first battle were 3 officerr. and 37 men killed, 8 officers and 176 men wounded ; in all 224. The 38th Massachusetts headed the list with 6 killed and 29 wounded, and Gooding's brigade, to which this regi- ment belonged, reported 87 casualties, or ^'^ percent, of the whole. In the six light batteries 15 horses were killed and 12 wounded, and one caisson of the ist Maine was upset and lost in crossing the Teche to go into action. The losses of the Confederates have never been reported and no means are known to exist for estima- tino- them. B ISLAND. 103 The disparity of the forces engaged was more than enough to overcome the Confederate advantage of position, for Banks had 10,000 men with ^Z guns, while Taylor reports but 4,000 men with four bat- teries, estimated at 24 or 25 guns. To these must be added the Diana, until disabled on Monday morning, and to the Union strength the Clifton, after she arrived and opened fire at long range on Monday afternoon. At Bisland the nev/ headquarters flags were for the first time carried under fire. These distinguishing colors, as prescribed in General Orders on the i8th of February, were guidons four feet square attached to a lance tv/elve feet long, made for convenience in two joints. In camp or garrison they served to indicate the quarters of the general commanding the corps, division, or brigade, while on the march they were borne near his person by a mounted orderly, commonly a trusty sergeant. The flag of the Nineteenth Army Corps was blue with a white four-pointed star in the middle, and on the star the figures 19 in red. From this the division flags differed only in having a red ground and the number of the division in black. The brigade flags had blue, white, and blue horizontal stripes of equal width, with the number of the brigade in black in the white stripe. Thenceforward these colors were borne through every engagement in which the corps took part. Not one of them was ever abandoned by its bearer or taken by the enemy.

## irish-bend

CHAPTER XL IRISH BEND. Grover's instructions were to gain a landing on the shore of Grand Lake, and then marching on Frank- lin, to cut off Taylor's retreat or to attack him in the rear, as circumstances might suggest. We have seen how, instead of being ready to move from Berwick Bay on the morning of the loth of April, Grover found his departure delaj'ed by the various causes already mentioned until the morning of the 1 2th was well advanced. The flotilla, under Lieutenant-Commander Cooke, composed of the flag-ships Estrclla, Arizona, Clifton, and Calkoii7i, having completed the ferriage of Emory and Weitzel over Ben\ack Bay, was now occupied in assisting the army transports to convey Grover to his destination, besides standing ready to protect his movement and his landing with its guns. About noon, when off Cypress Island, the Arizona ran hard and fast aground, and four precious hours were lost in a vain attempt to get her afloat. If, in the light of after events, this may seem like time wasted, it should always be remembered that all four of the gunboats were crowded with troops, while an attack from the Queen of the West and her consorts was to be looked for at any moment. Finally, rather than to put the adventure in peril by a longer delay, 104 IRISH BEND, 105 Cooke determined to leave the Arizona to take care of herself, and once more steaming ahead, at half- past seven o'clock, the gunboats and transports came to anchor below Miller's Point, off Madame Porter's plantation. At this place, known as Oak Lawn, Grover in the orders under which he was acting had been told he might expect to find a good shell road leading straight to the Teche, and crossing the bayou about the middle of the bow called Irish Bend. Grover at once sent Fiske with two companies of the ist Louisiana ashore in the Cliftons boats to reconnoi- tre. It was midnight when, after carefully examining the ground, Fiske returned to the gunboat and re- ported the road under water, and quite impracticable for all arms. The fleet then got underway, and pro- ceeding about six miles farther up the lake, anchored beyond Magee's Point. Before daylight Dwight sent two of his staff officers, Captain Denslow and Lieutenant Matthews, ashore, with a small detachment from the 6th New York, to examine the plantation road leading from this point to the Teche. The road being found practicable for all arms, the debarkation began at daybreak. Dwight landed first. As soon as his leading regi- ment, the ist Louisiana, reached the shore, Holcomb threw forward two companies, under Lieutenant-Colo- nel Fiske, as skirmishers, and formed the battalion in line to cover the landing. Taylor, when he first learned that the gunboats and transports had passed up Grand Lake, had sent Vin- cent, with the 2d Louisiana cavalry and a section of Cornay's battery, to Verdun Landing, about four miles behind Camp Bisland, to observe and oppose the movement. This was about noon on Sunday, the io6 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. 1 2th. In the evening, hearing of the progress of the fleet, Taylor sent a second section of Cornay's battery to the lake, and going himself to Vincent ordered him to follow the movement and try to prevent a landing. The next morning Taylor sent Reily with the 4th Texas, to join Vincent and aid him in retard- ing Grover's progress. Taylor seems to have censured Vincent for letting Grover land, yet in truth Vincent was not to blame. The line he had to watch was too long for his num- bers, and the Union flotilla could and did move more rapidly on the lake than the Confederate troops by the roads. When he had stationed his pickets at the probable landing-places, and taken up a central posi- tion to support them, he had done all that lay in his power. The range and weight of the 9-inch shells of the navy were alone enough to put a serious oppo- sition to the landing out of the question, but as soon as Vincent found where the attempt was to be made, he disposed his men and guns to retard it. Two of Cornay's guns even tried, ineffectually of course, to destroy the transports : Cooke quickly drove them off. As Holcomb's skirmishers deployed they were met by a brisk fusillade from Vincent's men strongly posted in ambush behind a high fence in the thick wood that skirts the shore ; but when Holcomb advanced his battalion Vincent's men fell back on their main body and left the wood to Holcomb, who immediately moved to the edge of the clearing and held it, obser- ving the enemy on the farther border. This was Vincent with his regiment and the four guns of Cor- nay ; and from this moment all that was happening on the lake shore passed unseen by the Confederates. Meanwhile the landing went on very slowly, for the IRISH BEND. 107 transports could not come nearer to the beach than a hundred yards, and, although the foot-soldiers were able to jump overboard and scramble ashore, and the horses could also take to the water, It was necessary to make a bridge of flats for the gnns and caissons of the artillery. Thus it was four o'clock in the after- noon before the whole division found itself assembled on the plantation of Duncan McWilliams on the shore of the lake, with the Teche at the upper reach of Irish Bend four miles to the southward, and Char- enton in the hollow of Indian Bend lying but two miles toward the southwest. There were roads in either direction, but Irish Bend was the way to Frank- lin, and to Franklin Grover was under orders to go. About nine o'clock in the morning Dwight had bor- rowed from Birge his two leading regiments, the 13th Connecticut and the 159th New York, to support the I St Louisiana. Grover also gave Dwight Closson's battery and Barrett's troop of cavalry. Toward noon, moving a detachment by his left, Dwight seized the bridge that crosses the Teche in approaching Madame Porter's plantation from the northward, just in time to extinguish the flames that Vincent's men had lighted to destroy it. After seizing the bridge at Oak Lawn, Barrett galloped down the left bank of the Teche and seized the bridge a mile or two below, by which the same plantation is reached from the eastward ; probably by the shell road that Grover had been told to take, and at which he had tried to land. Barrett was in time to save the bridge from Vincent, and to hold the advantage thus gained Dwight soon sent Holcomb with the ist Louisiana, 131st New York, 6th New York, 2 2d Maine, and Closson's battery. Meanwhile, the division being entirely without io8 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. wagons, save a few that were loaded with the re- serve ammunition, still another wait took place while the men's haversacks were being filled with hard bread and coffee. All these delays were now having their effect upon Grover's own calculations. He now knew nothing of Banks's movements or of his situation. Of his own movements he was bound to suppose that Taylor had received early and full information. More- over, the topography of the country where Grover found himself was obscure and to him unknown. In- stead, therefore, of marching forward as fast as his troops could land, boldly and at all hazards to seize the roads by which Taylor must retreat, Grover now took counsel with prudence and concealing his force behind the natural screen of the wood, waited till his whole division should be fully ready. Thus it was six o'clock and the sun stood low among the tree-tops when Grover, with Birge and Kimball, took up the line of march for the Teche. Crossing the upper of the two bridges, he went into bivouac on the right bank on the plantation of Madame Porter, and called in Dwight's detachment. Before setting out to rejoin the division Holcomb burned the lower bridge, under orders, and then marching up the left bank, crossed the upper bridge at a late hour of the night. In Grover's front stood Vincent alone, for Reily had not yet coiiie ; but in the darkness it was impossible for Grover to make out the enemy's force, or even to find his exact position. When about nine o'clock that night, as related in the last chapter, Taylor heard the news from Reily, he supposed Grover to be already in strong possession of the only road by which the Confederates could make good their retreat up the Teche ; yet desperate IRISH BEND. 109 as the situation seemed, Taylor at once made up his mind to try to extricate himself from the toils. Send- ing his wagon train ahead, soon after midnight he silently moved out of the lines of Bisland and marched rapidly on Franklin, leaving Green to cover the rear and retard the pursuit. These dispositions made, Taylor himself rode at once to his reversed front, a mile east of Franklin. With him were Reily, whom he had picked up on the road below Frank- lin, Vincent who with the four guns of Cornay was still watching Grover, and Clack's Louisiana bat- talion, which had come in from New Iberia just In the nick of time. The plantation with the sugar- house, then belonging to McKerrall, is now known as Shaffer's. The grounds of Oak Lawn adjoin it toward the east and north, and along its western boundary stand Nerson's Woods, whence the com- ing battle takes the name given to it in the Confed- erate accounts. Here, beneath the trees, along their eastern skirt and behind a stout fence, Taylor formed his line of battle, facing toward the east, and waited for the coming of Grover. South of the bayou road stood Clack ; on his left, two pieces of Cornay's bat- tery, next Reily, then Vincent with a second section of Cornay's guns. The task before them was simple but desperate. They were to hold off Grover until all but they had safely passed behind the living barrier. Then they v/ere to extricate themselves as best they could, and falling in rear of the main column of the Confederate army try to make good their own escape. Before this could happen, Grover might overwhelm them or Banks might overtake them ; yet there was no other way. As early on the morning of Tuesday the 14th of I lo THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. April as it was light enough to see, Grover marched on Franklin by the winding bayou road. Preceded by Barrett and a strong line of skirmishers, Birge with Rodgers's batter}'- led the column ; Dwight with Clos- son's battery, followed; while Kimball with Nims's battery brought up the rear. The head of Grover's column had gone about two miles, and in a few moments more would have turned the sharp corner of the bayou and faced toward Franklin, when, on the right, near the sugar-house, Birge's skirmishers ran into those of Clack's battalion, and the battle of Irish Bend began. Between Birge and the concealed Confederate ranks, past which he was in fact marching, while his line of direction gave his right flank squarely to the hostile front, lay the broad and open fields of McKerrall's plantation, where the young sugar-cane stood a foot high above the deep and v/ide furrows. From recent ploughing and still more recent rains the fat soil was soft and heavy under foot, and here and there the cross-furrows, v/idening and deepening into a ditch, added to the toil and difficulty of move- ment, both for men and guns. On the left flowed the dark and sluggish Teche. On the right lay the swamp, thickly overgrown and nearly impassable, whence the waters of the Choupique begin to ooze tov/ard the Gulf. Along the southern border of this morass ran a great transverse ditch that carried off the gathered seepage of the lesser drains. In front, on the western edge of the cane-field, stood Nerson's woods, where, as yet unseen, the Confederates lay in wait ; while before them, like a screen, stretched a low fringe of brake and undergrowth. Birge's order of march placed the 25th Connecticut o;: 11 AH. IRISH BEND. Ill in the advance, one wing deployed as skirmishers across the road, the other wing- in reserve. Next came the 26th Maine with Bradley's section of Rodgers's battery, then the 159th New York, then the remainder of Rodgers's battery, while the 13th Connecticut brought up the rear. When he saw his skirmishers briskly engaged and by the sound and smoke discovered the position of the enemy, Birge made the reserved battalion of the 25th Connecticut change front forward and move across the field against the Confederate left Bissell led his men quickly to within a hundred yards of the wood, where they lay down under the partial cover of a ditch and began firing. Hubbard, with the 26th Maine, came up on Bisscll's left and took up the same tactics. At once the enfilade fire of Cornay's section near the bayou on the right of the Confederate line became vigorous and annoying, until Bradley took his two guns at a gallop to the skirt of the undergrowth opposite the interval between the infantry battalions and, opening fire at five hundred yards' range, engaged for a time the whole attention of the Confederate cannoneers. Then Grover, who rode with Birge, sent in the 159th New York on the left of the 26th Maine, with orders to take the wood, while the 13th Connecticut, march- ing round the bend of the bayou, formed on the ex- treme left between the stream and the road. Molineux promptly deployed his regiment, and gallantly led it forward at the double-quick over and beyond the left of the line already formed, until the men were within short point-blank range of the enemy's musketry ; there, finding them exhausted by the rapid advance over the rough and heavy ground, as well as suffering severely from the bullets of the enemy, he 112 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. made the men throw off their blankets and overcoats, lie down, and open a vigorous fire. Perhaps under the stress of this, but more probably in preparation for the counter-attack, the Confederates slackened their fire, and Molineux, perceiving his opportunity, as It seemed, was in the act of uttering the command " Forward !" when a bullet struck him in the mouth and he fell, painfully wounded, leaving the command of the regiment, for the time, to Captain Dayton. Lieutenant-Colonel Draper had already fallen, and Major Burt was with Grover, serving on the staff. At the word the men sprang to their feet, but before the command could be carried out, suddenly came the crisis of the battle. About seven o'clock. Gray had brought up the 28th Louisiana to Taylor's aid, and with it the news that the rest of the forces from Bisland were close at hand and all was well with them. Under cover of the wood, Taylor moved Gray quickly to the left, and perceiving that his line now overlapped Grover's right, promptly determined to gain the brief time he still needed for the safe retreat of his main body by a bold and vigorous attack with the whole force he had under his hand. The order was obeyed with spirit. Out of the wood beyond the right, and from the main ditch, well in the rear of the 159th, the Confederates came charging strongly, and halting, they poured in a hot volley. Seeing that the situation was critical Dayton ordered the regiment to retire. Under a severe fire it fell back quickly, yet in good order, to the road. There it promptly re-formed on its colors, and Burt rejoining took the command. In their retreat the New Yorkers swept over the position of the 26th Maine and the 25th Connecticut and carried these already shaken regiments with IRISH BEND. "3 tkem, in some natural disorder ; but this lasted hardly /longer than was needed for Dwight to hear and obey the command that now came back from Grover, to deploy the first brigade and take up the broken battle. Bradley held his ground stoutly to the last moment, and when finally the choice was narrowed to retreat or capture, he retired in good order to a fresh posi- tion, and there serving his canister with coolness and deliberation, held off the enemy's advance. At this point, Rodgers, who with his centre section was in the road on the left, engaged at 800 and 400 yards with Cornay's right section, turned his attention to the Confederate infantry on the right, and crossing with spherical case-shot the canister fire of his Lieu- tenant, made good the check. Almost at the moment when Taylor's left was thus roughl)^ bearing down the right of Birge, on his left his own 13th Connecticut, under Lieutenant-Colonel Warner, enveloped in a grove, was moving steadily on the Confederate right, where Clack stood and the two guns of Cornay. Emerging from the grove into an open field that still lay between them and the enemy in the wood, Warner's men instantly replied to the volleys of cannon and small-arms that greeted their appearance and pushed on, firing as they went. More fortunate than their comrades in the direction and the monient of their attack, they pressed back Clack, drove off Cornay's guns, and took two of his caissons, ;i limber, and a color presented to his bat- tery b)' the ladies of Franklin. Nearly 60 prisoners at the same time fell into their hands. They were still advancing when Grover's orders recalled them to the restored line of battle of the brigade. As Birge's right retired, Dwight deployed in two 114 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. lines, the 6th New York and the 91st New York in front, the 2 2d Maine, ist Louisiana, and 131st New York in support, and advancing against Taylor's left flank and overlapping it in its turn pushed it back into and beyond the woods. In this movement Dwight took 70 prisoners. The resistance he encountered was feeble compared with the vigor with which Birge had been met and turned back, for in that effort the Confederate line of battle had practically gained its main object and had now only to extricate itself and make good its own withdrawal. Birge, at the same time that he drew back the 13th Connecticut, once more moved forward his three other regiments and re-formed the brigade in two lines on Dwight's left. Kimball, whose brigade was in two lines in reserve, brought up the 12th Maine to the support of the 13th Connecticut. This done, Grover advanced the whole division through the woods to the open fields on their farther or western verge, and seeing the Confederates in force on the knoll beyond, to which they had retired, halted and began to observe and reconnoitre. To cover the right flank of the last Confederate position Semmes brought up the Diana, whose inju- ries of the day before he had during the night partly made good by repairs. Her 30-pounder Parrott now opened a slow fire without great effect other than to add to Grover's caution. Shortly after eight o'clock Mouton rode up. To him Taylor turned over the command of the force confronting Grover, and then rode into Franklin to direct the retreat. By half-past nine Green with the rear-guard moved out on the direct road toward IRISH BEND. "5 New Iberia. The last of Green's troopers had not (Quitted the little town at the upper end when the first of Weitzel's entered at the lower end. Some time passed before Mouton knew of this. Then for a brief space his peril was great ; but for- tunately for him the unlooked-for situation of affairs raised a momentary doubt in the minds of Green's pursuers. Should they go to the right or to the left ? And where was Grover? After questioning prisoners and towns-people, Banks directed Weitzel to fol- low by the cut-off road and Emory to move up the bayou. The interval, short as it was, enabled Mou- ton to fall back quickly, and taking a by-way across country to strike into the cut-off road beyond the northern outskirts of P^ranklin. Not an instant too soon, for in the confusion Sibley had fired the bridge over the Choupique and across the blazing timbers lay Mouton's last hope of escape. Hardly had his men reached the north bank in safety when Weitzel's advance guard came in sight down the road. They galloped to the bridge only to find it impassable. Before retiring the Confederates blew up the Dia7ia and applied the match to all their transport steamers on the Teche save the hospital boat, the Commie, which loaded with the sick and wounded of Bisland fell into the hands of the Union forces. Captain Semmes, who had but the day before left his battery to command the Diana, was taken prisoner, with all his crew. He and Weitzel had been friends and classmates at West Point ; he now refused the offered courtesies of his captor, and a few hours later, finding himself rather loosely guarded, cleverly managed to regain his liberty-. To return to Grover. The situation of the enemy's ii6 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. force in his front, the vigorous resistance encountered in his advance, and lastly, the information gathered from the prisoners he had taken, had convinced him that he had to deal with Taylor's whole force, save a small rear-guard, and that Taylor had already suc- ceeded in passing him, so that it was no longer possi- ble to cut the Confederate line of retreat. Indeed, Grover seems rather to have thought that Taylor meant to attack him. It was while careful reconnois- sances were being conducted to develop the true facts that Taylor slipped away, as we have seen, having thus adroitly extricated himself from the net spread in his sight. About two o'clock, however, as Taylor did not attack, Grover moved forward, and as he marched down the bayou road soon met Emory coming up, as related in the last chapter. Banks, seeing that the bridge could not be made passable before morning, and that nothing was to be gained by marching his tired troops over the long roundabout of the bayou road, went into bivouac early in the afternoon, covering the northern approaches of Franklin. Grover occupied his battle-field of the morning, Emory held the bayou road between Grover and the town, and Weitzel the cut-off road. Taylor crossed the Cypremort and having marched fifteen miles since quitting Franklin, or twenty-five since midnight, rested near Jeannerette. Grover reported his loss during the 13th, 14th, and 17th as 53 killed, 270 wounded, and 30 captured or missing ; in all 353. In the battle of Irish Bend, ac- cording to the nominal lists as compiled in the Official Records, his loss was 6 officers and 43 men killed, 17 officers and 257 men wounded, and 30 men missing; IRISH BEND. 117 in all 353 ; agreeing with the first statement covering the three days, yet differing slightly in the details. Of this total Dwight's brigade lost 3 killed and 9 wounded on the 13th, i killed and 5 wounded on the 17th, and only 2 killed and 13 wounded in the battle. Both statements seem to leave out the ist Louisiana, which had 2 men killed and the lieutenant-colonel and 2 men wounded on the 13th. In Birge's brigade the loss in the battle, according to Grover's report, was 46 killed, 236 wounded, 49 missing; in all 3 12. The official reports show 16 less in the columns of wounded and in the total : these are probably the 16 wounded ofificers accounted for in the nominal lists. Of the regiments engaged the heaviest loss fell upon the 159th New York, in which the nominal lists show 4 officers and 15 men killed, 5 officers and ']■%, men wounded, and 20 men captured or missing; in all 117.' But this fine regiment suffered even more severely than these figures indicate, for besides having to mourn the death of the gallant and promising Draper, Molineux re- ceived a grievous wound that for many weeks deprived the regiment of one of the best colonels in the service, while of the wounded officers two were mortally hurt and died soon afterward. Birge's loss was nearly one man in four or five, for his strength did not exceed 1,500, and it is probable that his fighting line num- bered not more than 1,200. The Confederate loss is not reported. They left on the field, to be cared for by their adversary, 21 of their dead and 35 of their wounded. Among these were Gray, Vincent, and Reily. Taylor gives the number of his infantry engaged ' According to the regimental history (MS.), 4 officers and 22 men killed ; 5 officers and 76 men wounded ; ii men missing; in all, iiS : of the wounded. 2 officers and 10 men mortally. ii8 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. in the charge on Birge's right as less than i,ooo. The disparity of the opposing forces in that affair was, therefore, not important, and Birge's somewhat greater numbers may fairly be considered as off-set by the advantages of Taylor's position and the famil- iarity with the country common to nearly all the Confederate soldiers there engaged, while to their antagonists it was an unknown land. Grover's whole force was about 5,000, of all arms, but of these, though all are to be taken into account, nearly a third were in reserve, neither firing nor under fire, while another third met a resistance so light that its loss was no more than one per cent, of its numbers hardly more than it had suffered in the skirmishes of the day before. Grover had eighteen pieces of artil- lery, of which but four were in action ; Taylor also had four gun? of which he made good use, and these, toward the close of the battle, were reinforced by the five heavy guns of the Dia^m, of which, however, it is probable that but one, or at most two, could be brought to bear. The field of battle was so contracted that Taylor's strength sufficed to occupy its front, while Grover was hindered or prevented from deploying a force large enough to outflank and crush his antagonist at a blow. Viewed from a Confederate standpoint, the issue forms an instructive example of the great results that may be achieved by a right use of small forces. If, on the other hand, one turns to consider the lost opportunity of Grover, two things stand out in strong relief : the one, the positive disadvantage of employ- ing forces too large for the affair in hand or for the scene of operations ; the other, that bold adventures must be carried boldly to the end. IRISH BEND. 1 19 Instead of making the campaigTi with four brigades and twenty-four guns, as Weitzel's original plan had contemplated, Banks, for greater security, set out with seven brigades and fifty-six guns. So far as concerned the main body ascending the Teche, this excess of strength could do no harm, but it was otherwise with the turning column by the lake ; for to the needless augmentation of the artillery were directly due not only the day and night first lost, but also the still more pre- cious hours of daylight consumed in landing guns that were not to fire a shot. Two brigades of infantry, with six guns at most, landing at Indian Bend, and march- ing directly toward the Cypremort, and quickly en- trenching across both roads at or near their upper fork, would have been enough to hold the position against the best efforts of the whole of Taylor's army, with Emory close on their heels ; and thus Taylor must have been lost and the war in Western Louisiana brought to an end. Consequences many and far- reaching would have followed. Moreover, when it was determined to use more than two divisions one of these was naturally Grover's, and thus it happened that to Grover, who knew nothing of the countr}^ was assigned the delicate duty first cut out for Weit- zel, while Weitzel, who had studied to the last point every detail of the topography and of the plan, stayed behind as the third in command of the column des- tined to butt its nose against the breastworks of Bis- land and wait for the real work to be done a day's march on their farther side. Grover has been often criticised and much misun- derstood for alleged over-caution and for taking the wrong direction after quitting the borders of the lake. Both criticisms are unjust. Generals, like other men. I20 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. act according to their temperaments. In the whole war no braver man than Grover ever rode at the head of a division, nor any more zealous, more alert, more untiring in his duty. No troops of his ever went into battle but he was with them. But he was by nature cautious, and the adventure was essentially one that called for boldness. Moreover, he was by nature conscientious. That his orders, based as they were on misinformation of a date much later than Weitzel's intelligence, required him to land at Irish Bend instead of at Indian Bend, as first arranged, and to march on Franklin instead of toward the Cypremort, was not his affair. Surely no soldier is to be blamed, least of all in combined and complex operations, for choosing to obey the clearly expressed orders of those set over him, rather than to follow the illusory inspirations of the will-o'-the-wisp commonly mistaken for genius. As for the orders themselves, they were correct upon the information at hand when they were given and the state of affairs then existing. To land at Madame Porter's and to seize the roads at Franklin was better than to go farther afield to gain the same end ; for the distance was less, and while on the march Grover was enabled to offer his front instead of his flank to the enemy. But the information proved inexact ; when Madame Porter's road was tried it was found impassable, and with this and the unfore- seen delays it happened that the orders became in- applicable.

## opelousas-vermilion

CHAPTER XII. OPELOUSAS. Cooke, after detaching the Clifton to go up the Teche after the Diana, as already related, remained at anchor in Grand Lake opposite Grover's landing- place and awaited developments. He had not long to wait. The first news of Banks's movement across Berwick Bay had overtaken and recalled Taylor on his way up the Atchafalaya to bring down the Queen of the West and her consorts, the Grand DiLke and Mary T, to join in the intended operations against Weitzel. Although Taylor at once sent a staff officer to urge despatch, yet from some cause more than two full days had passed before, on the afternoon of the 13th, the distant smoke of the Confederate gun-boats coming down Lake Chicot was seen by the lookouts of the Union navy in Grand Lake. At daylight the Queen of the West and the Mary T, were seen approaching from Chicot Pass. Cooke at once got the Estrella, Calhoun, and Arizona under way, opened fire at long range, and forming his boats in a crescent began to close with the enemy. Soon, however, the Queen of the West was seen to be in flames, from the explosion of the Union shells, and, her consort having promptly taken to flight, Cooke ceased firing and lowered all his boats to save the crew of the burning vessel from drowning. Captain Fuller, who had formerly com- 122 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. manded the Cotton, was rescued with 90 of his men, but nearly 30 were lost. Then with a loud explosion the eventful career of the Queen of the West came to an end, leaving her five guns, however, once more in the hands of the Union navy. This fortunate stroke gave the mastery of the Atchafalaya into Cooke's hands with nothing save Butte-a-la-Rose and two feeble gunboats to hinder his taking possession. Once safely across the Cypremort, Taylor's army began to melt away and his men, as they passed their homes, to fall out without hindrance. Many were of the simple class called Acadians, with scant sympa- thy for either side of the great war into which they found themselves drawn, and in all the regiments there were many conscripts. On the 15th of April, Taylor marched ten miles to New Iberia. While there, he had the unfinished ironclad gunboat Stevens, previously known as the Hart, floated two miles down the Teche, destroyed by fire, and the wreck sunk in the channel. On the 1 6th he marched twenty miles, crossed the Vermilion River, went into camp on the high ground on the north bank, and burned the bridges behind him. Early in the morning of the 15th of April, Banks took up the pursuit with his united force, now out- numbering Taylor's as three to one. Weitzel led the advance of the main column on the direct road. Emory followed him, and Grover marching at first on the bayou road fell in the rear after passing the fork. The army halted for the night at Jeannerette. On the following afternoon Banks entered New Iberia. Here the ways parted, the right-hand road by Saint Martinsville following for many miles the OPELOUSAS. 123 windings of the Teche, while the left-hand road leads almost directly to Opelousas, by way of Vermilion- ville, now called Lafayette. Beyond Indian Bend the lowlands, in many places below and nowhere much above the level of the adjacent waters, may be said to end and the plains to begin ; and soon after leaving New Iberia and Saint Martinsville the troops found themselves on the broad prairies of Western Louisiana, where the rich grasses that flourish in the light soil sustain almost in a wild state vast herds of small yet fat beeves and of small yet strong horses ; where in favored spots the cotton plant is cultivated to advantage ; where the ground, gently undulating, gradually rises as one travels northward ; where the streams become small rivers that drain the land upon their borders, instead of merely bayous taking the back waters of the Mississippi and the Red. Near the right bank of the Teche runs even a narrow ribbon of bluffs that may be said to form the western margin of the great swamps of the Atchafalaya. Along the streams live- oaks, magnolias, pecans, and other trees grow luxuri- antly ; but, for the most part, the prairies are open to the horizon, and at this time, thoueh the orin-houses were full of cotton, the fields were mainly given over to the raising of corn for the armies and the people of the Confederacy. From New Iberia Banks ordered Grover to send a detachment to destroy the famous Avery salt-works, on Petit Anse Island, distant about twelve miles toward the southwest. On the 17th of April, Grover accord- ingly despatched Kimball on this errand, with his 1 2th Maine, the 41st Massachusetts, one company of the 24th Connecticut, and Snow's section of Nims's 124 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. battery. This extremely rich natural deposit of rock salt was, at that time, in the hands of the Confederate government, being, indeed, the main source of supply of this indispensable article for the whole Confederacy, especially for the region between the Mississippi and the Atlantic. The works required for its extraction are, however, very simple, for the deposit lies close to the surface, and has only to be quarried in blocks of convenient size. These, always as clear and beautiful as crystal, have only to be crushed or broken to be ready for use for common purposes, and when pul- verized, however rudely, yield the finest table salt. Kimball burned all the buildings, destroyed the engines and implements, with six hundred barrels of salt, and marched back to New Iberia, and, on the 19th, rejoined Grover on the Vermilion. The Con- federates having drawn off the detachment and the guns previously posted to guard the works, Kimball met with no opposition. On the 17th of April, Grover, with the main body of his division, reinforced by Gooding's brigade, tem- porarily commanded by Colonel John \V. Kimball, of the 53d Massachusetts, continued the pursuit toward Vermilion, while Banks, with Weitzel and Emory, marched to Saint Martinsville, on the Teche. Early in the afternoon Grover caught sight of Green's rear-guard of Taylor's retreating forces, then about two miles distant, and in the act of crossing the Vermilion. Before Grover could overtake them, the bridges were in flames. Dwight's skirmishers deployed on the right and left of the road, and, with the help of the guns of Closson and Nims, drove off the enemy, posted to hinder or prevent the work of reconstruction. In this affair Dwieht lost one killed OPELOUSAS. 125 and five wounded. The next day, the iSth of April, was spent by Grover in rebuilding the main bridge. Then began to be felt the need of such a force of mounted troops as on these plains formed the main strength of Taylor's little army, and the source of its safety ; for Banks's cavalry, taken as a whole, with some splendid exceptions, was at this time greatly inferior, not only in numbers but in fitness for the work in hand, to the rough riders led by the restless and indomitable Green. A few more horsemen, under leaders like Barrett, Williamson, and Perkins, would have saved the bridge and insured the dispersion or the destruction of Taylor's force. Weitzel, who, as far as Saint Martinsville, had led the advance of the main column, followed by Emory with Paine and Ingraham, there took the road to the left and halted on the evening of the 17th of April at Cote Gelee, four miles in the rear of Grover. The next morning Weitzel moved up to Grover's support, while Banks, with Emory, rested at Cote Gelee to await the rebuilding of the bridge.
