# Duke: History of Morgan's Cavalry, Ohio raid selections, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a New York Public Library scan; not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers and a garbled illustration caption. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages only; page locators refer to unverified OCR page markers. Diaries, newspapers and conversations quoted or reported by Duke are not separately inspected originals.

## title-and-preface

H 1 s r O R Y MORGAN'S CAVALRY, By basil W. duke. CINCINNATI: MIAMI FEINTING AND PUBLISHING- COMPANY, CORNER BEDINGF.R STREET AND MIAMI CANAL. 18 6 7. , 156319 ''''IONS. Entered according to Act of Congress in the year eighteen hundred and sixty-siX; By MRS. HENRIETTA MORGAN, In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of Kentucky, at Covington. TO THE WOMEX OF KENTUCKY, FKIEXDS AXD RELATIVES OF THE GALLANT MEN WHOSE HEROISM HAS BECOME PART OF THE HISTORIC HERITAGE OF THE STATE, AND WHOSE KIXDXESS ALLEVIATED THE HARDSHIPS WHICH THESE MEX SO LOXG EXDURED. AND FOR WHOSE SAKE THEY WERE PROUD TO SUFFER AND BLEED. THIS BOOK IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED. PREFACE. TIIIE writer presents to the reading public the narrative of an arduous and adventurous military career, which, commencing at a period but little subsequent to the outbreak of the late civil war. continued through the four eventful years. He luxs endeavored to make the work a correct and graphic representa- tion of the kind of warfare of which Morgan was the autiior, and in which his men won so much celebrity. Strict accuracj' has been attempt- ed in the description of the military operations of which the book is a record, and it is hoped that the incidents related of personal daring and adventure will be read with some interest. The author regrets that, for reasons easily understood, the book is far less complete than he desired to make it. Tlie very activity of the ser- vice performed by Morgan's Cavalry prevented the preservation of data which would be very valuable, and a full account of many imi:)ortant operations is therefore impossible. Limited space, also, forbids the men- tion of many brave deeds. If many gallant and deserving men were noticed as they deserve, the book could not be readily finished. To the friends whose contributions assisted the work, the author returns his warmest thanks. To Mr. Meade "Woodsox, to whom he is indebted for the maps which so perfectly illustrate his narrative, he is especially grateful. He regrets, too, that many of his old comrades have altogether failed to render him aid, confidently expected, and which would have bf^cn very valuable B. W. D.

## plan-of-raid

This was the greatest of all his "raids," the one known as the "Ohio raid." Although it resulted disastrously to his own command, it had a great influence upon the pending campaign between Bragg and Rosecrans, and greatly assisted the former. It was beyond all comparison the grandest enter- prise he ever planned, and the one Avhich did most honor to his genius. The military situation in Tennessee, at that time, may be briefly described : General Bragg's array lay around Tullahoma, his cavalry covering his front and stretching far out upon both wings. General Buckner was in East Tennessee, with a force entirely inadequate to the defense of that important region. General 408 HISTORY OF morgan's CAVALRY. Bragg, confronted by Rosecrans with a vastly su23erior force, dared not detach troops to strengthen Buckner. The latter could not still further weaken his small force by sending aid to General Braffgr — if the latter should need it. General Burnside was preparing (in Kentucky), a force, variously estimated, at from fifteen to more than thirty thousand men, for the invasion of East Tennessee. AVith this force he could easily drive out Buckner. It was estimated that at various points in Southern Kentucky, Bowlinggreen, Glasgow, and along the Cumberland river — and at Carthage in Tennessee, and other points in that vicinity, there were from eight to twelve thousand Federal troops — the greater part of them under the command of a General Judah, whose headquarters were at Glasgow. Of these forces, some five thousand were excellent cavalry. General Judah's official papers (captured on the Ohio raid), gave the exact strength of his forces, but I have forgotten it. There was pes'fect unanimity of opinion (among the Confed- erate officers), about the plan and method of the anticipated Federal movement. Rosecrans (all believed), would press hard upon General Bragg — Burnside, simultaneously, or as soon af- terward as was practicable, would move against Buckner. Judah's force could be used to keep open direct communication between these two armies, and also as a reserve. When the ad- vance was fairly inaugurated, Judah, who in the meantime might guard against the raids of our cavalry, could be concentrated and moved through Burkesville, Livingston and Sparta — turning then, if General Bragg staid to fight, upon the right flank of the army at Tallahoma — or, if General Bragg retreated, pressing down through the Sequatchie valley to Chattanooga. A junc- tion of all these forces, it was thought, would be made, and the Confederate army would then confront a host too formidable to be beaten. This was the belief which prevailed in our army regarding the intentions of the enemy. It may have been incorrect — the feature, which we of Morgan's cavalry especially dwelt upon, to- BRAGG OPPOSED TO OHIO RAID. 409 wit, the part, in the supposed programme, to be phiyed by Ju- dah, may have been altogether uncontemplated — perhaps he was not a man capable of having executed it. But whatever may have been the Federal plan of the campaign, it is certain that terrible dangers menaced the army of General Bragg, and all the salient points of his department. General Bragg regarded the peril Avith just apprehension — he took in its full proportions. He decided and (as was conceded by all who understood the situation), with good and sufficient reasons, to retreat beyond the Tennessee river, and then some- where near Chattanooga, turning upon his foes, fight the battle which had to be delivered for the protection of his department. But that retreat would be very hazardous. He was right in the path of the avalanche, and the least movement upon his part might precipitate it upon him. The difficulty and danger of crossing the Tennessee, with Rosecrans hard upon his rear, would be greatly augmented, if these other Federal forces were poured down upon his flank. General Bragg, it may be repeated, knew how to use, and in- variably used, his cavalry to good purpose, and in this emer- gency he resolved to employ some of it to divert from his own hazardous movement, and fasten upon some other quarter, the attention of a portion of the opposing forces. He hoped, not only to give them enough to do, to prevent them from an- noying and endangering his retreat, but, also, to draw off a part of their forces from the great battle which he expected to fight. He selected Morgan as the officer who should accomplish this design. In the conference between them, General Morgan expressed a perfect confidence in his ability to effect all that was desired of him, but dissented from General Bragg in one important par- ticular. The latter wished him to confine himself to Kentucky — giving him carte blanche to go wherever he pleased in that State, and urging him to attempt the capture of Louisville. General ^lor- gaTi declared, that, while he could by a dash into Kentucky and 410 HISTORY OF morgan's CAVALRY. a march through that State, protect General Bragg's withdrawal from the position his army then held, he could not thus accom- plish the other equally important feature of the plan, and draw off troops which ■S'ould otherwise strengthen Rosecrans for the decisive hattle. A raid into Kentucky would keep Judah busy, and hold Burn- sides fast until it was decided, but, he contended it would be decided very soon, and he would be driven out or cut to pieces in a few days, leaving the Federal forces so disposed that they could readily commence their previously determined operations. A raid into Indiana and Ohio, .on the contrary, he contended, would dra\v all the troops in Kentucky after him, and keep them employed for weeks. Although there might be sound military reasons why Judah and Burnsides should not follow him, but should stick to what the Confederate officers deemed the original programme of Rosecrans, General Morgan urged, that the scare and the clamor in the States he proposed to invade, Avould be so great, that the military leaders and the administration would be compelled to furnish the troops that would be called for. He thought that, even if he lost his command, he could greatly benefit General Bragg by crossing the Ohio river and only in that way. General Bragg refused him permission to make the raid as he desired to make it and ordered him to confine himself to Ken- tucky. I was not present at the interview between them, but General Morgan told me that General Bragg had ordered him to operate in Kentucky, and further stated that he intended, not- withstanding his orders, to cross the Ohio. I do not mean to justify his disobedience of orders, but simply to narrate the facts as I learned them, and to explain General Morgan's ideas regarding the movement, which were definite and fixed. This expedition into the Northwestern States had long been a favorite idea with him and was but the practical development of his the- ory of the proper way to make war, to-wit: by going deep into the country of the enemy. He had for several weeks foreseen STARTIXU ON THE RAID. 411 the necessity of some such diversion in General Bragg's behalf, and believed that the period for the accomplishment of his great desire was at hand. He had ordered me, three weeks previously, to send intelli- gent men to examine the fords of the upper Ohio — that at Buf- fington among them — and it is a fact, of which others, as well as myself, are cognizant, that he intended — long before he crossed the Ohio — to make no effort to recross it, except at some of these fords, unless he found it more expedient, when he reached that region, to join General Lee, if the latter should still be in Pennsylvania. Never had I been so impressed with General Morgan's re- markable genius — his wonderful faculty of anticipating the exact effect his action would have upon all other men and of calculating their action — his singular power of arriving at a correct estimate of the nature and capacities of a country, which he knew only by maps and the most general description — and the perfect accu- racy with which he could foretell the main incidents of a march and campaign — as when he would briefly sketch his plan of that raid. All who heard him felt that he was right in the main, and although some of us were filled with a grave apprehension, from the first, we felt an inconsistent confidence when listening to him. He did not disguise from himself the great dangers he encountered, but was sanguine of success. As it turned out, only the unprecedented rise in the Ohio caused his capture — he had avoided or had cut his way through all other dangers.

## initial-strength

Our entire strength was twenty- four hundred and sixty effective men — the first brigade number- ing fourteen hundred and sixty, the second one thousand. This, however, was exclusive of artillery, of which we had four pieces — a section of three-inch Parrots attached to the first brigade, and a section of twelve-pound howitzers attached to the second.

## garnettsville

On the afternoon of the 7th, the column halted at Garnetts- ville, in Hardin county, and went into camp. It has been fre- quently surmised, in the North, that Morgan crossed the Ohio river to escape from Hobson. Of all the many wildly and ut- LOATHING FOR SOUTHERN RENEGADES. 429 terlj absurd ideas Avliich have prevailed regarding the late war, this is. perhaps, the most preposterous. It is difficult to under- stand how, even the people whose ideas of military operations are derived from a vague rendition of the newspaper phrases of "bagging"' armies, " dispositions made to capture," " deriving material advantages," when the derivers were running like scared deer, it is hard to comprehend how even such people, if they ever look upon maps, or reflect for a moment upon what they read, can receive, as correct, such assertions as the one under consideration. Hobsoii was from twenty-four to thirty- six hours behind us. He was pursuing us, it should be stated, with the cavalry of Judah's corps — he was, at any rate, a good fifty miles in our rear, and could learn our track only by follow- ing it closely. General Morgan, if anxious to escape Ilobson, and actuated by no other motive, would have turned at Bards- town, and gone out of Kentucky through the western part of the State, Avhere he would have encountered no hostile force that he could not have easily repulsed. It was not too late to pursue the same general route when we were at Garnettsville. Roads, traversable by artillery and excellent for cavalry, ran thence in every direction. Hobson would have had as little chance to intercept us, as a single hunter has to corner a wild horse in an open prairie. To rush across the Ohio river, as a means of escape, would have been the choice of an idiot, and yet such conduct has been ascribed to the shrewdest, most wide- awake, most far-seeing Captain (in his own chosen method of warfare), the greatest master of " cavalry strategy," that ever lived. That military men in the North should have entertained this o[)inion, proves, only, that in armies so vast, as that which the United St.ites put into the field, there must necessarily be many men of very small capacity. General Morgan certainly believed that he could, with energy and care, preserve his com- mand from capture after crossing the Ohio, but he no more be- lieved that it would be safer, after having gained the Northern 430 HISTORY OF morgan's cavalry. side of the river, tlian he believed that it was safer in Kentucky than south of the Gutuberhmd.

## crossing-and-corydon

Just before the crossing of the river was commenced, an un- expected fusillade was delivered, from the Indiana shore, upon the men who showed themselves in the little town and upon the boats, which was soon followed by the sharp report of a rifled- 432 HISTORY OF morgan's cavalry; cannon. The river at this point is some eight hundred or a thousand yards wide — and tlie musketry produced no effect. The shell, however, from the piece of artillery pitched into a group on the river bank, scattering it, and wounding Captain Wilson, Quartermaster of the First Brigade. The mist, hanging thick over the river, had prevented us from seeing the p;irties who directed this firing, take position. Soon the mist lifted or w;is dispersed by the bright sun, and disclosed a squad of combatants posted behind one or two small houses, a clump of hay stacks, and along the brink of the river on the other side. Apparently, from the mixture of uniforms and plain clothes, which could be discovered by the glass, this force was composed of militia and some regular troops. Several shots were fired from the gun while Ave were getting our pieces in readiness to reply — but as ■ soon as Lawrence opened upon them with his Parrots, a manifest disposition to retire was seen among our friends who had shown themselves so anxious to give us a wai-m and early welcome. They attempted to carry the piece of artillery off with them, but were induced by Lawrence to relinquish it. It was mounted upon the wheels of a wagon from which the body had been re- moved, and, as they moved it by hand, its transportation was difficult and tedious and very disagreeable under fire. Leaving the piece, they fell back to a Avooded ridge five or six hundred yards from the river bank and parallel with it. The Second Kentucky and Ninth Tennessee were irame(.liately put across the river, leaving their horses on the Kentucky shore, and were formed under the bluff bank. As they ascended the bank they were greeted by a volley from the enemy which did no damage, and Colonel Ward and Major Webber at once pressed them on toAvard the ridge. Scarcely had the boats returned, and while yet the two regiments on the other side Avere moving across the open fields between the river and the ridge, Avhen a small boat Avhich had for some minutes been in sight, steaming rapidly doAvn the river, began to take a part in the affair. We had Avatched her with great interest, and were inclined to think. CROSSING THE OHIO. 433 from her bold unhesitating advance, that she was a river gun- boat, and Avhen she came Avithin a mile of the tovm all doubts upon the subject were dispelled. Suddenly checking her way, she tossed her snub nose defiantly, like an angry beauty of the coal-pits, sidled a little toward the town, and commenced to scold. A bluish-white, funnel-shaped cloud spouted out from her left- hand bow and a shot flew at the town, and then chanirino; front forward, she snapped a shell at the men on the other side. The .ridge was soon gained by the regiments, however, the enemy not remaining to contest it, and they were sheltered by it from the gun-boat's fire. I wish I were sufficiently master of nautical phraseology to do justice to this little vixen's style of fighting, but she was so unlike a horse, or a piece of light artillery, even, that I can not venture to attempt it. She was boarded up tightly with tiers of heavy oak planking, in which embrasures were cut for the guns, of which she carried three bronze twelve-pounder howitzers, apparently. Captain Byrnes transferred the two Parrots to an eminence just upon the river and above the town, and answered her fire. His solid shot skipped about her, in close proximity, and his shells burst close to her, but none seemed to touch her — although it was occasionally hard to tell whether she was hit or not. This duel was watched with the most breathless interest by the whole division ; the men crowded in intense excitement upon the bluffs, near the town, to witness it, and General Morgan exhibited an emotion he rarely permitted to be seen. Two of his best regiments were separated from him by the broad river, and were dismounted, a condition which always ap- peals to a cavalryman's strongest sympathies ; they might at any moment, he feared, be attacked by overwhelming forces, for he did not know what was upon the other side, or how large a swarm Ilines had stirred up in the hornet's nest. He himself might be attacked, if delayed too long, by the enemy that he well knew must be following his track. Independently of all considerations of immediate danger, he was impatient at delay 28 434 HISTORY OF M0R(5AN's CAVALRY. and anxious to try his fortune in the new fiehl he had selected. There were many with him who coukl appreciate his feelings. Behind us two broad States separated us from our friends — a multitude of foes, although we thought little of them, were gathering in our rear. On the other side of the great river were our comrades needing our aid, perhaps never to be received. When we, too, were across, we would stand face to face with the hostile and angiy North — an immense and infuriated population, and a sol- diery out-numbering us twenty to one, would confront us. Tel- egraph lines, tracing the country in every direction, would tell constantly of our movements ; railways would bring assailants against us from every quarter, and we would have to run this gauntlet, night and day, without rest or one moment of safety, for six hundred miles. As we looked on the river, rolling be- fore us, Ave felt that it divided us from a momentous future, and we were eager to learn our fate. After an hour perhaps had elapsed, but which seemed a dozen, the gunboat backed out and steamed up the river. Her shells had nearly all burst short, doing no damage. The boats were put to work again without a moment's delay, to ferry the command over. First, the horses of the men on the other side were carried to them, affording them exquisite gratification. Although no time was lost, and the boats were of good capacity, it was nearly dark before the first brigade was all across. The gunboat returned about five p. M., accompanied by a consort, but a few shots from the Par- rots, Avhich had been kept in position, drove them away without any intermission having occurred in the ferriage. The second brigade and the artillery were gotten across by midnight. One of the boats, which was in Government employ, was burned; the other was released. The first brigade encamped that night about six miles from the river. "A great fear" had fallen upon the inhabitants of that part of the State of Indiana. They had left their houses, with open doors and unlocked larders, and had fled to the CAPTURE OF COKYDOX AND SALEM. 435 thickets and "caves of the hills." At the houses at which I stopped, every thing was just in the condition in which the fu- gitive owners had left it, an hour or two before. A bright fire was blazing upon the kitchen hearth, bread half made up was in the tray, and many indications convinced us that we had inter- rupted preparations for supper. The chickens were strolling before the door with a confidence that was touching, but mis- placed. General Morgan rode by soon afterward, and was in- duced to " stop all night." We completed the preparations, so suddenly abandoned, and made the best show for Indiana hos- pitality that was possible under the disturbing circumstances. On the next day, the 9th, the division marched at an early hour, the second brigade in advance. At the little town of Corydon, Colonel Morgan's advance guard found a body of militia posted behind rail barricades. He charged them, but they resolutely defended their rail piles, killing and wounding several men, among the latter Lieutenant Thorpe, of Company A, Second Kentucky, Colonel Morgan's acting Adjutant, and a very fine young ofiicer. A demonstration was made upon the flank of the enemy, by one regiment of the second brigade, and Colonel Morgan again advanced upon their front, when, not un- derstanding such a fashion of fighting upon two or three sides at once, the militia broke and ran, with great rapidity, into the town, their progress accelerated (as they got fairly into the streets) by a shot dropped among them from one of the pieces. Passing through Corydon, we took the Salem road, and en- camped some sixteen or eighteen miles from the latter place.

## buffington

The road we were traveling runs for several miles at no great distance from the town of Pomeroy, which is situated on the Ohio river. Many bye-roads run from the main one into the town, and at the mouths of these roads we always found the enemy. The road runs, also, for nearly five miles through a ravine, and steep hills upon each side of it. These hills were occupied, at various points, by the enemy, and we had to run the gauntlet. Colonel Grigsby took the lead with the Sixth Kentucky, and dashed through at a gallop, halt- ing when fired on, dismounting his men and dislodging the enemy, and again resuming his rapid march. Major Webber brought up the rear of the division and held back the enemy, who closed eagerly upon our track. About 1 o'clock of that day we reached Chester and halted, for an hour and a half, to enable the column to close up, to breathe the horses, and also to obtain a guide, if possible (Gen- eral Morgan declaring that he would no longer march without one). That halt proved disastrous — it brought us to Buffington ford after night had fallen, and delayed our attempt at crossing until the next morning. Before quitting Ohio, it is but just to acknowledge the kind hospitality of these last two days. At every house that we ap- proached, the dwellers thereof, themselves absent, perhaps un- able to endure a meeting that would have been painful, had left warm pies, freshly baked, upon the tables. This touching at- tention to our tastes was appreciated. Some individuals were indelicate enough to hint that the pies were intended to propi- tiate us and prevent the plunder of the houses. We reached Portland, a little village upon the bank of the river, and a short distance above Buffington Island, about 8 P. M., and the night was one of solid darkness. General Morgan consulted one or two of his officers upon the propriety of at once attacking an earthwork, throw^n up to guard the ford. From all the information he could gather, this work was manned ARRIVAL AT BUFFIXGToN. 447 with about three hundrcil infantry — rcguhir troops — and two heavy guns were mounted in it. Our arrival at this phice after dark had involved us in a dilemma. If we did not cross the rivor that night, there was every chance of our being attacked on the next day by heavy odds. The troops we had seen at Pomeroy were, we at once and correctly conjectured, a portion of the infantry which had been sent after us from Kentucky, and they had been brought by the river, which had risen several feet in the previous week, to intercept us. If transports could pass Pomeroy, the General knew that they could also run up to the bar at Buffington Island. The transports would cer- tainly be accompanied by gun-boats, and our crossing could have been prevented by the latter alone, because our artillery ammunition was nearly exhausted — there was not more than three cartridges to the piece, and we could not have driven off gun-boats with small arms. Moreover, if it was necessary, the troops could march from Pomeroy to Buffington by an excellent road, and reach the latter place in the morning. This they did* General Morgan fully appreciated these reasons for getting across the river that night, as did those with whom he advised, but there were, also, very strong reasons against attacking the work at night; and without the capture of the work, which commanded the ford, it would be impossible to cross. The night, as I have stated, was thoroughly dark. Attacks in the dark are always hazardous experiments — in this case it Avould have been doubly so. We knew nothing of the ground, and could not procure guides. Our choice of the direction in which to move to the attack would have been purely guess work. The defenders of the work had only to lie still and fire with artillery and musketry directly to their front, but the assailants would have had a line to preserve, and would have had to exercise great care lest they should fall foul of each other in the ob- scurity. If this is a difficult business at all times, how much is the danger and trouble increased when it is attempted Avith broken-down and partially demoralized men ? 448 HISTORY OF MOKGAN's CAVALRY. General Morgan feared, too, that if the attacking party "was repulsed, it would come back in such disorder and panic that the -whole division would be seriously and injuriously affected. He determined, therefore, to take the work at early dawn and in- stantly commence the crossing, trusting that it would be effected rapidly and before the enemy arrived. By abandoning the long train of wagons which had been collected, the wounded men, and the artillery, a crossing might have been made, with little difficulty, higher up the river at deeper fords, y/hich we could have reached by a rapid march before the enemy came near them. But General Morgan was determined (after having already hazarde'd so much) to save all if possible, at the risk of losing all. He ordered me to place two regiments of my brigade in position, as near the earthwork as I thought proper, and attack it at daybreak. I accordingly selected the Fifth and Sixth Kentucky, and formed them about four hundred yards from the work, or from the point where I judged it to be located. Lieu- tenant Lawrence was also directed to place his Parrots upon a tongue of land projecting northward from a range of hills run- ning parallel with the river. It was intended that he should assist the attacking party, if, for any reason, artillei-y should be needed. Many efforts were made, during the night, to find other fords, but unsuccessfully. As soon as the day dawned, the Fifth and Sixth Kentucky were moved against the work, but found it unoccupied. It had been evacuated during the night. Had our scouts, posted to observe it, been vigilant, and had this evacuation, which oc- curred about two P. M., been discovered and reported, we could have gotten almost the entire division across before the troops coming from Pomeroy arrived. The guns in the work had been dismounted and rolled over the bluff. I immediately sent Gen. INIoriian information of the evacuation of the work, and instructed Colonel Smith to take command of the two regiments and move some four or five hundred yards further on the Pomeroy road, by which I supposed that the garrison had retreated. In a few FIGHT AT BUFFINGTON. 449 minutes I hoard the rattle of musketry in the direction that the regiments had moved, and riding forward to ascertain what oc- casioned it, found that Colonel Smith hiid unexpectedly come upon a Federal force advancing upon this road. He attacked and dispersed it, taking forty or fifty prisoners and a piece of artillery, and killing and wounding several. This force turned out to be General Judah's advance guard, and his command was reported to be eight or ten thousand strong, and not fiir off. Among the wounded was one of his staff, and his Adjutant- General was captured. I instructed Colonel Smith to bring the men back to the ground where they had been formed to attack the work, and rode mj^self to consult General Morgan and re- ceive his orders. He instructed me to hold the enemy in check, and call for such troops as I might need for that purpose. This valley which we had entered the night before, and had bivouacked in, was about a mile long, and perhaps eight hundred yards wide at the southern extremity (the river runs here nearly due north and south), and gradually narrows toward the other end, until the ridge, which is its western boundary, runs to the water's edge. This ridge is parallel with the river at the southern end of the valley, but a few hundred yards farther to the northward both river and ridge incline toward each other. About half way of the valley (equi-distant from either end) the road, by which we had marched from Chester, comes in. Colonel Smith had posted his men, in accordance with direc- tions given him, at the southern extremity of the valley, with the ridge upon his right flank. At this point the ridge, I should also state, bends almost at right angles to the westward. As I returned from consultation with General Morgan, I found both of the regiments under Colonel Smith in full retreat. When the main body of the enemy (which was now close upon us) ap- peared, an order had been issued by some one to " rally to horses." While doing this, the line was charged by the enemy's cavalry, of which they had three regiments, two of them, the Seventh and Eighth Michigan, were very fine ones. A detachment of 29 450 HISTORY OF morgan's CAVALRY. the Fifth Indiana (led by a very gallant officer, Lieutenant O'Neil) headed this charge. The men rallied and turned, as soon as called on to do so, and had no difficulty in driving back the cavalry, but a portion of the Fifth Kentucky was cut off by this charge, and did not take part in the fight which succeeded. These two regiments were not more than two hundred and fifty strong each, and they were dismounted again, and formed across the valley. The Parrot guns had been captured, and, although our line was formed close to them, they were not again in our pos- session. I sent several couriers to General Morgan, askino; for the Second Kentucky, a portion of Avhich I wished to post upon the ridge, and I desired to strengthen the thin, weak line with the remainder. Colonel's Johnson's rear videttes (still kept during the night upon the Chester road) had a short time previously been driven in, and he had formed his brigade to receive the enemy coming from that direction. Colonel Johnson offered me a detachment of his own brigade with which to occupy the part of the ridge immediately upon my right — the necessity of holding it was immediately apparent to him. Believing that the Second Kentucky would soon arrive, I declined his offer. The force advancing upon the Chester road was General Hob- son's, which our late delays had permitted to overtake us. Neither Judah nor Hobson was aware of the other's vicinity, until apprised of it by the sound of their respective guns. We could not have defeated either alone, for Judah was several thousand strong, and Hobson three thousand. We were scarcely nineteen hundred strong, and our ammunition was nearly ex- hausted— either shot away or worn out in the pouches or cart- ridge-boxes. The men, had on an average, not more than five rounds in their boxes. If, however, either Judah or Hobson had attacked us singly, we could have made good our retreat, in order, and with little loss. The attack commenced from both directions, almost simulta- neously, and at the same time the gun- boats steamed up and commenced shelling us without fear or favor. I heartily wished FEARFUL ODDS. 451 that their fierce ardor, the result of a feeling of perfect security, could have been subjected to the test of two or three shots through their hulls. They were working, as well as I could judge, five or six guns, Hobson two, and Judah five or six. The shells coming thus from three different directions, seemed to fill the air with their fragments. Colonel Johnson's line, con- fronting Hobson, was formed at right angles to mine, and upon the level and unsheltered surface of the valley, each was equally exposed to shots aimed at the other. In addition to the infantry deployed in front of my line, the ridge upon the right of it was soon occupied by one of the Michigan regiments, dismounted and deployed as skirmishers. The peculiar formation we were forced to adopt, exposed our entire force engaged to a severe cross fire of musketry. The Second Kentucky and Ninth Ten- nessee, of the first brigade, were not engaged at all — nor the Eight and Eleventh Kentucky, of the second brigade. These regiments, however, were as completely under fire, in the com- mencement of the action, afs were the others which were pro- tecting the retreat. The scene in the rear of the lines engaged, was one of in- describable confusion. While the bulk of the regiments, which General Morgan was drawing ofi", were moving from the field in perfect order, there were many stragglers from each, who Avere circling about the valley in a delirium of fright, clinging instinc- tively, in all their terror, to bolts of calico and holding on to led horses, but changing the direction in which they galloped, with every shell which whizzed or burst near them. The long train of wagons and ambulances dashed wildly in the only direction which promised escape, and becoming locked and entangled with each other in their flight, many were upset, and terrified horses broke lose from them and plunged wildly through the mass. Some of them in striving to make their way out of the valley, at the northern end, ran foul of the section of howitzers attached to the second brigade, and guns and wagons were rolled head- long into the steep ravine. Occasionally a solid shot or shell 452 HISTORY OF morgan's CAVALRY. would strike one and bowl it over like a tumbled ten-pin. All this shelling did little- damage, and only some t\Yenty-odd men were killed by the musketry — the enemy lost quite as many — but the display of force against us, the cross fire, and our lack of ammunition, seriously disheartened the men, already partially demoralized by the great and unremitted fatigue. The left flank of my line, between which and the river there Avas an interval of at least three hundred yards, was completely turned, and the Sixth Kentucky was almost surrounded. This regiment (under the command of Major William Bullitt, an officer of the calmest and most perfect bravery), behaved nobly. It stood the heavy attack of the enemy like a bastion. At length seeing that General i\Iorgan had gotten out of the valley with the rest of the division. Colonel Johnson and myself, upon consultation, determined to withdraw simultaneously. We had checked this superior force for more than half an hour — which, as much as our assailants boasted of their victory, was quite as good as an equal number of the best of them could have done against such odds. The men were remounted without confusion, and retreated in column of fours from right of companies, and for quite a mile in perfect order. The Sixth Kentucky formed to the "rear into line" three times, and Avith empty guns, kept the pursuing cavalry at bay. But Avhen we neared the other end of the valley and saw that there were but two avenues of escape from it — the men broke ranks and rushed for them. In a moment, each was blocked. The gun-boats sought to rake these roads with grape — and although they aimed too higli to inflict much injury, the hiss of the dreaded missiles increased the panic. The Seventh Michigan soon came up and dashed pell-mell into the crowd of fugitives. Colonel Smith, Captain Campbell, Captain Thorpe, and myself, and some fifty other oflicers and men, were forced by the charsxe of this regiment into a ravine on the left of the road and soon afterward captured. Captain Thorpe saved me from capture at an earlier date, only to ultimately share my fate. INEFFECTUAL EFFORT TO CROSS THE RIVER. 453 He had acted as Adjutant General of the First Brigade, since the detachment of Captain Davis, and had perfn'ined all of his duties with untiring assiduity and perfect efficiency. On this day, there was allowed opportunity for the display of courage only, and for that he Avas ever distinguished. About seven hundred prisoners were taken from us in this fight Among the officers captured were Colonels Ward and Morgan, Lieutenant Colonel Huffman, who was also severely wounded, and Majors Bullock and Bullitt. On the next day, the 20th, we were marched down the river bank some ten miles to the transport which was to take us to Cincinnati, and she steamed off as soon as we were aboard of her. A portion of the Ninth Tennessee had been put across the river, in a small flat, before the fight fairly commenced, and these men, under command of Captain Kirkpatrick, pressed horses and made their escape. Colonel Grigsby and Captain Byrnes also crossed the river here, and succeeded in escaping. Between eleven and twelve hundred men retreated with Gen- eral Morgan, closely pursued by Hobson's cavalry — the indefat- igable Woolford, as usual, in the lead. Some three hundred of the command crossed the river at a point about twenty miles above Buffington. Colonel Johnson and his staff swam the river here and got safely ashore, with the exception of two or three of the latter, who were drowned in the attempt. The arrival of the gun boats prevented the entire force from crossing. General Morgan had gained the middle of the river, and, having a strong horse, could have gained the other shore without difficulty, but seeing that the bulk of his command would be forced to remain on the Ohio side, he returned to it.

## last-days-and-surrender

From this time, for six days, it was a continual race and scramble. That men could have endured it, after the previous exhausting marches, is almost incredible. The brigades were reorganized, Colonel Cluke was placed in command of the second, Major Webber of the first, each was a little more than four hundred strong. " The bold Cluke" had need of all of his audacity and vigor during these six days of trial. It is impossible for the reader to appreciate the true con- dition in which these brave men were placed. Worn down by tremendous and long sustained exertion, encompassed by a mul- titude of foes, and fresh ones springing up in their path at every mile, allowed no rest, but driven on night and day ; attacked, harassed, intercepted at every moment, disheartened by the dis- asters already suffered — how magnificent was the nerve, energy and resolution which enabled them to bear up against all this and struggle so gallantly to the very last against capture. Major Webber had long been suffering from a painful and ex- hausting disease, and when he started upon the raid he could not climb into his saddle without assistance. But he could not en- dure the thought of being absent from such an expedition. He was one of the very best officers in the Confederate cavalry, and his ideas of duty were almost fanatical. All through the long march to Buffington, he rode at the head of the " old regulars," without a murmur escaping his lips to tell of the pain which paled his brave, manly face, but could not bend his erect form. Of his conduct after the Buffington disaster. General Morgan, and his comrades spoke in enthusiastic praise — one officer in de- scribing his unflinching steadiness called him the " Iron man." No description could do justice to these six days, and I will not attempt one. One incident will serve to show how constantly the enemy pressed the command. Once, when there seemed leisure for it, General Morgan called a council of his officers. While it was in session, the enemy were skirmishing with the GETTING OUT OF A TRAP. 456 advance and rear-guards of the column, and were upon both flanks. A bullet struck within two inches of the General's head, while he was courteously listening to an opinion. When the council was closed, General Morgan moved the column back to- ward "Blennerhassett's Island," where he had previously at- tempted to cross the river. Clouds of dust marked his march (although he quitted the main road) and also the track of his enemies, and in that way the exact position of all the columns was known to each. That night he halted with a bold mountain upon one side of him and the enemy on the other three. His pursuers evidently thought that the morning would witness his surrender, for they made no effort to force him to yield that evening. But when night had fairly fallen and the camp fires of his foes were burning brightly, he formed his men, partially ascended the mountain, stole noiselessly and in single file along its rough slope and by midnight was out of the trap, and again working hard for safety. Here is a description from Major Webber's diary, of how General Morgan eluded the enemy posted to ensnare him when he should cross the Muskingum. He had been compelled to drive off a strong force in order to obtain a crossing ; after he had crossed he found himself thus situated. " The enemy had fallen back on all of the roads — guarding each one with a force in ambush much larger than ours — and to make our way through seemed utterly impossible; while Hobson had made his appear- ance with a large force on the opposite bank of the Musking- ham so that to retrace our steps would be ruin. Finding every road strongly guarded, and every hill covered with troops, it would have been impossible for any one except Morgan to have led a column out of such a place, and he did it by what the cit- izens tell us, is the only place which a horse can go ; and that down a narrow pass leading up a narrow spring branch hundreds of feet below the tops of the hills, the perpendicular sides of which pressed closely on our horses as we passed in single file. And then we went up another hill, or rather mountain side, up 456 HISTORY OF morgan's CAVALRY. wliich nobody but a Morgan man could have carried a horse. Up that hill, for at least one thousand feet, we led our tired horses, where it seemed that a goat couldn't climb, until we reached the plain, and were soon in the rear of the enemy and on our road again. Colonel Cluke who was in the rear lost two men killed. In looking around for a place to carry the column. Adjutant S. F. McKee and two of our men ran into an ambuscade, and were fired on, about thirty yards distant, by three hundred men, without striking either of them or their horses." But all this brave, persistent eifort, Avas unavailing. General Morgan maintained his high spirit to the last, and seemed untouched by the weariness which bore down every one else, but he was forced at last to turn at bay, and a fresh disaster on the 2Gth, reducing his command to two hundred and fifty men, and a fresh swarm of enemies gathering ai'ound this remnant, left him no alterna- tive (in justice to his men) but surrender. I may be permitted to mention (with natural pride), that the last charge made upon this expedition, was made by Company C, of my old regiment, the Second Kentucky, the "Regulars." This company had maintained its organization and discipline without any deteriora- tion, although greatly reduced in numbers. In this last fight, it was ordered to charge a body of Federal cavalry, who were dismounted and lay behind a worm fence, firing upon the column with their Spencer rifles. Led by its gallant Captain, llalph Sheldon, one of the best of our best ofiicers, this company dashed down upon the enemy. The tired horses breasted the fence, without being able to clear it, knocking off the top rails. But with their deadly revolvers our boys soon accomplished the mission upon which they were sent. General Morgan surrendered in a very peculiar manner. He had, many days before, heard of the retreat of General Lee, after Gettysburg, from Pennsylvania, and of the fall of Vicks- burg. In at least twenty towns through which we had passed, in Indiana and Ohio, we had witnessed the evidences of the SURRENDER OF COMMAND. 457 illuminations in honor of these events. He feared that, in con- sequence of the great excess of prisoners thus coming in Fed- eral possession, the cartel (providing for the exchange of pri- soners and the paroling of the excess upon either side, Avithin a short period after their capture) -would he broken. lie was anxious, therefove, to surrender "upon terms." Aware that he was not likely to get such terras as he wished, from any officer of the regular troops that were pursuing him, unless he might happen to hit upon Woolford, who was as noted for gen- erosity to prisoners (if he respected their prowess) as for vigor and gallantry in the field, he looked around for some militia officer who might serve his turn. In the extreme eastern part of Ohio (where he now was), he came into the "district" of a Captain Burbeck, who had his militia under arms. General Morgan sent a message to Captain Burbeck, under flag of truce, requesting an interview with him. Burbeck consented to meet him, and, after a short conference. General Morgan concluded a treaty with him, by which he (Morgan) engaged to take and disturb nothing, and do no sort of damage in Burbeck's district, and Burbeck, on his part, covenanted to guide and escort Mor- gan to the Pennsylvania line. After riding a few miles, side by side, with his host. General Morgan, espying a long cloud of dust rolling rapidly upon a course parallel with his own (about a mile distant), and gaining his front, thought it was time to act. So he interrupted a pleasant conversation, by suddenly asking Burbeck how he would like to receive his (Morgan's) surrender. Burbeck answered that it would afford him inexpressible satis- faction to do so. " But," said Morgan, " perhaps you would not give me such terms as I wish." "General Morgan," replied Burbeck, "you might w^rite your own terms, and I would grant them." "Very well, then," said Morgan; "it is a bargain. I will surrender to you." He, accordingly, formally surrendered to Captain Burbeck, of the Ohio militia, upon condition that officers and men Avere to be paroled, the latter retaining their horses, and the former horses and side-arms. When General 458 HISTORY OP morgan's cavalry. Shackleford (Hobson's second in command, and the ofificer who was conducting the pursuit in that immediate region) arrived, he at once disapproved this arrangement, and took measures to prevent its being carried into effect. Some officers who had once been Morgan's prisoners, were anxious that it should be observed, and Woolford generously interested himself to have it done. The terms of this surrender were not carried out. The cartel (as Morgan had anticipated) had been repudiated, and the terms for which he had stipulated, under that apprehension, were repudiated also.

## effects

Although this expedition resulted disastrously, it was, even as a failure, incomparably the most brilliant raid of the entire war. The purposes sought to be achieved by it were grander and more important, the conception of the plan which should regulate it, was more masterly, and the skill with which it was conducted is unparalleled in the history of such aif<iirs. It was no ride across a counti-y stripped of troops, with a force larger than any it should chance to encounter. It was not an expedition started from a point impregnably garrisoned, to dash by a well marked path to another point oc- cupied by a friendly army. It differed from even the boldest of Confederate raids, not only in that it was vastly more ex- tended, but also in the nerve with which the great natural ob- stacles were placed between the little band with which it was undertaken and home, and the unshrinking audacity with which that slight force penetrated into a populous and intensely hos- tile territory, and confidently exposed itself to such tremendous odds, and such overwhelming disadvantages. Over one hundred thousand men were in arms to catch Morgan (although not all employed at one time and place), and every advantage in the way of transporting troops, obtaining information, and disposing forces to intercept or oppose him, was possessed by his enemy, and yet his wily strategy enabled him to make his way to the river, at the very point where he had contemplated recrossing it when he started from Tennessee ; and he was prevented from (459) 0/ those who mude THEIE ESCAPE FROM OHIO, July and August, ISliS. 460 HISTORY OF morgan's cavalry. recrossing and effecting liis escape (\Yliich Avould then have been certain) only by the river having risen at a season at -which it had not risen for more than twenty years before. The objects of the raid -were accomplished. General Bragg's retreat was unmolested by any flanking forces of the enemy, and I think that military men, -who Avill review all the facts, will pronounce that this expedition delayed for weeks the fall of East Tennessee, and prevented the timely reinforcement of Rosecrans by troops that would otherwise have participated in the battle of Chickamauga. It destroyed Morgan's division, however, and left but a remnant of the Morgan cavalry. The companies in Kentucky became disintegrated — the men were either captured or so dispersed that few Avere ever again available. Captain Davis crossed into Indiana, with the two companies assigned him, but failed to rejoin the division, and -was surrounded by overwhelming numbers, and himself and the greater part of his command captured. Some of the men in those companies es- caped— the majority of them returned to the Soutli, others remained in Kentucky to "guerrilla." Two fine companies of the Ninth Tennessee, under Captains Kirkpatrick and Sisson, crossed the river at Buffington; two companies of the Second Kentucky, under Captains Lea and Cooper, effected a crossing a day or two later. Besides these organized bodies of men, there were stragglers from all the regiments to the number of three or four hundred, who escaped. These men were collected by Colonels Johnson and Grigsby, and marched through Western Virginia to Morristown, in East Tennessee, where all that was left of Morgan's command was rendezvoused. Although the consequences were so disastrous, although upon the greater part of those who followed Morgan in this raid was visited a long, cruel, wearisome imprisonment, there are few, I imagine, among them who ever regretted it. It was a sad infliction upon a soldier, especially upon one accustomed to the life the "Morgan men" had led, to eat his heart in the tedious, dreary prison existence, Avhile the fight which he EFFECT OF THE RAID. 461 Bhoukl have shared was dailv growing deadlier. But to have, in our turn, been invaders, to have carried the war north of the Ohio, to have taught the people, who for long months had been pouring invading hosts into the South, something of the agony and terror of invasion — to have made them fly in fear from their homes, although they returned to find those homes not laid in ashes ; to have scared them Avith the sound of hostile bugles, althou'Th no signals were sounded for flames and destruction — these luxuries were cheap at almost any price. It would have been an inexpiable shame if, in all the Confederate army, there had been no body of men found to carry the war, however briefly, across the Ohio, and Morgan by this raid saved us, at least, that disgrace.
