# Humphreys, The Virginia Campaign of ’64 and ’65: Overland campaign selections, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a University of Illinois scan; not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, soft-hyphen marks (¬), running headers, page numbers and footnotes. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages only; page locators refer to unverified OCR page markers. Reports, returns, despatches and memoirs quoted or summarized by Humphreys are not separately inspected originals.

## title-and-preface

THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65 CAMPAIGNS OF THE CIVIL WAR.— XII. THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65 THE ARMY OF THE POTOMAC AND THE ARMY OF THE JAMES BY ANDREW A. HUMPHREYS, BRIGADIER-GENERAL, CHIEF OF ENGINEERS, AND BREVET MAJOR-GENERAL U. S. A. J CHIEF OF STAFF, ARMY OF THE POTOMAC J COMMANDING SECOND CORPS, ETC., ETC. NEW YORK CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS 1883 Copyright, 1883, by CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS Trow's Printing and Bookbinding Company 201-213 East Twelfth Street NEW YORK / 1 4 5 3 crp REMOTE STOEAGs. oo « CQ LuJ bcokstacks office ac UJ — i PREFACE. $ a O o M N 0 01 «JI o CQ T> In preparing this narrative I have met with great and un¬ expected difficulties from the incomplete condition of the files of the War Department in the matter of the official reports of Corps, Division, and Brigade commanders. So many officers of high command were killed and wounded during the campaign, the movements by day and night, the battles, actions, and close contact with the enemy were so unceasing, that there was but little time for the prepara¬ tion of reports, and to this day many of them, if prepared, have not been received at the War Department. The de¬ spatches become therefore the more important, but the files of these are not complete. All the Reports, Returns, orders, despatches, and papers of every kind in the War Department, including the Con¬ federate Archives, have been placed at my disposal by authority of the Secretary of War, and I am under many obligations to General Drum, Adjutant-General, and Col¬ onel R. N. Scott, in charge of the preparation of the “ Offi¬ cial Records of the Union and Confederate Armies ” for publication. Major-General Hancock has furnished me with a complete printed set of the reports made by him during the war. I am indebted to Colonel George Meade for placing in my hands the retained copies of all General Meade’s despatches S 1 68 ! 89 VI PREFACE. sent and received during the campaign. I have also had my own papers covering the same period. I am also indebted to Major-General de Peyster for the valuable information contained in his elaborate work, “ La Royale,” published at his own expense for private circula¬ tion, and for the aid .1 have derived from his correspondence with Confederate officers. I am also under obligations to General Fitz Lee and Gen¬ eral E. P. Alexander for valuable information, and to the Rev. J. William Jones, D.D., Secretary of the Southern Historical Society, for a full set of the publications of that Society from January, 1876, to the present day, and for other information. The Military Historical Society of Massachusetts placed all its papers in my hands. Colonel John P. Nicholson, of Philadelphia, offered the volumes of his valuable Military Library for my use. From the gentlemen having charge of the several sub¬ offices of the Adjutant-General’s Department — Messrs. Joseph W. Kirkley, Henry Ellerbrook, Thomas C. Bourne, A. P. Tasker, F. Jones, and Hemy E. Scott — I have had constant aid. , Mr. Fitz Gerald, Librarian of the War Department, has sent me all the volumes of the Library treating of the War. Indeed, wherever I have asked for assistance in any shape it has been given me in the most obliging manner. To Mr. William J. Warren, Chief Clerk of the Engineer Department, I am under very great obligations for untiring assistance throughout the whole time of the preparation of this narrative. Through him, also, I have had the use of the Journal of Colonel Roebling, of General Warren’s staff. A. A. Humphreys.

## armies-spring-1864

The consolidated Morning Report of the Army of the Potomac of the 30th April, 1864, gives for its numerical strength on that day • “ present for duty equipped Officers. Enlisted Men. Guns, Provost Guard . 70 1,048 Engineers . 50 2,226 The three Infantry Corps . 3,506 69,884 Artillery of the Infantry and Cavalry • Corps, and the Reserve Artillery with its Guard . 285 9,945 274 The Cavalry Corps . 585 11,839 The total number of officers and enlisted men of the Army of the Potomac of all arms and branches of the service, in¬ cluding Provost Guard, Engineers, Reserve Artillery with its guard, the Infantry Corps and their Artillery, and the Cavalry Corps and its Artillery, “present for duty equipped ,” on the 30th of April amounted to 99,438. According to the return of the Ninth Corps for the month of April, 1864, the number present for duty was 923 officers and 18,408 enlisted men, with forty-two guns. These num¬ bers include 73 officers and 1,199 enlisted men of cavalry and the officers and enlisted men of artillery. The Morning Report of this Corps for the 10th of May, 1864, gives for its strength — Officers. Enlisted Men. Guns. Infantry . * . 851 18,995 Artillery . 33 1,017 80 9 Cavalry . 84 1,728 1 It consisted of four divisions, the First commanded by Brigadier-General Thos. G. Stevenson, the Second by Brigadier-General R. B. Potter, the Third by Brigadier-General O. B. Willcox, and the Fourth, a colored division, by Brigadier- General E. Ferrero. The Third and Fourth Divisions were newly raised, and had not been in the field, and in fact all but 6,000 of the enlisted men of the Corps had just entered the service. 2 See Appendix B. 3 Probably a mistake — 42 guns. THE ARMIES IN THE SPRING OF ’64. 15 On the 1st of May, 1864, the Army of Northern Virginia, commanded by General R. E. Lee, was composed of three Infantry Corps, the First Corps commanded by Lieutenant- General James Longstreet, the Second by Lieutenant-Gen¬ eral Richard S. Ewell, the Third by Lieutenant-General A. P. Hill. The Cavalry Corps was commanded by Major-Gen¬ eral J. E. B. Stewart.1 The consolidated Morning Report of the Army of North¬ ern Virginia, of April 20, 1864 (the Morning Report for April 30, 1864, is not in the possession of the War Depart¬ ment, nor is there any information in that Department concerning it) shows that there were that day present for duty : Officers. Enlisted Men. Second Corps 2 3 . . 1,379 15,705 Third Corps . . 1,551 20,648 Total Infantry . . 2,930 36,353 Cavalry Corps . . 467 7,932 Artillery . . 237 4,617 The last return previous to May 1, 1864, of Longstreet’s two divisions that were with him in the Department of East 1 The Chief of Artillery was Brigadier- General William N. Pendleton ; the Adjutant-General, Colonel Walter H. Taylor; the Chief Engineer, Major-General M. L. Smith ; the Chief Quartermaster, Lieutenant- Colonel James L. Corley ; the Chief Medical Director, Surgeon Lafayette Guild. The First Corps had present with it only two of its divisions, commanded by Major-Generals Field and Kershaw, Pickett’s division being absent on the south side of James River. The Second Corps had present its three divisions, commanded by Major-Generals Early, Johnson, and Rodes, and the Third Corps its three divisions, commanded by Major-Generals Anderson, Heth, and Wilcox. The Cavalry Corps consisted of two divisions commanded by Major-Generals Hampton and Fitzhugh Lee. For the details of the Army of Northern Virginia, See Appendix C. 3 Hoke’s brigade and two regiments of Rodes's division absent, not counted. 16 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. Tennessee (known to the War Department) is that of March 31, 1864, which gives present for duty : 1 Officers. Enlisted Men. Field’s Division . 3,875 McLaw’s Division (Kershaw’s before May 1st) . 4,542 Total . 8,417 There were probably 1,000 officers with the two divisions. Colonel Taylor, in his “Four Years with General Lee,” estimates the effective force of those two divisions when they rejoined the army at 10,000 enlisted men present for duty.2. There were, according to our information, four bat- 1 Department of East Tennessee, Lieutenant-General Longstreet commanding, March 31, 1864. Officers. Field’s Division . McLaw’s “ . Buckner’s “ . Wharton’s Brigade . Jackson’s “ . . . Cavalry two brigades, Generals Jones and Vaughn commanding . Enlisted Men. 3,875 4.542 3,401 ' 838 366 4,264 Buckner’s division, commanded by Brigadier- General B. R. Johnson, consisted of Johnson’s brigade of Tennessee regiments and Gracie’s and Law’s Alabama brigades. 2 So far as I can make out from the very defective returns in our possession of Pickett’s division, its effective force (enlisted men present for duty) at this period, the latter part of April, was about 5,000. The first return, or Morning Report, in the Confederate archives in the posses¬ sion of the War Department, in which the numbers of Longstreet’s Corps are given after that of March 31, 1864, is the Morning Report of the Army of North¬ ern Virginia of June 30, 1864, in which that corps is reported as having present for duty 1,098 officers and 13,060 enlisted men. That this Corps should have gone into the campaign of 1864 with about the same numbers that it had on the 31st of August, 1863, while the Third Corps (Hill’s) increased in that time from 13,601 enlisted men present for duty to 20,648, and the Second Corps (Ewell’s) from 15,428 to near 18,000 (including Hoke’s brigade, and two regiments of Rodes’s, absent), was quite unexpected. Neither General Longstreet nor his division commanders state the strength of their commands in their reports of the opening operations of the campaign. THE ARMIES IN THE SPRING OF ’64. 17 teries of four guns in each infantry division, which, for the eight divisions, is one hundred and twenty-eight guns, seventy-two guns in the reserve artillery, and twenty-four with the Cavalry — a total of two hundred and twenty-four guns. Using the figures of the extracts from the Morning Re¬ ports of the Army of Northern Virginia, we have for its num¬ bers “ present for duty,” May 1, 1864, not less than — Officers. Enlisted Men, Infantry . 3,930 44,770 Artillery . 237 4,617 Cavalry . 467 7,932 making a grand aggregate of officers and enlisted men of infantry, artillery, and cavalry of 61,953, with probably two hundred and twenty-four guns.

## wilderness-opening

On the 2d of May the order for the movement of the Army of the Potomac was issued.1 The movement began promptly at midnight of the 3d, Major-General Sheridan, with two of his cavalry divisions, leading the two infantry columns, one of his divisions, Tor- bert’s, being left to cover the rear of the army. A canvas and a wooden ponton bridge were laid at Germanna Ford, the same at Ely’s Ford, and a wooden ponton bridge at Culpeper Mine Ford, five bridges in all, the river being about two hundred feet wide. The Second Corps, preceded by Gregg’s cavalry division, crossed at Ely’s Ford, and moved to Chancellorville, fol¬ lowed by the reserve artillery. The Fifth Corps, preceded by Wilson’s cavalry division, and followed by the Sixth Corps, crossed at Germanna Ford, and moved to Wilderness Tavern, at the intersection of the Germanna plank road,2 by the Orange Court House and Fredericksburg pike. The head of the Sixth Corps halted three miles from Germanna Ford, the rear at the ford. The trains, except those known as the fighting trains, which accompanied the troops (see the order of movement). 1 See order of May 2, 1864 — Appendix D. 2 This road ran from Germanna FonJ to Fredericksburg. THE PASSAGE OF THE RAPID AN. 19 crossed at Culpeper Mine Ford and Ely’s Ford. They were covered by the cavalry, and had an infantry guard of 1,200 men from each infantry corps. Gregg’s cavalry moved to the vicinity of Piney Branch Church, throwing out reconnoissances on the Pamunkey road and toward Spottsylvania Court House, Fredericksburg, and Hamilton’s crossing. Wilson’s cavalry moved to Parker’s store, on the Fredericksburg and Orange Court House plank road, throwing out reconnoissances to the right on the Orange pike and plank roads, and on the Catharpin and Pamunkey roads. The head of the Second Corps arrived at Chancellorville at 10 a.m. of the 4th, and the whole corps, with the trains moving with the troops, were at the halting-place designated about 1 o’clock. The whole of the Fifth Corps was up to its position by 2 o’clock. Each of these corps had marched more than twenty miles, and both had assisted in laying the wooden ponton bridges at their crossings of the Rapidan, and had improved the roads leading up the steep river-banks. The Sixth Corps had marched more than sixteen miles, but following the Fifth Corps was later in getting to its halting- ground for the night. The canvas bridges were taken up on the 4th, and joined the corps to which they belonged. The wooden bridges were left for the trains and the Ninth Corps. Respecting this operation General Grant says, “ This I re¬ garded as a great success, and it removed from my mind the most serious apprehensions I had entertained, that of cross¬ ing the river in the face of an active, large, well-appointed, and ably-commanded army, and how so large a train was to be carried through a hostile country and protected.” And he might well be gratified at the result, for it was a good day’s work in such a country for so large an army with its artillery and fighting trains to march twenty miles, crossing 20 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. a river on five bridges of its own building, without a single mishap, interruption, or delay. It was not practicable, however, to get over all the great trains on the 4th, nor was it expected, as the order of move¬ ment shows. In fact it was two o’clock in the afternoon of the 5th of May before they had ceased crossing at Ely’s Ford, when the wooden bridge there was taken up and moved to . Chancellorville ; and it was five o’clock in the afternoon of the 5th of May before they had ceased crossing at Culpeper Mine Ford, when the bridge there was taken up and the pon¬ ton train moved one and a half miles from the river. It was in consideration of the fact that it was not practicable in this region to move the great trains along the protected flank of the army simultaneously with the troops, that led to fix¬ ing the halting-places of the heads of the infantry columns at Chancellorville and Wilderness tavern, points which they reached early in the day. The troops might have easily con¬ tinued their march five miles further, the Second Corps to Todd’s tavern, the head of the Fifth Corps to Parker’s store, and the head of the Sixth Corps to Wilderness tavern ; but even that would have left the right too open during the fore¬ noon of the 5th, and it was more judicious to let the troops remain for the night where they had halted, as it made the passage of the trains secure, and the troops would be fresher when meeting the enemy next day, of which there was much probability. At 1.15 p.m. of the 4th, General Grant telegraphed from Germanna Ford to General Burnside to make a forced march until he reached there. His First Division, General Steven¬ son, had then arrived at Brandy Station, and his Fourth, the colored division, had marched that morning from Ma¬ nassas Junction, more than forty miles distant from Ger¬ manna Ford. General Stevenson’s division crossed the Bapidan at Germanna Ford on the morning of the 5th, and THE PASSAGE OF THE RAPIDAN. 21 by the night of the 5th Potter’s and Willcox’s divisions, coming from Bealeton and from Rappahannock Station, had likewise crossed there and advanced some three miles. General Ferrero’s division (Fourth) crossed on the morning of the 6th. Indications concerning the movements of the enemy were noted before one o’clock in the afternoon of the 4th ; some few shots were fired toward Robertson’s tavern, and they were observed moving in some force from Orange Court House on the plank road toward New Yerdiersville. Major-General Sheridan having received some informa¬ tion during the day to the effect that the main body of the enemy’s cavalry was near Hamilton’s crossing, and suggest¬ ing that he should proceed against them, the order for movement on the 5tli directed him to do so with Gregg’s and Torbert’s divisions. The army was to move at five o’clock in the morning, General Wilson to proceed to Craig’s Meeting House on the Catharpin road, and to keep out parties on the Orange Court House pike and plank road, the Catharpin and Pamunkey roads, and in the direction of Twyman’s store and Andrew’s tavern or Good Hope Church ; General Hancock to move to Shady Grove Church, on the Catharpin road, and extend his right toward the Fifth Corps at Parker’s store ; General Warren to move to Parker’s store and extend his right toward the Sixth Corps at Old Wilderness .tavern ; General Sedgwick to move to Old Wilderness tavern, leaving a division to cover the bridge at Germanna Ford, until General Burnside’s command arrived. After reaching the points designated the army was to be held ready to move forward. The movement began promptly as ordered.1 Let us see what the Army of Northern Virginia was doing to meet this advance of the Army of the Potomac. 1 See order of May 4tli — Appendix E. 22 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. General Ewell states that the corps and division com¬ manders of the Army of Northern Virginia met General Lee on the 2d of May at the signal station on Clark’s Mountain, when he expressed the opinion that the Army of the Poto¬ mac would cross by some of the fords below them ; that the movement of that army being observed on the morning of the 4th, he, General Ewell, moved, under orders, toward Locust Grove (Robertson’s tavern) on the Orange pike, where the head of his corps, Early’s division, halted for the night about five miles from Old Wilderness tavern, Rodes’s and Johnson’s divisions closing up on him.1 (general Hill with Heth’s and Wilcox’s divisions of his corps moved about midday of the 4tli along the Orange Court House plank road, halting for the night, Heth at Mine Run and Wilcox at Verdiersville, the former about seven miles from Parker’s store and about ten from the intersec¬ tion of the Brock road writh the Orange Court House plank road. Anderson’s division remained on the Rapidan and did not unite with the corps until the morning of the 6th. It will be observed that General Lee moved more promptly toward the Army of the Potomac than he had done in the preceding November when that army crossed the Rapidan, though the reports from General Wilson’s par¬ ties indicated that these corps were no further advanced than they had been on that occasion. General Longstreet moved from the vicinity of Gordons- ville at four o’clock in the afternoon of the 4th, halting for the night at Brock’s bridge, and on the night of the 5th at Richards’s shop on the Catliarpin road, not far from Craig’s Meeting House. He was probably retained on the Catliar- pin road until it was ascertained what disposition was made of Hancock. Stewart’s cavalry, which had been drawn in, 1 R. D. Johnson’s brigade of Rodes’s division joined it on the morning of the 6th. THE BATTLE OF THE WILDERNESS. 23 was to operate on the Confederate right flank, on the Catliar- pin and other roads. On the morning of the 5th, General Ewell moved down the pike, Johnson’s division leading, followed by Eodes's and Early’s. He was instructed by General Lee to regulate his march by that of General Hill on the plank road, and was informed that it was preferred not to bring on a general engagement before General Longstreet came up. General Ewell, being three or four miles further advanced than Hill, halted his command when the head of it was two miles dis¬ tant from the Wilderness tavern or Germanna road. Just before halting he sent Walker’s brigade of Johnson’s divi¬ sion down the road leading, on his left, from the pike to Spottswood on the Germanna plank road. General Crawford’s division led the column of the Fifth Corps, General Wadsworth’s followed, then General Robin¬ son’s ; General Griffin’s forming the rear — his division hav¬ ing lain during the night across the pike, about a mile out from the Germanna road. At a quarter past seven General Meade, while on his way to General Warren’s headquarters near the Old Wilderness tavern, received a despatch from that officer informing him that the enemy’s infantry was on the pike in some force about two miles from the Wilderness tavern. A few minutes later General Meade was with General Warren, and at once directed him to halt his column and attack the enemy with his whole force. This would soon develop what part of Lee’s army was there. At the same time, 7.30 a.m., a des¬ patch was sent to General Hancock informing him that the enemy was on the pike in some force, and directing him to halt at Todd’s tavern until further developments were made. This despatch was received by him at 9 o’clock, at which time his advance was two miles beyond Todd’s tavern. General Sedgwick was directed to move out on the road 24 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’05. that leaves the Germanna plank road at Spottswood and en¬ ters the pike some two and a half miles from Wilderness tavern, attack the enemy and connect with the Fifth Corps on the pike. His force was Wright’s division and Neill’s brigade of Getty’s division, to which the second brigade of Ricketts’s division, General Seymour commanding, was added in the afternoon. General Ricketts’s division covered the Germanna bridge until General Burnside’s troops re¬ lieved him toward noon. General Grant had been at once informed by General Meade of what was transpiring and soon joined him. After brief conference the two rode forward a short distance, and took position on a knoll in the open ground around Wilder¬ ness tavern and the Lacy farm, and on this knoll General Grant and General Meade remained during the battle, with only an occasional brief absence to the nearest troops. When the head of Crawford’s column reached the high open ground of Chewning’s farm, about a mile from Parker’s store (and three miles from Wilderness tavern), he found Colonel Hammond, commanding the cavalry detachment left there by General Wilson until the infantry should arrive, skirmishing with what General Crawford, at 8 a.m., re¬ ported to be the enemy’s cavalry. At 5 a.m. General Wilson had reported his command mov¬ ing toward the Catharpin road, and that his pickets re¬ ported nothing new from the enemy that morning. At 8 a.m. General Crawford had received the order to halt, and had taken up a good position in high open ground at Chewning’s, from which a good road ran to Parker’s store, and another to Tapp’s farm on the plank road, about two miles east of Parker’s store. Finding that our cavalry at Parker’s store needed assistance, General Crawford threw forward a skirmish line that became engaged with the flankers of an infantry force moving on the plank road, the THE BATTLE OF THE WILDERNESS. 25 advance guard of Hill, Kirkland’s brigade, but by that time the cavalry had been forced back, retiring slowly on the plank road before the skirmishers of Hill’s advance. Some time after eight o’clock General Crawford was in¬ formed by General Warren that Griffin and Wadsworth would attack Ewell on the pike, and he was ordered to join in it with one of his brigades. Between nine and ten o’clock, the development of the en¬ emy’s force was such that a despatch was sent to General Hancock, directing him to move up the Brock road to the Orange Court House plank road, and be prepared to move out that road toward Parker’s store. When Sedgwick was ordered out against Ewell’s left, Getty’s division of the Sixth Corps, except Neill’s brigade, was brought to the Wilderness tavern, and as soon as it was ascertained that the enemy’s infantry were on the plank road at Parker’s store in force, between nine and ten o’clock, Getty was sent on the Brock road to its intersection with the Orange plank road, about two miles from the Wilder¬ ness tavern, and directed to move out the latter road and attack the enemy, and, if he could, drive them back beyond Parker’s store. The order to General Getty was sent at the same time as that to General Hancock to come up. The Brock road begins on the Orange pike about a mile east of the Old Wilderness tavern, and runs in a southeast direction to Spottsylvania Court House, intersecting the Germanna plank, the Orange plank, the Furnace, the Cathar- pin and other roads running in a southwest and south direc¬ tion. General Ewell, seeing our force on the pike, supported Jones’s brigade of Johnson’s division (which had led the advance prepared for action) with Battle’s and Doles’s bri¬ gades of Rodes’s division. The other brigades of Johnson’s division (Steuart’s, Stafford’s, and Walker’s) were formed on XII.— 2 26 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. their left of the pike in the order stated, or were forming, when, about noon, General Griffin, advancing with great difficulty through the woods — Ayres’s brigade on the right of the pike, Bartlett’s and Barnes’s on the left — suddenly struck Jones’s brigade, broke it and drove it back through the supporting line, disordering Battle’s brigade, which, with Doles’s, was then hard pressed. General Jones, a gal¬ lant officer, was killed in a desperate effort to rally his bri¬ gade.1 Ayres’s brigade at the same time attacked the part of Johnson’s division in his front. Daniel’s brigade of Rodes’s division was at once sent forward to the assistance of Doles and Battle. Early’s division was brought up and formed across the pike, Gordon’s brigade being ordered for¬ ward to the right of Rodes’s line (the contest still going on), where it took an active and important part in repelling the attack. Wright’s division of the Sixth Corps was to have attacked in connection with the Fifth Corps, but met with such delay and difficulty in forcing its way through the dense scrubby pine and tangled undergrowth, that it could not connect with the Fifth, and did not get in contact with the enemy until much later in the day. General Griffin stated that, not being supported on his right, Ayres’s brigade was forced back across the pike, and that entailed the falling back of the other brigades of his division, the enemy following and forming on the line first occupied by them, where they at once intrenched. Two of Griffin’s guns on the pike were lost.

## wilderness-close

To return to the infantry corps of the army. On the morning of the 7th, reconnoissances were made of the enemy’s position, which was found to be well intrenched : part of it ran along the open ground of the Hagerson, Chew- ning, and Tapp farms ; artillery was placed not only where the ground was open, but at other portions of the line. The average distance apart of the lines of the two armies was about three-quarters of a mile. To attack a position of such character, situated as this was, covered by a tangled forest that inevitably disordered the attacking forces as they ad¬ vanced, was not judicious ; it promised no success. General Grant therefore decided to continue the movement by the left flank, with a view to a general engagement in the more open country. Early in the morning of the 7th, the bridge at Germanna Ford was taken up, and relaid at Ely’s Ford, for the passage of the ambulance train containing the wounded, who were to THE BATTLE OF THE WILDERNESS. 53 be sent to Washington by the Orange and Alexandria Rail¬ road. In the course of the day their destination was changed, and they were subsequently sent to Washington by way of Fredericksburg. According to the reports of the Medical Director of the Army of the Potomac, Surgeon Thomas A. McParlin, from May 4 to December 31, 1864 (see pages 148-178, Appendix to First Part of the “ Medical and Surgical History of the War,” and also the tables of killed, wounded, and missing in Part First, Surgical Volume), the number of wounded of the Army of the Potomac in the battle of the Wilderness was 9,102, not including the Ninth Corps (see pages 151 and 152, Appendix) . This I believe to be more correct than any other statement we have of the number of wounded in that battle. In the same report it is stated that the number of wounded according to the regimental reports was 10,805, but that subsequent reports rendered it probable that that number was erroneous. The number of killed, according to the regimental reports, was 2,009, which number is undoubt¬ edly very nearly accurate. The number of missing according to the regimental records was 2,902. This is the number furnished by the Adjutant-General of the army to General Badeau, and includes the missing of the Ninth Corps. The casualties in General Burnside’s Ninth Corps were, according to his report, 256 killed and 1,118 wounded. These added to the regimental reports of killed and the medical reports of wounded, we have for the casualties of the Army of the Potomac and the Ninth Corps in the battle of the Wilderness 2,265 killed, 10,220 wounded, and 2,902 miss¬ ing. Total, 15,387. Killed and wounded, 12,485. General Burnside’s missing numbered 145. 1 1 For a notice of the errors in Badeau’s tabular statement ot the killed, wounded, and missing in the Army of the Potomac and James, from May 5, 1864, to April 9, 1865, found on page 713, vol. iii. , of his Military Life of General Grant, 54 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. The woods took fire in many places, and it is estimated that 200 of our wounded perished in the flames and smoke. According to the tabular statement, Part First, “ Medical and Surgical History of the War,” the casualties in the Army of Northern Virginia were 2,000 killed, 6,000 wounded, and 3,400 missing. The authority for this statement is not given, and I do not find anywhere records of the loss of that army in the Wilderness.* 1 Concerning the difference of loss between the two armies, it must be recollected that the Army of the Potomac was the attacking party on the right and left, and that these attacks were continued and repeatedly renewed after Ewell and Hill had intrenched. It is true that some counter-attacks were made by the Army of Northern Virginia, or parts of it, upon Sedgwick, Warren, and Hancock, but it was when the posi¬ tions of those corps in the woods were well defined, though, with two exceptions, not intrenched, and when there was no see Appendix P. See, also, the same Appendix for the correction of the errors of a statement of the losses of the Army of the Potomac in the battle of the Wilder¬ ness, by Major-General C. M. Wilcox, which errors arose from his misapprehension of the tabular statement in the Medical and Surgical History of the War. 1 General Ewell, in his report of March 20, 1865, states that his killed and wounded in the Wilderness numbered 1,250. General McGowan in his report states that the casualties of his brigade (Wilcox’s division) amounted to 438 killed and wounded, and 43 missing. General Lane states the loss of his brigade (Wil¬ cox’s division) at 272 killed and wounded and 143 missing. In General Kershaw’s brigade (see General Kershaw’s report of his division) the loss was 296 killed and wounded and 26 missing. In General Goode Bryan’s brigade (Kershaw’s division) the killed and wounded were 133. In Mahone’s brigade the number was 146. It is stated that the losses in Gregg’s and Benning’s brigades of Field’s division were very heavy. The heaviest losses were probably in Hill’s corps and part of Long- street’s. But I can find no sufficient data to serve as a test of the correctness of the numbers of the table of the Medical and Surgical History of the War. General Early, who took command of Hill’s corps on the morning of May 8th, says that when he took command of it “the infantry numbered about 13,000 muskets for duty.” By the return of April 20th, the number of enlisted men of infantry of Hill's corps present for duty was 20,648. This contrast of numbers may afford some indication of the loss of that corps by killed, wounded, and missing in the Wilderness. It is true there are other sources of reduction of numbers than the casualties of battle, such as expiration of terms of service. THE BATTLE OF THE WILDERNESS. 55 uncertainty as to where and liow they were posted. The chief exceptional attack made against our troops intrenched was that against Hancock in the afternoon of May 6th, when his loss was small, that of the enemy severe. The other was the front attack of Early, late in the atternoon, and in the evening, when Gordon’s flank attack was made. Besides the general officers named, both sides lost many valuable officers in this battle, and of those in the Army of the Potomac none were held in higher esteem for soldierly qualities than Major H. L. Abbott, of the Twentieth Massa¬ chusetts, a brilliant young officer.1 2 I have gone into more detail in the account of this battle than I shall undertake to give of those that are to follow, chiefly because it may serve to show what difficulties were encountered by the forces engaged in it, owing to the char¬ acter of the field on which it took place. Some of its fea¬ tures were found in other of the battle-grounds of the two armies ; but, so far as I know, no great battle ever took place before on such ground.3 But little of the combatants could be seen, and its progress was known to the senses chiefly by the rising and falling sounds of a vast musketry fire that continually swept along the lines of battle, many 1 Colonel Theodore Lyman informs me that on a visit he made to the battle¬ field of the Wilderness after the war, in going over the ground where the Twen¬ tieth Massachusetts, one of the very best regiments in the service, lost a third of its number in killed and wounded, he found the line occupied by the enemy to be just behind the crest of a slight elevation, where they had placed a row of logs, and, lying down behind it, were effectually screened from the bullets and sight of our troops, for in front of and around them was a dense thicket of saplings; and in that thicket, not more than twenty or thirty yards distant, was the Twentieth Massachusetts and other of our troops, whose presence was made known by their thrusting through the brush, and whose return fire, aimed, as they supposed, at the Confederate troops, had cut off the saplings three, four, and five feet above the ground as regularly as if they had been cut by a machine. Many of the par¬ tially cut off tops were still hanging when Colonel Lyman visited the ground. 2 The ground occupied by the Army of the Potomac in the vicinity of Chancel- lorville in the Spring of 1863 was either open or in woods chiefly of ordinary character with but little undergrowth. 56 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OP ’64 AND ’65. miles in length, sounds which at times approached to the * sublime. General Badeau, in his “Military Life of General Grant,” appears to intimate that General Grant intended to bring on a general engagement on the 5th of May, in the preliminary position directed to be taken up in the order of march issued on the 4th. But that view is not consistent with the orders issued nor with what was best to do. . Had he really wished to fight a battle on the 5th, the Second Corps, after cross¬ ing at Ely’s Ford on the 4th, should have moved out the Orange plank road to New Hope Church ; the Fifth Corps out the pike to Bobertson’s tavern ; the Sixth Corps to Old Wilderness tavern ; and, on the morning of the 5th, to posi¬ tion between the Second and Fifth Corps ; Wilson’s cavalry out the Orange plank road in advance of the Second Corps, and moving to the left at New Hope Church. That would have brought on a battle in more open and better ground for the Army of the Potomac than that of the Wilderness. Had Lee gone into the strong, intrenched position of Mine Bun, or had he withdrawn to it after the battle, we could have moved to turn his right as soon as the trains were suf¬ ficiently advanced to admit of it, and in doing so should have found still more open country. I do not perceive that there is anything to induce the belief that General Grant intended or wished to fight a battle in the Wilderness. His doing so was, under the circumstances, unavoidable, not a matter of choice. Further, it would have been strange if the Chief-of- Staff of the Army of the Potomac, whose special occupation concerned the operations of that army, its move- % ments and battles and their object, should not have known of this intention if it had any existence.

## spotsylvania-opening

CHAPTER III. SPOTTSYLVANIA COURT HOUSE. As before stated, General Grant had determined to con¬ tinue the movement by the left, and in that view directed General Meade to take position, by a night march, at Spott- sylvania Court House with one corps, at Todd’s tavern with another, and with a third at the intersection of the road from Piney Branch Church to Spottsylvania Court House, with the road from Alsop’s to the Old Court House ; Burnside to move to Piney Branch Church. These positions were merely preliminary to further movement in a more southerly direc¬ tion, dependent partly upon the course that General Lee should take. This movement required the trains to be set in motion about three o’clock in the afternoon of the 7th, so as to clear the road for the troops, though it was apprehended that the people of the country would inform General Lee of it, and that he would readily surmise its object. In accordance with the project of General Grant, the army began to move at half-past eight in the evening ; General Warren by the Brock road toward Spottsylvania Court House, General Sedgwick by the pike and plank roads to Chancellorville, and thence by way of Aldrich’s and Piney Branch Church toward the point designated in the order of march, the intersection of the two roads named ; but early in the morning of the 8th he was directed to hold one divi¬ sion at that point, another at Piney Branch Church, and the 3* 12 58 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND 65. third midway between the two. Burnside followed Sedg¬ wick, but early on the 8th he was directed to halt at Ald¬ rich’s, where the Piney Branch Church road leaves the Fredericksburg plank road (about two miles from the church), in order to cover the trains. Ferrero’s division went to the trains, with which it remained several weeks. Han¬ cock followed Warren as far as Todd’s tavern. The reserve artillery wTent to Piney Branch Church, the trains to that vicinity. General Sheridan was directed to have a sufficient force on the approaches from the right to keep the corps commanders advised in time of the appearance of the enemy.1 After overlooking, for a time, the commencement of the movement, General Meade, with General Grant, rode to General Hancock’s headquarters on the Brock road, near the left of his line, to await there the arrival of the head of Warren’s column, and about eleven o’clock set out for Todd’s tavern, in advance of the Fifth Corps, reaching there about midnight.2 Arrived at Todd’s tavern General Meade found Gregg’s cavalry division there, Merritt’s being further forward on the 1 See Appendix G for the orders of General Grant and General Meade. 2 While at General Hancock’s headquarters it was learnt, about eleven o’clock, that the head of Warren’s column was near by, halted and seriously de¬ layed by the mounted troops of the Provost-Marshal-Genera], which, following the headquarters, had occupied the road instead of drawing out of it. General War¬ ren had remained in the vicinity of the Lacy house to oversee the withdrawal of his troops, the most important part of his duty. Had he been at the head of his column the delay would not have occurred, since he would at once have notified General Meade of the obstruction, and it would have been removed immediately. The headquarters at once set out as the speediest way of removing the obstacle, and rode rapidly to Todd’s tavern, reaching there about midnight. The narrow road lay through woods all the way, and made the night appear very dark ; for some distance after passing the Second Corps the woods were still on fire, and at one time obliged us to turn off to the right, and there was a little uncertainty afterward whether we had returned to the right road, a matter of some concern, as the enemy were probably within a mile of us on the right. As we shall see further on, Longstreet’s corps was at that time moving toward Spottsylvania Court House, along a road parallel with the Brock road, and about a mile from it. SPOTTSYLVANIA COURT HOUSE. 59 road to Spottsylvania Court House. They had not yet re¬ ceived their orders, and General Meade at one a.m. directed Merritt to move his command at once beyond Spottsyl¬ vania Court House, placing one brigade at the Block House, which is at the intersection of the Shady Grove Church road with the old Court House road, a mile and a half west of the Court House, and a mile east of the Shady Grove road bridge over the Po River. He was to picket the roads ajrproaching the Court House, and to dispose of the other two brigades to cover the trains. He was to open the Brock road beyond the Court House for the infantry corps, closely following him on its -way to occupy that place. Gregg he directed to move immediately to the vicinity of Corbin’s bridge and watch the roads approaching from Parker’s store, and when the Second Corps reached Todd’s tavern, to send a force on the Brock road to watch it in the direction of the Wilderness. General Sheridan was notified at the same hour of these orders. At five a.m. General Warren informed General Meade that the head of his column reached General Merritt’s head¬ quarters (about a mile east of Todd’s tavern) at half-past three a.m., that Merritt’s troops had then already moved to clear the road, and that he, General Warren, had massed his troops there as they came up to rest, for the march on a dark night by a narrow road running through woods had much fatigued them ; that at the hour of his writing Gen¬ eral Merritt had been engaged some time. General Pitzhugh Lee’s cavalry division was on the road, which they had barricaded by felling trees across it, and disputed every foot of ground, and in the darkness of night General Merritt found it exceedingly difficult to make any progress. At six a.m. General Warren, upon an intimation from General Merritt that his infantry could push the enemy faster than he could, ordered an advance of his corps, 60 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF '64 AND ’65. General Robinson’s division now leading. In reporting this General Warren added, “It is difficult to do much with troops in an expeditious manner in these dense woods.” The same obstacles continued until about half -past eight o’clock, when Robinson’s division emerged from the woods into the open ground of Alsop’s, about two and a half miles from the Court House. Here the Brock road forks, uniting again at the end of a mile. Robinson advanced along the left hand fork to the junction of the two, Lyle’s brigade on the left, Dennison’s on the right, Coulter’s, formerly Baxter’s, brigade on the left rear. At the junction of the forks the line was reformed in column of regiments, and advanced along the road in open ground, a strong line of skirmishers in front, to within two or three hundred yards of the wood which the road entered, when suddenly a severe musketry and artillery fire was opened upon their front and right from an intrench- ment just inside the edge of the wood. This staggered them, and in a short time they fell back to the shelter of the woods in their rear. The Maryland brigade took up a position in the edge of tlie wood and checked the further advance of the enemy, who followed them after turning the left of Lyle’s brigade, which had held on close to the enemy’s intrenchment under the shelter of a steep crest. General Robinson was severely wounded at the first fire, while lead¬ ing his men. Prisoners taken showed this force of the enemy to be Kershaw’s and Humphreys’s brigades of Ker¬ shaw’s division. Their intrenchments were slight, but gave sufficient cover to the men. They were at the intersection of the Brock road by the old Court House road, and about a mile and a half from Spottsylvania Court House and the same distance from the Shady Grove Church road bridge over the Po. In the meantime Griffin took the right fork, Bartlett in line of battle in advance, Ayres and Sweitzer marching on SPOTTSYLV ANI A COURT HOUSE. 61 the road. When Bartlett got half way across the open ground of Alsop, he also came under the fire of the enemy’s infantry and artillery soon after Robinson, and with nearly similar results, but by the personal exertions of General Griffin, who led his division in person, and of Generals Bartlett and Ayres, the men reformed quickly under cover of Ayres’s brigade, who were in a sunken part of the road ; and Griffin again advanced, taking uj) the line afterward held for several days. Crawford came up on his left, driv¬ ing the enemy out of the woods there. Field’s division of Longstreet’s corps had been coming up all this time, and taking part in the fight ; they began now to push through the pines on Griffin’s right, threatening that flank. But Cutler came up : his division had had several hours’ rest and were in good condition. Forming in a ravine, they advanced in fine style, drove the enemy out of the woods on Griffin’s right, and established their line so as to connect with his. The position now held by the corps was intrenched. It was from two to four hundred yards distant from that of the enemy. At half-past twelve p.m. General Warren reported that he had pushed back the enemy, but had not quite gained the junction of the Brock and Catharpin roads (Shady Grove Church road he meant, not the Catharpin) ; that General Wright had, at his request, come up to his support ; that the straggling had been heavy, the men, wounded and tired, falling out of the ranks into the woods ; that he had encountered a division of cavalry (Fitzhugh Lee’s) and two divisions of Longstreet’s corps, from whom he had taken prisoners ; that Longstreet’s men stated that they had left their trenches the night before at eleven o’clock.

## spotsylvania-intrenchments

It will be perceived from this brief sketch of Lee’s in¬ trenchments, that, from the vicinity of the intersection of the Brock and Block House roads, where the advanced in¬ fantry troops of the armies first came in contact, his line formed a salient projecting a mile to the north, with a width of half a mile from the west to the east face. The eastern half or more of the salient was covered by wood ; in the western part was the open ground of Harrison’s and McCool’s farms. West of the salient these intrenchments extended in a direc¬ tion a little south of west about two miles, as already de¬ scribed, covering the chief road leading west from the Court House and the crossing of the Po by that road, while on the right of the salient its easterly face was extended a mile south, and subsequently two miles further, to Snell’s bridge over the Po. With such intrenchments as these, having artillery throughout, with flank fire along their lines wherever prac¬ ticable, and with the rifled muskets then in use, which were as effective at three hundred yards as the smooth-bore mus¬ kets at sixty yards,1 the strength of an army sustaining at¬ tack was more than quadrupled, provided they had force 1 Accuracy of fire is meant, not range. 76 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND '65. enough to man the intrenchments well. In fact there is scarcely any measure by which to gauge the increased strength thereby gained. Much the greater part of this in- trencliment was concealed by wood, which in some places was scrubby and dense. The enemy’s skirmish lines and sharpshooters were very active in trying to keep off all our attempts to examine them closely.

## spotsylvania-salient-may-12

It was of the utmost importance to the enemy to maintain that part of their works, for if it had been carried the troops in the salient would have been taken in rear and flank. It was their point of support and the hinge upon which Lee was to swing back from the salient, and its giving way would have proved disastrous to him. SPOTTSYLVANIA COURT HOUSE. 93 troops in column and in line kept even pace, and when about half way np, and in the open ground of Landron, burst into a cheer, and ran forward, disregarding the sharp musketry fire they received, passed through the abatis and over the intrenchments, capturing, General Hancock says, nearly 4,000 prisoners of Ewell’s corps, twenty pieces of ar¬ tillery, with their caissons, horses, etc., several thousand stands of small arms, and upward of thirty colors. Major- General Edward Johnson, and Brigadier-General George H. Sfceuart were among the prisoners. General Hancock says the loss of the enemy in killed and wounded was unusually great, the most of the dead having been killed with the bay¬ onet. Our troops, he continues, after the capture of the in¬ trenchments pursued the enemy through the forest in the direction of Spottsylvania Court House until they encoun¬ tered a second formidable line of earth works (the works built by Gordon and heretofore mentioned).

## spotsylvania-close

It has been said that the continuance of this desperate con¬ test at the apex of the salient on the part of General Lee was an unnecessary sacrifice of troops he could ill afford to spare ; but in fact he could not withdraw them during daylight without the risk of serious disaster, and Meade continued to press against him there with the hope of bringing about that withdrawal and disaster. For the losses of the day, the same authority as that here¬ tofore used gives for the wounded on the 12th : The Second Corps . 2,043 The Fifth Corps . 970 The Sixth Corps . 840 Making a total of . 3,853 For the killed we have 880, and for the killed and wounded 4,733. The prisoners lost did not probably exceed 500. SPOTTSYLVANIA COURT HOUSE. 105 General Burnside states liis losses in his three divisions, from the 8th to the ‘20th of May, to have been 2,454 killed and wounded and 590 missing, one-half of which loss he assigns to the 12th of May. The number of killed and wounded he gives is probably in excess of the actual number, but I have no means of correcting it. The Ninth Corps did not at that time form part of the Army of the Potomac, and I have not been able to find the report of its Medical Director for that period. The killed and wounded of the Ninth Corps between the 8th and 12th was very small. The total killed and wounded on the 12th, including the Ninth Corps, is, therefore, 6,020. The total missing, 800. The killed, wounded, and missing, 6,820. I have not found any exact statement of the Confederate loss in killed and wounded. At the salient it must have been equal to that of our troops engaged there ; in Burn¬ side’s and Warren’s attacks much less than ours. Altogether their killed and wounded must have been between 4,000 and 5,000. Respecting the number of prisoners lost by the Confeder¬ ates, General Ewell says of his corps, that after the loss of Johnson’s division (before sunrise) his force barely num¬ bered 8,000. This was before the losses by fighting, after the capture of the salient, occurred. He says previously that when Hancock broke through the lines he captured about 2,000 men. His killed, wounded, and prisoners on the 10th he states to have been 650 ; his killed and wounded in the Wilderness, 1,250. The sum of these figures is 11,900, or say 12,000. But the number of enlisted men of Ewell’s corps present for duty on the 20th of April, 1864 (Hoke’s brigade and two regiments of Rodes’s division absent and not counted), was 15,705, leaving about 3,700 men not accounted for by General Ewell’s figures. His report, as before stated, was made in March, 1865, from Richmond, where the exact 5* 106 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. data may not have been accessible to him. If General Ewell’s estimate, that after the loss of Johnson’s division be¬ fore sunrise of the 12th his force barely numbered 8,000, be correct, then the greater part of the 3,700 men not accounted for may be attributed to an underestimate of his losses on the 10th, and an underestimate of Hancock’s captures at daylight on the 12th. The Confederate loss on the 12th in killed, wounded, and prisoners, appears from the preceding discussion to have been between 9,000 and 10,000, officers and enlisted men. In General officers the Confederates suffered severely, Brigadier-Generals Daniel and Perrin being killed, and Brigadier-Generals Walker (commanding the Stonewall Bri¬ gade, Johnson’s division), Bamseur, R. D. Johnston, and McGowan being severely wounded, and Major-General Ed¬ ward Johnson and Brigadier-General Geo. H. Steuart cap¬ tured. On the part of the United States, Major-General Wright vas wounded, and Brigadier-Generals Webb and Carroll were severely wounded. A movement by our right flank would probably have re¬ sulted in Lee’s abandoning his intrenchments at once and taking position behind the North Anna. That was not de¬ sired, and as a movement by the left promised an oppor¬ tunity of attacking Lee’s right before it could be reinforced from his left or his intrenchments extended, and as at the same time it would cover our hospitals and communication with our depots in Washington, the movement by the left was adopted. General Warren was directed to move his corps imme¬ diately after dark on the 13th, by way of Scott’s (Shelton’s), Landron’s, and thence by a farm-road to a ford of the Ny, half a mile distant, then crossing the Ny, to move across the country, chiefly through fields, to the Fredericksburg and SPOTTSYLVANIA COURT HOUSE. 107 Spottsylvania Court House road, and, advancing along that road, recross the Ny, form on the left of the Ninth Corps, and attack on the Fredericksburg road at four a.m. of the 14th The artillery of the Fifth Corps was directed to move by roads further to the rear and join the corps on the Freder¬ icksburg road. The Sixth Corps was directed to follow the Fifth and attack on its left on the Massaponax Church road. Guides were sent to the two corps. General Hancock was directed to be prepared to attack at four a.m. on his front, but not to attack until ordered. Gen¬ eral Burnside was instructed similarly to General Hancock. The night set in dark and rainy. Every precaution was taken by General Warren to mark out the line of his march ; men were posted at short intervals, and fires built along the line ; but the rain and heavy mist obscured and extinguished them. The mud was deep over a large part of the route ; the darkness intense, so that literally you could not see your hand held before your face. The march was necessarily very slow. The fatigue of floundering along in such a sea of mud but few can appre¬ hend. In spite of all the care taken to prevent it, men lost ■their way and lay down exhausted, until daylight enabled them to go on. At six o’clock in the morning the head of General Warren’s column arrived at the point where they were to form for at¬ tack, but the column was broken and scattered, and it was not practicable to get the command in condition for offensive operations that day. The attack was therefore abandoned. The Sixth Corps followed the Fifth, the head of the column starting at three o’clock in the morning of the 14th, and was massed out of sight on the Massaponax Church road, on the north side of the Ny. A high point on this road at Gayle’s, on the south side of the river and about half a mile from it, commanded the country around it (which was open) and the 108 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OP ’64 AND ’65. Fredericksburg road also. It was therefore occupied by Upton’s brigade, now only 800 strong. But shortly after he took possession he was attacked by Chambliss’s cavalry bri¬ gade and Mahone’s infantry, and forced to abandon the posi¬ tion. Under orders from General Meade, General Warren sent General Ayres to recover it, which was done, the enemy drawing off. General Wright at the same time sent two bri¬ gades, who relieved Ayres, and followed with his corps. General Wright’s brigade of Mahone’s division, which had been holding the intrenchments on the Confederate left covering the Shady Grave road bridge, was brought over to Early’s position at the Court House on the 14th, and the re- coniioissance made by it and by Mahone disclosed our move¬ ment and presence on their right. It was not until the afternoon of the 14th that our with¬ drawal from the right was discovered by Longstreet’s skir¬ mishers, who then entered the breastworks abandoned by the Fifth Corps ; nor was it until the night of the 14th that Field’s division was brought over to the Court House and posted on the right of Hill’s corps. Kershaw remained on the left until midnight of the 15th, and then moved to the Confederate right, where he was held in reserve. Fortune evidently did not favor us on the night of the 13th, for the intrenchments on the Confederate right did not extend much south of the Court House, and only Hill’s corps was on that front. With ordinary weather the Fifth and Sixth Corps would have been able to attack there early in the morning, before reinforcements could have been brought from the Confederate left. At four o’clock on the morning of the 15th, General Han¬ cock, by direction of General Meade, moved Barlow’s and Gibbon’s divisions to the Spottsylvania and Fredericksburg road in the vicinity of the Ny River, leaving Birney’s divi¬ sion to cover Burnside’s right flank. SPOTTSYL VANIA COURT HOUSE. 109 During the 15th, 16th, and 17th, the Fifth and Sixth Corps advanced their intrenched lines, established batteries, opened roads, examined the country and roads leading south¬ ward, and on the 17th the Fifth Corps prepared an intrench- ment to be held in connection with an operation to be under¬ taken on the morning of the 18th. Communication was being opened with Aquia Creek by railroad, which was com¬ pleted the 22d of May, and the wounded sent to the general hospitals at Washington. Supplies for the army and some additional troops were received during this time. Brigadier-General Grant, commanding Vermont brigade, Second Division, Sixth Corps, reports that Colonel Warner’s regiment, 1,500 strong, joined his brigade on the 15th of May. On the 17th of May Brigadier-General B. O. Tyler, with a temporary division of heavy artillery regiments serving as infantry, and the Corcoran Legion, joined the Second Corps, making an addition to it, General Hancock says, of 8,000 men. The Corcoran Legion was assigned to General Gib¬ bon’s division. These troops were distributed to the army soon after their arrival, and General Tyler was assigned to the command of one of Gibbon’s brigades. Owing to the losses in action and the expiration of the terms of service of many regiments of Mott’s division (the 4th), it had become so reduced in numbers that it was con¬ solidated into a brigade on the 13th of May, and assigned to Birney’s division.1 1 According to Badeau (foot-note, page 198, Vol. II.), some 1,800 drafted men, recruits, and convalescents were also received at this time, in addition to the re¬ inforcements already mentioned, making a total of 11,300. I have not been able to obtain any detailed statement from the War Department of additional troops sent to the Army of the Potomac during this campaign. The statement of the Department gives the whole number sent from May 4, 1804, to June 12, 1864, and from June 12, 1864, to April of 1865 ; and when the reinforcement was by organ¬ ization — that is, by regiments — the numbers of the statement comprise the absent as well as the present, the extra duty men, etc. The statement of the War Department is that the reinforcements sent to the 110 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. On the 19th of May the organization of the Reserve Artil¬ lery was broken up. Its guns, ninety-two in number, were sent to the Washington d6pot. Its caissons were retained, and took the place of the army wagons carrying the reserve ammunition. The artillerymen were transferred to the Corps Artillery. Upon arriving before Petersburg, the guns were returned to the Army of the Potomac. They had ac¬ companied the army chiefly with a view to their use before Richmond. The brigade guard of Colonel Kitching re¬ mained with the Fifth Corps, with which it had been serving from an early day after the campaign began. It had been suggested by Major-General Wright, and also by myself, that after the lapse of a few days a return by night to the enemy’s left, which would probably be aban¬ doned, or very much weakened by our concentration on his right, might afford a good opportunity to attack there. Gen¬ eral Wright’s suggestion was for his corps only to under¬ take it ; but it was concluded to send both the Second and Sixth Corps, and on the 17th, Generals Hancock and Wright were ordered to move their troops in the night to the works captured on the 12th, and attack the enemy’s new intrench- ments there at daylight on the 18th, the Sixth Corps on the right of the Second. General Burnside was directed to at¬ tack in conjunction with them, and General Warren to crien his artillery at the same time and be prepared for the offen¬ sive. The Second Corps, being nearest to the point of at¬ tack, led, the Sixth Corps following. The troops were in the Army of the Potomac (including Burnside’s corps) from May 4 to June 12, 1864, was by organizations 1,031 officers and 26,780 enlisted men, making a total of 27,811. But these numbers, as already remarked, included the absent as well as the present, and of the present, those on extra duty, etc. During the same period it, the Army of the Potomac, received, by recruits to regiments, 2,453 enlisted men. The effective force sent between May 4 and June 12 was probably about 12,000. But during this same period the term of service of many regiments expired, and they were mustered out of service. From May 2d to July 4th, thirty-six regiments were in this way discharged from the service. SPOTTSYLVANIA COURT HOUSE. Ill position designated before daylight, and at four a.m. Gibbon and Barlow moved forward to assault, their troops in lines of brigades. Birney and Tyler were held in reserve. The artillery was posted in the first line of works at the apex of the salient, firing over the troops. The Sixth Corps advanced on the right of the Second. But the enemy was on the alert, and the new intrenchments across the base of the salient were of the most formidable character, being concealed on their right by woods and having on that part of their front a heavy slashing, and on their left front, which was in the open ground of the Harrison farm, lines of abatis. As the troops • approached they were met with a heavy musketry and artil¬ lery fire which completely swept the ground in front ; but, notwithstanding, they pressed forward to the slashing and abatis, and made several gallant attempts to cany the enemy’s lines, but without success. Upon its being reported to General Meade that there was but little probability of the enemy’s lines being carried, he directed the attack to be discontinued, and the troops were accordingly withdrawn. The Sixth Corps returned at once to the left of the Fifth Corps, resuming its position there. During the night of the 18th, Barlow’s, Gibbon’s, and Birney’s divisions moved to the vicinity of Anderson’s mill, on the east side of the Ny River, below the left of the Sixth Corps. Tyler’s division was posted on the Court House and Fredericksburg road near the Harris house, in the vicinity of which Colonel Kitching’s brigade, now of the Fifth Corps, was also posted, on the left of Tyler. General Burnside made the attack directed on the morn¬ ing of the 18th with the divisions of Crittenden and Potter, and all his artillery, uniting on the right with Hancock, but could not carry the enemy’s intrenchments. The artillery of the Fifth Corps also opened and continued its fire for several hours. 112 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. During the night of the 18th the Ninth Corps was moved to the left of the Sixth Corps, its left resting near the Po at Quesenberry’s. The enemy’s right at this time rested on the Po, covering the road crossing that stream at Snell’s bridge. The Sixth and Ninth Corps were pressed up as close to the enemy’s intrenchments as practicable without assaulting, and intrenched. During the 20th the Ninth Corps made recon- noissances in the direction of Smith’s and Stannard’s mills, on the Ny and Po crossings of the Telegraph road. The Fifth Corps now formed the right of the army, and had an intrenchment running across the Ny above the Fred¬ ericksburg road crossing, with Kitching’s brigade and Tyler’s division, as before stated, near the Harris house on the east side of the Ny, covering the right of the army and the road to Fredericksburg, now in full use by our trains of all kinds. The Second Corps was held ready to move southward, recon- noissances in that direction going on. In the afternoon of the 19th instructions were sent to General Hancock to move that night, but an encounter with the enemy late in the afternoon on our right flank, held by Tyler’s division and Kitching’s brigade, led to its being deferred until the night of the 20th. General Ewell was directed by General Lee on the 19th to demonstrate in his front to ascertain whether the Army of the Potomac was moving to his, Lee’s, right, as he believed it to be. General Ewell says that to accomplish this he moved with his corps around on our right by a detour of several miles, on roads impassable for artillery, when he came upon us prepared to receive him — his force 6,000. Our position being developed, and his object attained, he was about to re¬ tire, he says, when he was attacked. Part of his line, he continues, was shaken, but Pegram’s and Ramseur’s brigades held their ground so firmly that he maintained his position till nightfall, when he withdrew unmolested ; that his loss was about 900 killed, wounded, and missing. SPOTTSYLVANIA COURT HOUSE. 113 Ramseur (whose account is the only one I find besides that of General Ewell) says that his brigade was in front, that their movement was discovered, and that he then attacked with his brigade and drove the enemy rapidly, and with severe loss, until his flanks were enveloped, when he retired two hundred yards and formed, Grimes’s brigade on his left, Battle’s on his right ; but that Gordon’s division on their left being flanked, retreated, and the whole line was com¬ pelled to fall back, when it was repeatedly attacked by a heavy force until night, when it quietly and safely withdrew. Kershaw’s division held Ewell’s intrenchments while he was absent. The force encountered by Ewell was Kitching’s brigade and General Tyler’s division, posted on the Fredericksburg road in the vicinity of the Harris house. Colonel Kitching, on the left of Tyler, perceived indications of the movement in the course of the afternoon, and precautions were taken to meet it. The firing began about half-past five o’clock, and it being heavy, General Hancock was at once directed by General Meade to send a division in double-quick to Tyler, and to hold his corps ready to move up. General Warren, being the nearest at hand, was directed to send some troops over, and the Maryland brigade sent by him got to the ground in time to take an active and effective part in the fight. The First Maryland regiment, returning from Fred¬ ericksburg, had at once, without waiting for orders, joined in the attack on Tyler’s right. General Hancock ordered up Birney’s division in double- quick, directed Barlow and Gibbon to be ready to follow, and went himself to the ground, where he found Tyler’s divi¬ sion “ fiercely engaged ” with the enemy in front of the Fredericksburg road. As soon as General Birney’s troops arrived two of his brigades were thrown into action on Tyler’s right, but the severity of the action was already 114 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. over. General Crawford, of the Fifth Corps, arrived shortly after Birney, about dark, and was formed in support of Kitching and the Maryland brigade on the left. The fighting, General Hancock says, continued obstinate until about nine o’clock, when the enemy gave way, retreat¬ ing rapidly across the Ny. The loss of the enemy in killed and wounded was severe, and about 400 prisoners fell into our hands. This was the first engagement Tyler’s troops had taken part in, and they acquitted themselves handsomely, he says. General Early says that his whole corps was held ready to co-operate with Ewell, should his attack prove successful, and that, to create a diversion in his favor, Thomas’s bri- . gade was thrown forward. It made a demonstration on General Cutler’s front so far as to drive in the pickets on his right flank. Bussell’s division of the Sixth Corps was massed near the Harris house during the night of the 19th, and on the morn¬ ing of the 20th relieved Birney’s and Tyler’s divisions, which joined the other two divisions of the Second Corps near Anderson’s or Clark’s mill. Crawford and Kitching with Bussell now protected the right flank of the army.1 1 I was surprised to find in Badeau’s account of this affair the following state¬ ment : “ Warren had participated in the battle on the left of the Second Corps, and when the rebels were seen to be repelled, he was ordered to fall upon their flank and rear with the view of cutting off and capturing Ewell’s entire column, but he failed to carry out his instructions and under cover of night the enemy retired.” The troops from both corps engaged received the same orders from General Meade, and continued the action together, both equally close to the enemy until its close. Nothing took place on the field nor is there anything on record to sup¬ port the statement of Badeau. Ewell was close to the ford near Landron’s when the fighting terminated, two miles from Warren, who was with Griffin’s and Cat- lin’s divisions close up to the Spottsyl vania intrenchments, under orders to attack them if there was promise of success. Badeau further states : “ Ferrero with his colored division was on the road to Fredericksburg in rear and on the right of Tyler and near the point where Ewell struck the National SPOTTSYLVANIA COURT HOUSE. 115 The number wounded on the 18tli of May, almost entirely of the Second Corps, was, according to Medical Director McParlin, 552, and on the 19th, chiefly from the Second Corps, 1,100, making a total wounded of 1,652. Estimating by the rule adopted, we have for killed, 371, and for killed and wounded 2,023. Colonel Coulter, commanding brigade in Crawford’s division, was severely wounded on the 18th. Adding the number of wounded of the Army of the Poto- line. This road formed Grant’s direct communication with his base and he sent word at once to Ferrero : ‘ The enemy have crossed the N y on the right of our lines in considerable force, and may possibly detach a force to move on Fredericksburg. Keep your cavalry pickets well out on the plank road and all other roads leading west and south of you,’ ” etc., etc. Badeau continues : “ The rebels did indeed push on as far as the Fredericksburg road, but Ferrero and his colored division handled them severely. Twenty-seven wagons were cap¬ tured in the first surprise, but all retaken ; and on the soil of Virginia men who had once been slaves, beat back the forces of those who had held them in slavery. It was the first time at the East when colored troops had been engaged in any important battle, and the display of soldierly qualities obtained a frank acknowl¬ edgment from both troops and commanders, not all of whom had before been willing to look upon negroes as comrades. But after that time, white soldiers in the Army of the Potomac were not displeased to receive the support of black ones. They had found the support worth having.” Ferrero’ s division of colored troops was not in rear and on the right of Tyler, nor near the point where Ewell struck the National line, nor was he on the road forming Grant’s direct communication with his base (the Fredericksburg and Spottsylvania Court House road) but on the plank road from Orange Court House to Fredericksburg, not far from Salem Church, and over five miles north of the Harris farm where Ewell was encountered as narrated by me. General Ferrero had with him besides his division, the Second Ohio and the Third New Jersey (both white veteran cavalry regiments) thrown out in advance of his infantry, and this cavalry had an outpost on the road from Alsop’s to Silver’s on the Orange plank road. This outpost was driven in about half-past five in the afternoon by some cavalry and artillery force of the enemy. This force the Second Ohio and the Third New Jersey engaged, and Ferrero formed his division in line to support them. The enemy fell back with slight loss, our two cavalry regiments losing 2 enlisted men killed, 7 wounded, and 2 missing. The colored division had not a casualty of any kind whatever, handled nobody, severely or otherwise ; in fact, were not engaged. The wagons captured were taken near the Harris farm, and were retaken by the troops there, not by Ferrero’s troops. This affair is in itself insignificant, but I have found it to be characteristic of the spirit of Badeau’ s volumes in much that concerns the Army of the Potomac. 116 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. mac heretofore stated as occurring at Spottsylvania Court House, from the morning of the 8th to the night of the 19th, we have a total wounded of 10,821. Medical Director McParlin states it to have been 10,531, but I find he omits the 300 wounded left in the hands of the Confederates in the afternoon of the 10th of May. The number of killed, according to the regimental re¬ ports, he states to have been 1,781 ; and of missing, accord¬ ing to the same authority, 2,077 ; making a total, by his numbers, of 14,389. But many of those counted among the missing were killed. Using the numbers I have given, we have : Wounded . .* . 10,821 Killed . 2,447 Killed and wounded . 13,268 Missing . 1,411 Total . 14,679 The sum of the killed and missing, according to the regi¬ mental records, is probably correct, and I have used that sum, apportioning its parts differently. General Burnside states his losses to have been 2,454 killed and wounded, and 590 missing. These numbers, added to those of the Army of the Potomac, give killed and wounded, 15,722; missing, 2,001; total casualties, 17,723. Medical officers were directed to retain in the field -hos¬ pital all cases of slight wounds, but it was difficult to exe¬ cute the order ; men would slip off in the night, and find their way to the steamers.^ Several hundred were, however, retained, accompanying the army in ambulances. Medical Director McParlin states that the total number of wounded received in Washington from Fredericksburg (the wounded of the Wilderness and Spottsylvania Court House) SPOTTSYLVANIA COURT HOUSE. 117 was 21,966, of which 19,766 belonged to the Army of the Potomac, and 2,200 to the Ninth Corps. The number I have given for the Army of the Potomac in those two battles is 19,923. The number reported by General Burnside for the Ninth Corps is, 3,123 ; total, 23,046, an excess of Surgeon McParlin’s numbers of 1,080. But that excess is more than made up by the number of slightly wounded accom¬ panying the army, and those left in the hands of the Confed¬ erates on the 10tli of May. The number of killed and wounded in the two battles of the Wilderness and Spottsylvania Court House is therefore 28,207. The number of missing 4,903, making a total of killed, wounded, and missing, of 33,110. Surgeon McParlin further states that the number of sick sent to Washington from Fredericksburg at this period was 4,225. This would make a total of losses in this period of sixteen days of 37,335, the men discharged by expiration of their term of service not included. The casualties at Spottsylvania Court House, according to Badeau, were 2,271 killed, 9,360 wounded, 1,970 missing ; total, 13,601. The source of error in his figures has been already pointed out ; his number of wounded is too small. I have no means of presenting an accurate account of the casualties in the Army of Northern Virginia at Spottsylvania Court House. Excepting on those days and at those parts of the field noted in the narrative, they must have been much fewer in number than our own, since they remained on the defensive under the cover of intrenchments, entangled in their front in a manner unknown to European warfare, and, indeed, in a manner new to warfare in this country. Their losses were, however, severe. This account of the operations shows in what manner the contest between the two armies was carried on. The march¬ ing was done, chiefly at night, and the contact was so close 118 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF '64 AND ’65. as to require constant vigilance day and night, and allow but little time for sleep. The firing was incessant. The fatigue, the loss of sleep, the watchfulness, taxed severely the powers of endurance of both officers and men. Usually, in military operations, the opposing armies come together, fight a battle and separate again, the strain lasting only a few days. In a siege it is only a small part of the opposing troops that are close together. But with these two armies it was different. From the 5th of May, 1864, to the 9th of April, 1865, they were in constant close contact, with rare intervals of brief comparative repose.

## north-anna

The withdrawal of the Fifth Corps, which could not be con¬ cealed from the enemy, set Lee’s army in motion, but not to attack the Second Corps, as it was hoped he would, but to interpose between the Army of the Potomac and Richmond, and to cover the Virginia Central Railroad, one of those MOVEMENT TO THE NORTH ANNA RIVER 123 roads that connected Richmond with the most fertile parts of Virginia. This road coming from the west intersects the Fredericks¬ burg and Richmond Railroad between the North and South Anna rivers, a few miles above the confluence of those streams, and there turns and runs south to Richmond, keep¬ ing east of the Fredericksburg road and five or six miles dis¬ tant from it. The point of crossing of these roads is called Hanover Junction, after the county of that name. Hanover Junction is twenty-four or twenty-five miles north of Richmond, and twenty-eight miles south by the Telegraph road from the right of Lee’s Spottsylvania Court House in- trenchments at Snell’s bridge on the Po. About the time when Lee began to move, Hancock’s lead¬ ing division had just crossed the Mattapony at Milford and taken position there, but this fact could not then have been known to Lee, who must still have been under the belief that we were moving east of the Mattapony to cross it at a point much lower down than Milford, and then avoiding the North and South Anna rivers to cross the river formed by their junction, the Pamunkey, at Littlepage’s bridge on the stage road to Richmond, or at other convenient points below. Lee’s shortest route to meet this movement was by the Tele¬ graph road through Hanover Junction ; and about midday of the 21st, Ewell set out on that road for the Junction, fol¬ lowed by Longstreet’s corps on the same road. Ewell ar¬ rived at the Junction some time in the forenoon of the 22d ; the head of Longstreet’s corps reached the North Anna at the Telegraph road bridge about midday. The bridge is two miles north of the Junction. General Lee accompanied Ewell’s corps. Hill’s corps moved in the night of the 21st, taking a route west of the Telegraph road, probably passing through Childsburg and crossing the North Anna at Ander¬ son’s bridge, near Beaver Dam Station. It united with the 124 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. other corps at Hanover Junction evidently not later than the morning of the 23d. On the afternoon of the 21st General Hill returned to the command of his corps ; and General Early resumed com¬ mand of his division on the morning of the 22d. General Gordon was assigned to the command of John¬ son’s division, to which his own brigade, now commanded by Brigadier-General Evans, wTas transferred. Hoke’s brigade, now commanded by Colonel Lewis, joined General Early’s division at the Junction on the 22d, coming from Peters¬ burg. Its effective force is put down by Colonel Taylor, Adjutant-General of Lee’s army, at 1,200. The effective total of infantry with General Breckinridge was, most probably, 2,500. Having defeated General Sigel on the 15th of May at New Market, in the Shenandoah Val¬ ley, with severe loss, and that officer having retreated behind Cedar Creek, General Breckinridge, by General Lee’s direc¬ tion, after sending off his temporary force and leaving Gen¬ eral Imboden with his mounted infantry to look after the Valley, brought his two infantry brigades by railroad from Staunton to Hanover Junction, arriving there on the 20th of May. General Pickett, with his division, had also arrived at the Junction, his effective total being, according to the best in¬ formation, 5,000. 1 1 Respecting the strength of Pickett’s division when it rejoined Longstreet’s corps at this time, Badeau states that Pickett’s Division Return for November 27, 1863, shows his present for duty at that time to have been 9,162, and then adds some information concerning the division subsequent to that time, indicat¬ ing the probability of its not being materially less than that number when it rejoined the Army of Northern Virginia at Hanover Junction. I can find no Return of Pickett’s division of the 27th of November, 1863, or for any day of No¬ vember of that year, in the Confederate Archives Office, nor for any date subse¬ quent to November, indicating such strength. His Return of his division for September, 1863, gives for its effective total 4,419. There is, however, in the Confederate Archives Office, a Return by General Pickett of the Department of North Carolina for November 27, 1863, in which the present for duty of all arms, MOVEMENT TO THE NORTH ANNA RIVER. 125 General Bntler having at this time withdrawn to his in- trenchments at Bermuda Hundred, in the forks of the James and Appomattox rivers, General Beauregard having a short line of intrenchments in Butler’s front, running from river to river, was able to send General Pickett’s division to General Lee. Lee’s reinforcements at Hanover Junction, according to this statement, amounted to 8,700 muskets and probably 600 officers. Shortly after sending General Pickett to General Lee, General Beauregard sent General Hoke’s division to him. It joined General Lee at Cold Harbor with an effective total of infantry (enlisted men) a little less than 6,000, according to Colonel Walter H. Taylor. Warren’s cavalry outpost at Lebanon Church, near Madi¬ son’s store, or ordinary, had heard the noise of troops passing along the Telegraph road all night, and some part of the trains that accompany troops were in view from Lebanon Church early in the morning of the 22d. Information was re¬ ceived from the detachment sent by General Warren toward Mud tavern that Ewell’s and Longstreet’s corps had passed over the road in the night. Early in the morning of the 22d General Warren was di¬ rected to move as soon as the Sixth Corps was up to him, by way of Madison’s ordinary and Nancy Wright’s to Harris’s store, and halt there for the night. Harris’s store is near the Telegraph road and on the cross-road from Childsburg to Milford. General Wright was directed to move to Madi¬ son’s ordinary as soon as his corps rested ; General Burnside to resume his march at ten o’clock, cross the Mattapony at Downer’s bridge, and take the road running from that bridge officers and enlisted men, is 9,192. General Pickett commanded the Department at that time. Only one of his brigades was included in the Return of that De¬ partment. Can Badeau have mistaken this Return for a Return of Pickett's Di¬ vision ? 126 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF '64 AND ’65. • _ to Hanover Junction, halting at New Bethel Church, where there is a cross-road running past Madison’s ordinary to Bowling Green. General Hancock was directed to remain at Milford during the 22d. By this arrangement, on the night of the 22d the four corps were at points three or four miles distant from each other. Communication was kept up between them during the day. Upon arriving at Madison’s ordinary General Warren trans¬ ferred part of his corps to the Telegraph road, the other part taking a road one mile east of and parallel with it. Stragglers of the enemy’s infantry were picked up. The rear of Longstreet’s corps was reported to be but three miles distant. At one o’clock p.m. Rosser’s cavalry brigade was encountered at the crossing of the Mat River near Dr. Flipper’s. The enemy’s cavalry pickets hung about Hancock during the day, and one body of them was at Athens, about three miles distant. Upon leaving Spottsylvania Court House the character of the country in great part changed. It was now open and well cultivated, but there were still extensive woods, with thick undergrowth and swamps. The chief object of Hancock’s circuitous movement was not accomplished. 1 There would probably have been more chance of success had Hancock moved by the Telegraph 1 It has been already stated that the distance from the right of Lee’s intrench- ments on the Po to Hanover Junction by the Telegraph road is twenty-eight miles, measured on the map. From the position of the Second Corps at Anderson’s mill on the Ny by the Telegraph road to Hanover Junction is, by the map, twenty-five miles; by Han¬ cock’s route through Bowling Green to Hanover Junction, the distance is thirty- four miles. From the positions of the Fifth and Sixth Corps at Spottsylvania Court House, by way of Guinea Station and then by the Telegraph road to Hanover Junction, the distance is thirty miles. MOVEMENT TO THE NORTH ANNA RIVER. 127 road on the night of the 20th, followed by Warren ; the Sixth and Ninth Corps to be moved subsequently in accord¬ ance with the developments of the Second and Fifth Corps : that would perhaps have brought on a collision before Lee could intrench on new ground. At 9.30 a.m. of the 22d General Lee telegraphed from Hanover Junction to Richmond : “I have arrived at this place with the head of Ewell’s corps. Longstreet is close up. Hill I expect to come on my right, but I have not heard from him since I left him last night. I have learned as yet nothing of the movements of the enemy east of the Mattapony.” But it could not have been much after mid¬ day of the 22d when General Lee received information from his cavalry of our advance toward the North Anna by the Telegraph and other roads west of the Mattapony,1 and be¬ gan to dispose his force to meet our attempt to cross it. On the night'of the 22d Lee was at Hanover Junction with two of his corps (the third joining him the next morning), while the leading corps of Meade’s army were fifteen miles distant from it, the other two nineteen miles. On the night of the 22d General Grant directed General Meade to hold the army in readiness to move at 5 a.m. on the 23d, each corps to send at that hour the cavalry detach¬ ments serving with it, with some infantry, on all the roads in the front leading south, and ascertain, if possible, where the enemy was. Similar instructions were given to the Ninth Corps. The corps were to follow their reconn oitering parties. If it was found that the enemy had crossed the North Anna, the army would follow ; the Second Corps would move to Chesterfield ford (near the Fredericksburg andBichmond Railroad bridge) ; the Ninth Corps to Jericho 1 General Bratton, whose brigade was the rear guard of Longstreet’s corps, states that he crossed the North Anna (by the Telegraph road bridge) at sunset of the 22d. 128 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. bridge ; the Fifth Corps to a point on the river west of Jericho bridge. There were but two roads leading south marked on our maps, and corps commanders were directed to seek for plantation or other roads so as to facilitate our movements. Our maps were erroneous in many places, but especially so in the vicinity of the North Anna. What was marked as Jericho bridge was really Jericho mills. The bridge across the North Anna was where the Telegraph road crossed it, four miles below Jericho mills and about half a mile above the Fredericksburg Railroad bridge. Chesterfield ford was at the site of the Telegraph road bridge. These map-errors led to but little delay or embarrassment. The general intention of the order was apparent, and the corps commanders arranged their troops in accordance with that. The Sixth Corps followed the Fifth on the Telegraph road, that being found the better arrangement. The Ninth Corps used in part plantation roads between those followed by the Second and Fifth Corps. Rosser’s cavalry kept in front of the Fifth Corps up to the vicinity of the North Anna. General Warren arrived at Mount Carmel Church about eleven a.m., and from that point moved to Jericho mills, about three miles distant, so as to give place for the Second Corps in its movement to Chesterfield ford (bridge over the North Anna). At Jericho mills no enemy was visible on the op¬ posite bank, and to secure the crossing-place Bartlett’s bri¬ gade waded over and formed on the opposite bank, encounter¬ ing only a few of the enemy’s pickets. The banks of the river were high and precipitous and the road on both sides very rough, consisting of a series of rocky steps. The laying of a ponton bridge was at once commenced. Upon receiving this information, General Meade, with the sanction of Gen¬ eral Grant, directed General Warren to cross the river with his whole corps. By 4.30 p.m. all the infantry was over, MOVEMENT TO THE NORTH ANNA RIVER. 129 Crawford’s division wading across while Cutler’s was passing on the ponton bridge. Artillery followed the infantry. It was learnt that Hill’s corps was near at hand, partially in¬ trenched on the Central Railroad. Line of battle was formed about half a mile from the river, on the edge of a wood next to the river, the front being covered by the wood. On the right there was open ground, and here artillery was posted. Crawford was on the left, resting near the river ; Griffin in * the centre ; and Cutler on the right. Cutler was still going into position when, at about six o’clock, Hill attacked the centre and right of Warren’s line ; the attack was heaviest on Cutler, whose troops on the right not having formed, broke and were followed by the enemy, but the artillery drove them back, and being repulsed on Griffin’s front they fell back to the railroad, having suffered considerable loss, es¬ pecially in prisoners. The loss in killed and wounded was probably equal on both sides. The head of the Sixth Corps was at Mount Carmel Church when the action began, and the corps moved at once to the support of General Warren, but did not cross the river until the morning of the 24th, as it was not deemed necessary. The Fifth Corps intrenched during the night. At eleven a.m. of the 23d General Hancock reported from Old Chesterfield (about four miles from the North Anna, at the railroad and Telegraph road bridges) that part of his in¬ fantry had passed that point, moving toward those bridges, his First Division massed at Old Chesterfield and the rest coming up. In accordance with his instructions, advancing, he took position on the north bank about a mile from the river, his right across the Telegraph road, his left across the Freder¬ icksburg Railroad ; Birney on the right, Barlow in the centre, and Gibbon on the left. The enemy were seen in force on the south side of the river, moving in column. They had batteries in position on the high southern bank of 6* 130 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. the river, as well as infantry intrenchments. On the north side they had intrenchments covering the Telegraph road bridge, and on the south side, close to both bridges, similar works. The bridge-head works were held in force by a part of Kershaw’s division. After examining them General Bir- ney was of opinion they could be taken, and about six o’clock General Hancock directed him to make the attempt. The force sent, Egan’s and Pierce’s brigade of Birney’s division, had to advance several hundred yards over open ground as¬ cending to the river bank under artillery and infantry fire, which they did in a spirited manner carrying the works and capturing some of the enemy, the rest being driven over the river. The bridge was taken possession of, and the attempts of the enemy to burn it during the night were frustrated. The south end of the railroad bridge was, however, held by them throughout the night, and that end was burnt. General Burnside had been directed to take position on the right of Hancock, seize Ox ford, which was about a mile above the Telegraph road bridge, and hold it if practicable. But on his approach to the ford it was found to be in the possession of the enemy, who at this point were strongly in¬ trenched on the south bank of the river, and in heavy force. Oh the morning of the 24th it was found that the enemy in front of the Second Corps had abandoned his advanced works on the south bank of the river, and General Hancock crossed and occupied them. Upon examining the enemy’s position it was seen that in this part of the field he held a strongly intrenched line, having slashing and abatis ; his left rested on the river half a mile above the bridge, then ex¬ tended up it to Ox ford ; his right was several miles below and near the site of Morris’s bridge, the line being about three miles long and running in a southeast direction along the chord of a bend in the river. He had artillery in posi¬ tion, and traverses were being added where the line was ex- MOVEMENT TO THE NORTH ANNA RIVER. 131 I posed to enfilade or reverse fire. Ewell’s corps was on the right, Longstreet’s on the left. The Second Corps advanced and intrenched within six or eight hundred yards of this line. About six o’clock in the evening Smyth’s brigade of Gibbon’s division, which was on his left, became briskly en¬ gaged, the enemy pressing Gibbon’s outposts but gaining no material advantage. Barlow’s division was got ready to at¬ tack, but the enemy’s intrenchments were found to be so strong that the design was abandoned. Potter’s division of the Ninth Corps was sent to Hancock and occupied the right of his line. General Burnside was ordered on the morning of the 24th to carry Ox ford and cross with his corps to the south side of the river, but found the enemy so strongly intrenched on the south bank at this point that he did not attack. Crit¬ tenden’s division crossed the river at Quarles’s mill (about a mile and a half above Ox ford), where he found General Crawford with his division. These two advanced toward the enemy’s position at Ox ford, with a view to carrying it and enabling General Willcox to cross there ; but the enemy were found too strongly posted and in too strong force, and these two divisions, after a brief encounter, with¬ drew. Part of Griffin’s division and part of the Sixth Corps were thrown forward to the railroad. The next morning, the 25tli, the Fifth Corps (with Crit¬ tenden’s division, which was placed under General Warren’s orders) and the Sixth Corps were thrown forward to within six or eight hundred yards of the enemy’s line, which was found to run south from Ox ford to Anderson’s mill on Little River, a distance of about a mile and a half. It had been partially developed the day before by Crawford. It was well intrenched and traversed throughout, as it was ex¬ posed to enfilade and reverse fire from the high ground on the north bank of the North Anna, upon which General 132 THE VIRGINIA. CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. Willcox established some batteries. This part of Lee’s line was held by Hill’s corps and Pickett’s division. The position of Lee’s army, we now soe, was well chosen. With its left resting on Little River, the line ran north in open ground to the North Anna at Ox ford, extended along the river three-quarters of a mile, and then ran in a south¬ east direction to the river at the site of Morris’s bridge. His army was concentrated. The two parts of the Army of the Potomac were not only widely separated, with only a division between them, but the river Jiad to be crossed twice to reinforce one part from the other. Lee could re¬ inforce a point attacked in one-tliird of the time that Meade could reinforce at the same point. Some persons, indeed, have thought that Lee should have left a small part of his force to hold the intrenchments of his left and attacked Hancock with the rest of his armv. But Hancock was in- «/ trenched, and Lee knew well the advantage that gave, and he could not afford the loss that he would have inevitably suffered in such an attack. It was only by surprise at some exposed point that he could afford to attack. Hancock’s force, including Potter’s division, did not probably exceed 24,000 officers and enlisted men of infantry. Leaving 7,000 to hold the west face of his intrenchments and the apex on the river, Lee might have attacked Hancock with about 36,000 officers and enlisted men of infantry ; but intrench¬ ments make up for greater differences than that in numbers.1 1 Colonel Venable, an officer of General Lee’s staff, in his address at the Lee Memorial Meeting in Richmond on the 3d of November, 1870, said that at this period General Lee was constantly seeking an opportunity to attack the Army of the Potomac ; that he hoped to strike the blow at the North Anna, or between the Annas and the Chickahominy ; that he hoped much from the attack on Warren’s corps at Jericho ford, where it was in a hazardous position, separated from the rest of the army ; that General Hill also was sanguine of success in this attack ; but that the main plan miscarried through some mishap, though one or two minor successes on the left flank, notably the one by Mahone’s division, were effected. Colonel Walter H. Taylor, Adjutant-General of the Army of Northern Virginia, MOVEMENTS OF THE CAVALRY CORPS. 133 The strength of Lee’s position was such that it was determined to continue the movement by the left flank, a movement in that direction being considered, under the ex¬ isting conditions, preferable to that by the right flank. During the 25th and 26th portions of the Central and Fredericksburg railroads were broken up, and on the 26th General Wilson, with his cavalry division, was sent across the North Anna to demonstrate on our right, and also to aid in the destruction of the Central Railroad. The movements of his division gave General Lee the impression, as it was de¬ signed it should, that it was contemplated to move the Army of the Potomac by its right flank. According to the report of Medical Director McParlin, the wounded of the Army of the Potomac from the 21st to the 26th of May, both days included, numbered 2,100, that being the number sent from Port Royal on the Rappahannock River to the hospitals in Washington.* 1 General Benham, at Washington, was directed on the 26th of May to proceed to Fort Monroe with all his bridge-equi¬ page and materiel and be ready to move up the James River. General Sheridan returned with the Cavalry Corps to the Army of the Potomac on the 24th of May. In compliance with his instructions of the 8th of May to concentrate his available mounted force and proceed against also says of this period that if General Lee’s army had been of even reasonable proportion in comparison with that of his adversary, his movement would have been of another character than that of moving parallel with the Army of the Potomac, and one of the two wings of the Federal Army would have been assailed while on the south side of the river. 1 The tabular statement, however, of the losses of the Army of the Potomac and Ninth Corps during that time, in Part First, Medical and Surgical History of the War, does not altogether agree with McParlin’s report, though he mentions this tabular statement. The dates are also different. Surgeon McParlin’s re¬ port is, I believe, correct. The tabular statement is, from the 23d to the 27th of May, 223 killed, 1,460 wounded, 290 missing.

## cavalry-corps-yellow-tavern

General Sheridan returned with the Cavalry Corps to the Army of the Potomac on the 24th of May. In compliance with his instructions of the 8th of May to concentrate his available mounted force and proceed against also says of this period that if General Lee’s army had been of even reasonable proportion in comparison with that of his adversary, his movement would have been of another character than that of moving parallel with the Army of the Potomac, and one of the two wings of the Federal Army would have been assailed while on the south side of the river. 1 The tabular statement, however, of the losses of the Army of the Potomac and Ninth Corps during that time, in Part First, Medical and Surgical History of the War, does not altogether agree with McParlin’s report, though he mentions this tabular statement. The dates are also different. Surgeon McParlin’s re¬ port is, I believe, correct. The tabular statement is, from the 23d to the 27th of May, 223 killed, 1,460 wounded, 290 missing. 134 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. the enemy’s cavalry, replenish his supplies at Haxall’s Land¬ ing from General Butler’s stores, and return to the army, he concentrated in the vicinity of Aldrich’s, on the Orange and Fredericksburg plank road, and, on the morning of the 9th, moved on the Telegraph road past the right of Lee’s army to cross the North Anna, and get out of the reach of Lee’s infantry before encountering Stewart’s cavalry. Passing through Childsburg, his leading division, Merritt’s, crossed the North Anna at Anderson’s ford by dark. Gor¬ don’s (James B.) brigade of W. H. F. Lee’s cavalry division overtook his rear guard, Davies’ brigade, Gregg’s division, south of the Ta Biver, and continued in contact with Gregg’s and Wilson’s divisions uhtil a late hour, these divisions halt¬ ing for the night on the north side of the North Anna. Custer’s brigade was sent to Beaver Dam Station, on the Virginia Central Railroad, where, on the 10th, it destroyed ten miles of the road, locomotives, cars, and a large amount of army supplies, and recaptured 375 prisoners taken from us at the Wilderness, who were on their way to Richmond. • On the 10th Sheridan crossed the South Anna at Ground Squirrel bridge, halting for the night on the south bank. ' Gordon’s brigade of Stewart’s cavalry clung to Gregg’s and Wilson’s divisions while they were crossing the North Anna in the morning, and until they entered the Negro Foot road, about five miles before reaching Ground Squirrel bridge. General Fitzliugh Tree’s cavalry division, composed of Wickham’s and Lomax’s brigades, had, during all this time, been moving by a circuitous route to interpose be¬ tween Sheridan and Richmond. On the night of the 10th Davies’ brigade was sent to Ashland, on the Fredericksburg Railroad, where it arrived at daylight before the Confederate cavalry, drove out some force there, destroyed the d^pot, several miles of the road, a train and a large amount of stores, and rejoined the main MOVEMENTS OF THE CAVALRY CORPS. 135 body at Allen’s Station. There it was ascertained that Stewart was concentrating at the Yellow tavern on the Brook pike, six miles from Richmond, and Sheridan’s whole force moved on that point, Merritt in advance, Wilson next, then Gregg. Sheridan was advancing in a southeast direction on the Mountain road, which intersects the Brook pike at Yel¬ low tavern, and, upon arriving at the intersection, formed be¬ tween that road and the Fredericksburg Railroad. Stewart was formed at the intersection of the Brook pike and Moun¬ tain road, facing west or north of west. Merritt attacked and gained the Brook pike, but Stewart got a position on his flank and enfiladed his line with artillery. Then Custer charged this flanking force, Wilson supporting him, and captured their artillery, two guns, with their gunners, and broke their line. Stewart’s detached force under Gordon now attacked Sheridan in rear, but Gregg drove it toward Ashland and across the north fork of the Chickahominy ; Fitzhugh Lee’s division fell back toward Richmond. The casualties on both sides were severe, and especially on the Confederate side, their brilliant cavalry commander, General Stewart, being mortally wounded, and Brigadier- General James B. Gordon killed. Following up the part of Stewart’s force that fell back toward Richmond, General Sheridan crossed Brook Run aad entered the most advanced line of intrenchments. In- tending to keep south of the Chickahominy, and passing by Fair Oaks, to make a demonstration in favor of General Butler, who, he was informed, was on the south side of the James four miles from Richmond, he massed his force at daylight of the 12th on the plateau at Meadow bridge. Some force of the enemy’s cavalry held the north bank at the bridge, which had been so injured as to be impassable. Merritt’s division repaired it, crossed and followed up the other side to Gaines’s mill. 136 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. On the Mechanicsville road the defensive works of Rich¬ mond extended ont close to the Chickahominy, and Wilson found that he could not pass them. Two brigades of in¬ fantry, Barton’s and Gracie’s, with some dismounted cavalry, advanced from these works, and in conjunction with their artillery attacked Wilson and Gregg, and at first with suc¬ cess, but finally they were forced to withdraw within their lines, and Wilson and Gregg crossed the Chickahominy above the Mechanicsville bridge. The corps encamped for the night between Walnut Grove and Gaines’s mill. Cross¬ ing to the south side of the Chickahominy at Bottom bridge the next day, General Sheridan reached the vicinity of Hax- all’s Landing on the 14th of May, and remained there until the 17th. The casualties on our part in this operation were 425 killed, wounded, and missing. I have not been able to find any Confederate report or account of it or of their losses. In returning to the Army of the Potomac by way of the White House, 1 Custer was sent to destroy the railroad bridges over the South Anna and Gregg to Cold Harbor to cover Custer’s operations. But on the way to Hanover Court House Custer encountered so large a force of infantry, ap¬ parently on the march to join the Army of Northern Vir¬ ginia, that he was unable to accomplish the task, and they both returned to General Sheridan, who, as before stated, rejoined the army on the 24th of May.

## pamunkey-totopotomoy

CHAPTER VI. PASSAGE OF THE PAMUNKEY RIVER— TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. » In accordance with instructions received from General Grant, General Meade set the Army of the Potomac in motion as soon as it was dark, on the evening of the 26th of May, to cross the Pamnnkey River at and in the vicinity of Hanover Town, some thirty-two or thirty-three miles, by the shortest route, below the position then occupied by the Army of the Potomac. General Sheridan, with Torbert’s and Gregg’s divisions of cavalry, preceded the infantry, taking the river road in the afternoon of the 26th, and leaving some force at Little Page’s bridge and Taylor’s ford to deceive the enemy and watch those crossings until the army had passed. He was followed by Russell’s division of the Sixth Corps, which was to make a forced march to Hanover Town. As soon as it was dark the withdrawal of the Army of the Potomac to the north bank of the North Anna began, and by three o’clock in the morning of the 27th was completed, the ponton bridges taken up, the other bridges destroyed, and the army on the march, following the advanced force. General Wilson’s cavalry took the place of the infantry at the river crossings, and brought up the rear. The night was intensely dark, and the withdrawal was effected apparently without the knowledge of the enemy. General Wright with Getty’s and Ricketts’ divisions fol- PASSAGE OF THE PAMUNKEY RIVER. 161 lowed Russell. The -Fifth Corps, followed by the Ninth, which now formed a part of the Army of the Potomac, marched on a road more distant from the river, and were to cross the Pamunkey at New Castle Ferry, four miles below Hanover Town. The Second Corps followed the route of the Sixth Corps. The roads were not cleared for the Second and Ninth Corps until half-past ten in the morning. At nine a.m. of the 27tli, General Sheridan reported that he then occupied Hanover Town ; that the crossing was taken with but little opposition ; that twTo ponton bridges were laid and in use ; that his first division had crossed, and that the second was about crossing. In the vicinity of Hanover Town, on the Hanover Court House road, General Barringer’s (formerly Gordon’s) cavalry brigade of W. H. F. Lee’s division was encountered and forced back toward the Court House as far as Crump’s Creek, five miles northwest from Hanover Town. Our cavalry also occupied the road from Hanover Town to Atlee’s Station and Richmond. A strong force of the enemy’s cavalry was reported to be at Hanover Court House. At neon of the 27th, General Russell reported from the south side of the Pamunkey that his division had reached that point an hour before. On the afternoon of the 27th the routes of the army were changed ; the Sixth and Second Corps were directed to cross the Pamunkey at Huntley’s, four miles above Hanover Town, and the Fifth and Ninth Corps to cross at Hanover Town. Some brief description of the streams and roads in the section of country in which the operations now about to be described, took place, seems to be necessary. About two miles below Hanover Town, Totopotomov Creek, after a course nearly due east of twelve miles, empties into the Pamunkey. It rises near Atlee’s Station on the 162 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. Virginia Central Railroad, about ten miles north of Rich¬ mond. Three or four miles south of the Totopotomoy is Matadequin Creek, which also empties into the Pamunkey. Both these streams have many swampy heads and affluents. The Cliickahominy rises some fourteen miles northwest of Richmond, and running in a southeast direction, passing four miles east of Richmond, empties into the James about ten miles west of Williamsburg. The Cliickahominy, the Totopotomoy, the Matadequin, - and other streams in this section of country, have but little slope, have low swampy banks or bottom lands, usually wooded, and quickly become impassable swamps in the heavy, early summer rains. From Hanover Junction, the central point of Lee’s posi¬ tion on the North Anna, a road runs down the south bank of the North Anna and Pamunkey rivers, at no great distance from them, passing through Hanover Court House, Hanover Town, near New Castle Ferry, the White House at the head of navigation, etc. There are many roads from the Pamun-1 key to Richmond, crossing this river-road. The old stage- » road from Fredericksburg to Richmond crosses the Pamun¬ key at Little Page’s bridge, and passes through Hanover Court House, which is about seventeen miles from Rich¬ mond. From Hanover Town (also seventeen miles from Richmond) there is a direct road to Richmond, passing through Hawes’s Shop (four miles from Hanover Town), Pole Green Church on the Totopotomoy, Huntley’s Corners, and Shady Grove Church, crossing the Chickaliominy at the Meadow bridges, and also from Huntley’s Corners to Rich¬ mond by way of Meclianicsville. A branch from the Shady Grove Church road runs to Atlee’s Station. A road corned in at Huntley’s Corners from White House by way of Old Church. Again a road leads from New Castle Ferry on the Pamunkey to Richmond, passing through Old Church, and PASSAGE OF THE PAMUNKEY RIVER. leg by tlie Old Church road past Betliesda Church and through Mechanicsville ou the Chickahominy. From Old Church another road leads to Richmond by way of Cold Harbor and New Bridge. Several other roads lead from points lower down on the Pamunkey to Richmond, crossing the Chicka¬ hominy below New Bridge. All these roads from the Pamunkey to Richmond commu¬ nicate with each other by numerous small cross-roads. From Hanover Junction several roads lead to the points where the Army of the Potomac was to cross the Pamunkey, and to the roads by which it would advance after crossing. The first and shortest was the river-road already mentioned, passing through Hanover Court House. At the Court House, besides the river-road and the Richmond stage-road, there is one that leads due south to Atlee’s Station ; another that leads in a southeast direction past Hawes’s Shop, and, after crossing the Totopotomoy, enters the Old Church road. This last de¬ scribed road from the Court House has a branch before cross¬ ing Crump’s Creek that leads direct to Pole Green Church. Another of the routes from Hanover Junction passes through Ashland and Atlee’s to Shady Grove Church and Huntley’s Corners on the Hanover Town road to Richmond. Another route from Hanover Junction south, midway be¬ tween Hanover Court House and Ashland, passes through Merry Oaks and leads to Atlee’s Station, at which point the roads from the Pamunkey to Richmond south of Atlee’s Sta¬ tion are near at hand. Not long after midday of the 28th, the Sixth Corps had crossed the Pamunkey and was in position across the Han¬ over Court House or river-road, at Crump’s Creek. The Second Corps followed the Sixth closely, and formed on its left, completing the cover of the road from Crump’s Creek to Hawes’s Shop. The Fifth Corps crossed the Pamunkey before midday of 164 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. the 28th, and was posted with its right on the road to Rich¬ mond, two miles in front of Hanover Town, and its left near the Totopotomoy, where it is crossed by the road from Hawes’s Shop to Old Church. It was midnight before the Ninth Corps crossed the river. General Wilson remained on the north bank, covering the crossing of the trains until the morning of the 30th of May. On the morning of the 28th General Sheridan was directed to make a demonstration on the road from Hanover Town to Richmond to ascertain where the enemy was posted; and about a mile beyond Hawes’s Shop Gregg’s division encoun¬ tered the enemy’s cavalry, dismounted and occupying tem¬ porary breastworks of rails. This force, General Sheridan says, appeared to be the Confederate cavalry corps and a brigade of South Carolina troops armed with long-range rifles, reported to be 4,000 strong, and commanded by Col¬ onel Butler. But I learn from General Fitzhugh Lee that the Confed¬ erate cavalry force there on the 28th consisted of his own division of two brigades, Hampton’s division of two brigades, and a brigade under the command of Colonel, afterward General, Butler, which had recently arrived from South Caro¬ lina. 1 Fitzhugh Lee was on the right of their line, Hampton on the left. A long, hard contest ensued, and continued until late in the evening, when Custer’s brigade (of Torbert’s division) and Gregg’s division carried the intrenchments and drove 1 This brigade consisted of the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth South Carolina regi¬ ments and the Twentieth Georgia battalion. Part were armed with long-range rifles. Butler was, or had been, Colonel of the Sixth South Carolina. Although this brigade had never been in action, yet, General Sheridan says, it did good service in this encounter. General Dunovant succeeded General Butler in the command of the brigade when General Butler succeeded General Hampton in command of his division, then composed of Young’s, Kosser’s, and Dunovant's brigades. PASSAGE OF THE PAMUNKEY RIVER. 165 back the enemy. Torbert, with Devin’s and Merritt’s bri¬ gades, was also brought in from Crump’s Creek in the after¬ noon, and formed on Gregg’s right, but was not, General Sheridan says, seriously engaged. At six p.m. General Sheridan reported that his prisoners stated that General Longstreet’s and General Ewell’s corps were four miles from Hawes’s shop. Let us see what the Army of Northern Virginia had been doing since the evening of the 26tli. At seven o’clock on the morning of the 27th, General Lee telegraphed to Richmond that the enemy had retired to the north bank of the North Anna during the night ; that a por¬ tion of his force was still visible, but that some of his cavalry and infantry had crossed the Pamunkey River at Hanover Town, and that he had sent his cavalry in that direction to check the movement, and that he would move his army to Ashland. Ashland is a station on the Fredericksburg Rail¬ road, ten miles south of the position then held by the Army of Northern Virginia, and fourteen miles north of Richmond. Roads radiate from it in all directions. Ewell’s corps, on the Confederate right at Hanover Junc¬ tion, under the command of General Early, General Ewell being ill, crossed the South Anna at the Central Railroad bridge, and moved by way of Merry Oaks and Atlee’s Sta¬ tion to Huntley’s Corners at the intersection of the road from Hanover Town to Richmond by way of Hawes’s shop with the road from White House to Richmond by way of Old Church and Shady Grove Church. Here he placed his troops in position on the afternoon of the 28tli of May (after a march of twenty-four miles from Hanover Junction), cover¬ ing the roads mentioned, his right resting near Beaver Dam Creek, which empties into the Cliickahominy near Meclian- icsville, his left on the Totopotomoy, near Pole Green Church, about four miles from Hawes’s shop. 166 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. Longstreet’s corps, under the command of General An¬ derson, crossed the South Anna by the Fredericksburg Bailroad bridge, and, moving by Ashland and Atlee’s, halted in the afternoon of the 28th on Early’s right, between Hunt¬ ley’s Corners and Walnut Grove Church, covering the road from White House by Old Church, Bethesda Church, and Mechanicsville to Bichmond. Breckinridge’s command and Hill’s corps formed along the Totopotomoy, and extended from Early’s left to the vicinity of Atlee’s Station, crossing the railroad a mile north of it. The Confederate cavalry was at Hawes’s shop and Hanover Court House. It will be perceived that while we were securing the roads from the Pamunkey to Bichmond, upon which to advance against Lee, Lee was endeavoring to cover those roads. On the morning of the 29th, the commanders of the Sixth, Second, and Fifth Corps were directed to make reconnois- sances in their front, supported by their whole force. Gen¬ eral Wright toward Hanover Court House, General Hancock on the roads from Hawes’s shop to Atlee’s and to Bichmond, General Warren on the Shady Grove road. General Burn¬ side was held in reserve near Hawes’s shop. General Sher¬ idan, with Torbert’s and Gregg’s divisions, was on the left of the army on the Old Church road, wTatcliing the roads to Mechanicsville, Cold Harbor, and White House. General Wright’s leading division, Bussell’s, proceeded to Hanover Court House, meeting with no opposition, and encountering only small parties of cavalry. There was no infantry force of the enemy in that vicinity. General Hancock’s leading division, Barlow’s, met only the enemy’s vedettes, until it arrived at the crossing of the Totopotomoy by the Bichmond road, when the enemy was found in force intrenched on the south side, and a brisk skirmish ensued. General Birney and General Gibbon were ordered up, the former placed on TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 167 Barlow’s right, the latter, on the morning of the 30th, on Barlow’s left, and on the left of the Richmond road. Gen¬ eral Hancock had before him the left of Early’s corps, Breckinridge’s command and Hill’s corps, the Confederate left. General Griffin’s division of General Warren’s corps crossed the Totopotomoy, and moved along the Shady Grove Church road, encountering only the enemy’s infantry pickets, which fell back before it. The enemy being in force on this road, Cutler’s division moved over to Griffin. The Ninth Corps was in reserve between the Fifth and Second Corps. It was apparent that we were close upon Lee’s whole army, which was, in fact, -well intrenched in the position it had taken on the evening of the 28th, as already described. The infantry were directed to move close up to the en¬ emy’s position the next morning — General Wright to move at daylight of the 30th, form on Hancock’s right, and en¬ deavor to place his corps across the enemy’s left flank. Unfortunately, the heads of Crump’s Creek lay in the coun¬ try through which the Sixth Corps moved on the morning of the 30th, after leaving the road from Hanover Court House to Richmond, and formed a swamp and tangle of the worst character, which delayed the arrival of the corps on Hancock’s right, until it was too late for it to effect anything against the enemy that afternoon. On Hancock’s front bat¬ teries were put up, and the enemy’s artillery fire silenced. The skirmishing here was incessant, and resulted in the capture of most of the enemy’s strongly intrenched skirmish line. Burnside’s corps formed, with sharp skirmishing, on Hancock’s left, and at the close of the day had crossed the Totopotomoy, and had its right resting on that stream near the Whitlock House, and its left near the Shady Grove Church road. Warren’s corps moved along the Shady Grove Church 168 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. road, Griffin leading, Cutler and Crawford following. The enemy’s infantry and skirmishers fell back, Warren’s follow¬ ing them until they entered thickly wooded, swampy ground, formed by several small affluents of the Totopotomoy, which here crossed the road. On the opposite side of this swampy ravine was Huntley’s Corners, occupied by Early, well in¬ trenched. Warren’s skirmishers on the Old Church and Mechanicsville pike, three-quarters of a mile south of the Shady Grove Church road, had encountered all day small parties of the enemy’s cavalry, and now the skirmishing in¬ creased. It was still thought to be with cavalry, but on the afternoon of the 30th General Early, in accordance with orders from General Lee, moved to his right across Beaver Dam Creek to the Mechanicsville and Old Church pike, and out the pike to Betliesda Church, and was then across War¬ ren’s left. Supposing this increased skirmishing to be with cavalry parties, General Crawford sent a brigade over to look after them, and Cutler moved up to the support of Griffin. The brigade sent by Crawford had scarcely arrived in the vicinity of Bethesda Church, when Rodes’s division, of Early’s corps, moved down the road to attack them. The contest was brief ; the brigade was driven back to the Shady Grove Church road, the enemy following. A battery had been well posted where the cross-road from Bethesda Church en¬ ters the Shady Grove Church road, and by its effective fire delayed the enemy until Crawford’s remaining brigade and the scattered brigades of Cutler’s division could be brought up and put in position. The enemy made a resolute attack, but was repulsed and forced to retire, losing, among others, Colonel Willis, Twelfth Georgia, commanding Pegram’s bri¬ gade, mortally wounded, and Colonel Terrill, Thirteenth Virginia, and Lieutenant-Colonel Watkins, Fifty-second Vir¬ ginia, killed. General Early says this last attacking force was Pegram’s brigade, and one of Rodes’s which he had TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 169 sent forward to feel the enemy and ascertain his strength, and as this movement showed that the enemy was moving to the Confederate right flank, he withdrew at night a short dis¬ tance on the Meclianicsville pike, covering it. General Warren says that toward evening the Maryland brigade swung around on our left over to the pike, driving back the enemy’s pickets to Bethesda Church, and that by ten o’clock the enemy had abandoned the field, moving back on the pike, leaving some of their wounded and dead in our hands. To relieve the attack on General Warren, if it should prove to be serious, General Hancock was directed to attack as soon as he could find a suitable place. This despatch he received a little after seven p.m. There was no place on his line where an assault could be made with success at short notice, but to relieve General Warren, he gave the order for General Barlow’s division to attack. Barlow, he says, moved, as usual, with most commendable promptness, and Brooke’s brigade of his division advanced just at dark over obstacles which would have stopped a less energetic commander, and carried the enemy’s advanced line of rifle-pits. At 7.40 Gen¬ eral Meade ordered the attack to cease. When Early moved from Huntley’s Corners. General An¬ derson took his place there, Pickett on his right, Field in the centre, Kershaw on the left. General Sheridan, with Torbert’s and Gregg’s divisions, covered the left of the army. Some cavalry force of the enemy being in position on the road from Old Church to Cold Harbor, at the crossing of the Matadequin Creek, near Old Church, General Sheridan attacked it about one o’clock in the afternoon with Torbert’s division and drove it to Cold Harbor, 1 1 Cold Harbor. Probably so named after the former home of an early settler. I find on the Ordnance maps of England, Cold Harbor Point, on the Thames, ten miles below London, and a cluster of buildings at the Point called Great Cold XII.— 8 170 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OP ’64 AND ’65. Torbert taking up position within a mile and a half of that place.

## cold-harbor

Wilson’s cavalry division was on the right at Cramp’s Creek, under orders to cover that flank and destroy the bridges of the two railroads across the South Anna, and as much of the railroads south of the river as practicable. At midday of the 30th, General Smith’s transports began to arrive at the White House, and General Grant, upon learn¬ ing it that evening, informed General Meade that Smith would probably debark his troops during the night, and move up the south bank of the Pamunkey, starting early on the 31st, and that it was not improbable that the enemy, being aware of Smith’s movement, might feel to get on our left flank, to cut Smith off, or, by a dash, to crush him, and get back before we were aware of it ; that Sheridan should therefore be notified to watch the enemy’s movements well out toward Cold Harbor and also on the Mechanicsville road, and send a brigade early in the morning of the 31st to Smith, the brigade to return with him. But Lee did not learn of the arrival of Smith’s command at the White House until the afternoon of the 1st of June, at which time it had already been engaged at Cold Harbor.* 1 On the 31st the infantry corps were pressed up against the enemy as close as practicable without assaulting, but the po¬ sition was so strong naturally, and so well intrenched, and the intrenchments so strongly held that an assault was not Harbor, apparently a farm or country place. A mile above Great Cold Harbor is another cluster of buildings called Little Cold Harbor, and about seven miles southwest of London another cluster called Cold Harbor. 1 The first notice to be found in General Lee’s despatches of the arrival of Smith’s troops at the White House is in his despatch to Richmond in the evening of the 1st of June, in which he says, among other things ; “ A force of infantry is reported to have arrived at Tunstall’s Station from the White House and to be extending up the York River Railroad. They state that they belong to Butler’s force.” Tunstall’s railroad station is five miles from the White House, on the road up the south bank of the Pamunkey. TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 171 attempted ; the skirmish lines, however, were kept up against the enemy’s, and an attack threatened. On the same day General Sheridan, in pursuance of his in¬ structions, finding the enemy at Cold Harbor, Fitzhugh Lee’s division, apparently meditating an attack on Torbert’s divi¬ sion, anticipated them, and, with Torbert, attacked Lee in the afternoon and gained possession of the position of Cold Har¬ bor. Gregg followed Torbert. But Clingman’s brigade of Hoke’s division came up to Lee’s support about dusk, and General Sheridan deeming he could not hold the position against the force accumulating against him (Hoke’s division was not far off), directed Torbert to withdraw, but receiving an order from General Meade to hold Cold Harbor at all hazards, returned, and during the night modified the breastworks. Cold Harbor 1 was an important point to us, as it was on the line of our extension to the left, and roads concentrated there from Bethesda Church, from Old Church, from White House direct, from New Bridge, and, directly or indirectly, from all the bridges across the Cliickahominy above and below New Bridge. Some of these roads, and others con¬ nected with them, furnished great facilities to us in the movements and operations that took place here and those that followed. On the right, General Wilson, in pursuance of his orders, had, on the 31st, a sharp encounter with General Young’s cavalry brigade near Hanover Court House, and got posses¬ sion of that place. The detachment General Sheridan sent to the White House returned and reported the road clear ; that they could get no information of the enemy being anywhere in the sec¬ tion of country passed over, and that Smith’s troops were still debarking. 1 Sometimes called Old Cold Harbor to distinguish it from New Cold Harbor, a mile west of it. 172 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’05. On the 31st Anderson’s corps (Longstreet’s) was placed on the right of Early’s, and Early moved somewhat to the left, having Rodes’s division west of Beaver Dam Creek. Hoke’s division, which had joined Lee on the night of the 28tli, was on the extreme right of the Confederate line near Cold Harbor ; Kershaw’s division near Beulah Church (Woody’s), about a mile north of Cold Harbor, Pickett’s division on his left, reaching to or toward Walnut Grove Church road, and Field on the left of the corps, his left on the Meclianicsville pike. This general line was partly intrenched. It was the intention, General Anderson says, to make a strong movement from his right, with Hoke and Kershaw, toward Cold Harbor and Beulah Church, on the morning of the 1st of June. The presence of General Hoke near Cold Harbor was known to General Meade from Sheridan’s reports, but it was not known that Kershaw was near him, or that Anderson’s (Longstreet’s) corps was on the right of Early, between Bethesda Church and Cold Harbor. An attack of the enemy’s position on the Totopotomoy, and covering the Shady Grove Church road and Mechanics- ville pike, giving no promise of success, it was determined to send two infantry corps to maintain possession of Cold Har¬ bor, and attack the enemy there before they and the troops sent to their support could intrench. General Wright was directed to move that night, and make every effort to get to Cold Harbor by daylight of the 1st of June, for it was be¬ lieved that Sheridan would be attacked heavily at daybreak. But Wright’s only practicable route was through Hawes’s shop and across to the road from Old Church to Cold Har¬ bor, a night march of more than fifteen miles, through a strange country covered with an intricate network of narrow, ill-defined roads. General W. F. Smith had landed about 12,500 men at the White House by three o’clock in the afternoon of the 31st, TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 173 and leaving General Ames there with 2,500 men to guard the landing-place, marched with 10,000 men and all his artillery, sixteen guns, toward New Castle on the Pamunkey, to which place he had been directed to proceed by despatches of the 28th from General Rawlins, General Grant’s Chief-of-Staff. All his troops had not arrived, -nor had any of his wagons or ammunition. About ten o’clock at night he halted at Bas¬ sett’s, near Old Church, his troops suffering from the heat of the day, and from being unaccustomed to heavy marching. Reporting by despatch for orders, the next morning at day¬ light he received an order from General Grant’s Headquarters to proceed at once to New Castle Ferry, and take position between the Fifth and Sixth Corps. Cold Harbor was in¬ tended. Marching at once, General Smith perceived, upon arriving at New Castle Ferry, that there must be some mis¬ take in his order, and sent word to General Grant, who, in the meantime, hearing of the mistake that had been made, had sent Colonel Babcock to correct it. Some four or five hours were lost in this way, and the march of the troops in¬ creased several miles. On the morning of the 1st of June Hoke did not become engaged, but took position on the right. Kershaw, how¬ ever, attacked Sheridan with two of his brigades, one of them his own, but was repulsed by the fire of repeating-car¬ bines and artillery. He repeated the attack with the same result, Colonel Keitt’s regiment, the Twentieth South Caro¬ lina,1 giving way, and Colonel Keitt himself being mortally wounded in the effort to rally it. The attack was not re¬ newed, and at nine o’clock General Wright arrived, the head of his column near at hand. As soon as it was up, the cav¬ alry were relieved, and moved toward the Chickahominy, covering the left of the dTrmy. 1 This is called a big regiment in the Official Diary, First Corps. It was ap¬ parently a newly-raised regiment. 174 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. Tlie arrival of the Sixth Corps was observed by the enemy, and Kershaw at once closed in to the right on Hoke, Pickett on Kershaw, and Field on Pickett. This closing in to the right by Longstreet’s corps, which occupied about an hour, and was made under cover of in- trenchments in Warren’s front and beyond his left, was ob¬ served by him at half -past ten, and under General Meade’s order to attack, he deployed Lockwood’s and Cutler’s divi¬ sions, but these troops were embarrassed and delayed in forming by the wooded swamps of the Totopotomoy and Matadequin, and by the time they were in line in open ground the enemy’s movement to the right had ceased. Their intrenchments were too formidable to attack. By two o’clock in the afternoon the Sixth Corps was all up, and covered the roads to Cold Harbor from Bethesda Church, New Bridge, and Despatch Station on the York Kiver Railroad near the Chickaliominy. In the course of the morning General Smith had been placed under the orders of General Meade, and was directed to take position on the right of General Wright, and en¬ deavor to hold the road from Cold Harbor to Bethesda Church, and co-operate with General Wright in his attack. By six o’clock he was in position on the right, ready to ad¬ vance to the attack. The main line of the enemy’s intrenchments was about fourteen hundred yards distant from the preliminary position of Generals Wright and Smith, the interval between being mostly open ground. On Smith’s right the open ground was of less width. The intrenchments of the enemy’s picket or skirmish line were from three to four hundred yards in ad¬ vance of their main line ; much of it was in a narrow strip of pine wood. The intrenchments ran across, and were at right angles with the road from Old Cold Harbor to New Cold Harbor TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 175 (Richmond road). The right of the Sixth Corps, General Ricketts’s division, was to move along this road, having Rus¬ sell’s division on its left, Getty’s (General Neill command¬ ing) next, Neill’s brigade being refused to protect the left flank. General Smith’s line was formed with General Devens on the left, connecting with the Sixth Corps, General Brooks next on the right of Devens, and General Martindale on the right of the corps, his division refused. General Martindale was to hold the roads leading to Bethesda Church and toward Mechanicsville. Hoke’s division formed 1 the Confederate right, his left resting near the road upon which Ricketts’s division was to advance. Kershaw’s division was on Hoke’s left, then Pick¬ ett’s, Field’s division forming the left. At six o’clock Wright and Smith advanced to the attack, under heavy artillery and musketry fire. Ricketts’s division struck the main line of intrencliments at Hoke’s left and Kershaw’s right, and carried them,2 Clingman’s brigade giv¬ ing way ; Wofford’s on his left, being flanked, did the same, together with the right of Bryan’s brigade. Kershaw recov¬ ered the ground lost by Bryan, and captured some prisoners and a stand of colors. 3 Hunton’s brigade was sent to Hoke’s assistance, and Gregg’s to Wofford, and a new line was formed in rear of the part captured. General Ricketts took over 500 prisoners. The loss of his division in killed and wounded was severe. The right of Russell’s division, Upton’s brigade, took part with Ricketts in the capture of the intrenchments, the leading regiment, the Second Connecticut Artillery, losing 53 killed, 187 1 General Fitz Lee’s cavalry was on their extreme right. 8 It is stated in the Official Diary of Longstreet’s Corps that the enemy pene¬ trated an interval between Hoke and Kershaw. 8 Official Diary, First Corps, Army of Northern Virginia. 176 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. wounded, and 146 missing ; tlieir colonel, Kellogg, was killed at the head of his command. The right of Getty’s division (Neill commanding) kept pace with the left of Russell’s, but the left of the division was not heavily engaged. The Sixth Corps lost in this engagement about 1,200 killed and wounded. Devens’s division of the Eighteenth Corps passed over the wide space of open ground under heavy fire, and captured • the enemy’s advanced intrencliments in the pine wood, with 250 prisoners, and, passing through the wood, came close upon the main line of intrenchments, which being too strong to attack, the division held the line of woods. Gen¬ eral Devens’s leading brigade lost heavily in officers and men, among them its gallant commander, Colonel Drake, of the One Hundred and Twelfth New York. The leading brigade of General Brooks’s division pushed through the open ground in their front, driving the enemy before them, and through the pine wood, until they came upon the main line, when they received so heavy a fire that they fell back to the woods. The loss of the Eighteenth Corps was about 1,000 killed and wounded. Both corps at once intrenched the positions they had gained. The right of Smith crossed the Bethesda Church road at Woody’s near Beulah Church. During the day the skirmish lines of the army were incessantly engaged, as well as the artillery. In the afternoon General Hancock was ordered to with¬ draw early in the night, and make every effort to reach Cold Harbor by early morning to reinforce Wright’s left. Gen¬ eral Wright was advised of it, and directed to attack as early as possible in the morning, Smith to attack in conjunction with him, Warren also, supported by Burnside. But Smith TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 177 was nearly out of ammunition, and this, with the well-known exhausting effect of a night march upon troops in hot weather, on dusty roads, especially when they had been ac¬ tively engaged all day in close contact with the enemy, caused a postponement of the hour of attack to five in the afternoon. During the 1st, Sheridan, after being relieved by Wright at Cold Harbor, moved to the left with Gregg’s and Torbert’s divisions. Wilson, on the right of the army, sent Chapman’s brigade to destroy the two railroad bridges over the South Anna, while McIntosh’s brigade proceeded to Ashland Station to cover the operation and destroy as much of the railroad as practicable. McIntosh, at Ashland, was attacked in rear from the direction of Hanover Court House by Hampton, with Rosser’s brigade 1 (Wilson says Young’s brigade and other troops), and then from the direction of Richmond, part of General W. H. F. Lee’s division joining Rosser in this attack. A hot engagement ensued, during which Wilson sent the First Maine from Chapman’s brigade to attack the enemy’s rear. But the enemy’s force was too strong for him, and McIntosh was obliged to fall back rapidly toward Han¬ over Court House, Hampton following him closely until dark. Wilson halted his division for the night near the Court House on the river-road. Both railroad bridges were destroyed, and the roads otherwise injured. On the morning of the 2d, General Warren was directed to extend his left so as to unite with Smith at Woody’s, and to contract his right to such extent as to make one-half his force available for attack. This, it was expected, would bring his right to the vicinity of Bethesda Church. General Burnside was directed to withdraw his force and mass it in 1 Lee’s despatch to Secretary of War, Richmond. 8* 178 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. rear of Warren’s right, to protect that flank and support Warren. But this gave General Warren a line about three miles long, the left of which he held chiefly with artillery. It was interrupted here and there by the swamps of the Mat- adequin, which virtually shortened his lines, as he could command the swamps without occupying them. General Wilson was directed to cover the right of the army from the vicinity of Bethesda Church to the Pamunkey. The main body of the Confederate cavalry was on Lee’s left, Fitz Lee’s division on his right. Early on the night of the 1st, General Hancock began to withdraw ; his route was necessarily circuitous ; every effort possible was made to reach Cold Harbor early the next morn¬ ing, but the night was dark, the heat and dust oppressive, and the roads unknown. An attempt to take a short cut with one of the divisions, where artillery could not follow, turned out to be a cause of delay. Notwithstanding these difficulties, the head of th&? column was at Cold Harbor at half-past six in the morning, but in such an exhausted con¬ dition, that a little time was required to close up and cook rations (the attack ordered for the morning had been post¬ poned until five in the afternoon). At 7.30 a.m. the corps was placed in position on the left of Wright, brisk skirmishing going on during and after the for¬ mation. Gibbon was put across the road from Cold Harbor to Despatch Station by way of Barker’s mill, Barlow on his left ; Birney went to Smith until the afternoon. This al¬ lowed the Second Division of the Sixth Corps (Neill) to be transferred from the left to the right of the Sixth Corps, and take Devens’s place. Devens was then transferred to the right of Smith’s corps, the Eighteenth. Brisk skirmishing went on during and after the formation. In view of the movement of troops during the night and the morning, the heat of the day, and the short time had for TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 179 preparation, the attack was postponed until half -past four in the morning of the 3d, and the corps commanders were directed to make all the required preparations. Perceiving the withdrawal from our right, General Lee, on the morning of the 2d, sent General Breckinridge and General Hill, with Wilcox’s and Malione’s divisions, to his right, Breckinridge forming on the high ground on Hoke’s right, Hill on Breckinridge’s right, Fitz Lee moving across the Chickaliominy and picketing down toward the James. Kershaw was supported by Anderson’s, Law’s, and Gregg’s brigades of Field’s division. Early remained on the left with his own corps and Heth’s division. Intrenching went on all day, with heavy skirmishing and artillery fire. But General Lee directed General Early to get upon our right flank and drive down in front of the Confederate line. To carry out this order Bodes’s division moved out the Shady Grove Church road in the afternoon, Gordon swung around to keep pace with Bodes, and Heth, following Bodes, took position on his left. This movement brought on sharp fight¬ ing, which lasted until night, but did not accomplish what was designed. It found General Burnside’s withdrawal un¬ finished, and his skirmish line, occupying the corps intrench- ments, was driven from them by Bodes’s division, and a large number of prisoners taken from it. In this way Bodes’s troops got in rear of the Fifth Corps skirmishers unper¬ ceived, and captured a number of them. Cutler and Crawford held the long line from Bethesda Church to Smith’s right. Griffin’s division was massed at Bethesda Church, but as soon as Early’s movement was discovered it was formed in line, Ayres on the left, Bart¬ lett in the centre, Sweitzer on the right, and moved forward under musketry and artillery fire, to the attack of Bodes’s division, which had advanced from the Shady Grove Church road. Bodes was forced back to the road, and in this en- 180 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. counter lost a gallant officer, Brigadier-General Doles, who was killed. General Crittenden’s division brought up the rear in the withdrawal of Burnside, and was attacked with some vigor in doing so, but held Heth in check until Willcox and Potter got into position and stopped his further advance. Early’s troops remained on the Shady Grove Church road, and intrenched during the night, while Ramseur’s division held the intrenchments on the left of Anderson’s (Long- street’s) corps. The whole army was now ordered to attack at half-past four in the morning of the 3d, except the cavalry on the left. Wilson, reinforced by 3,000 infantry and 2,000 cavalry from Port Royal, was ordered to move from Hanover Court House to Hawes’s shop and attack the enemy’s left flank and rear.1 Lee’s position was naturally strong on the right, and was made strong throughout by intrenchments, which everywhere had open ground in front except for a short distance through the swamp on the right and parts of General Early’s front. It had artillery in position with direct and flanking fire. The right rested on the Chickahominy in swampy ground, but soon rose to high ground, and ran in a direction a little west of north to the right of Early’s position, the line of which was about northeast. The road from Despatch Sta¬ tion past Barker’s mill to Cold Harbor ran along the foot of the high ground on Lee’s right until it diverged to the right toward Cold Harbor, near and in front of the point where Gibbon’s division crossed the road. Along this part of the road, near the foot of the high ground, was an advanced line of Confederate intrenchment. Hill and Breckinridge with 1 General Wilson, reporting at 8.10 a.m., June 3d, says of the reinforcement: “ Colonel Cesnola’s command has been marching all night, all day yesterday, and is still on the road,” etc. ; he had only about 1,400 efficient infantry and 1,000 good cavalry, the rest being 1,200 or 1,500 disarmed stragglers, and “ an indiffer¬ ent force of dismounted cavalry regiments.” TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 181 probably a part of Hoke’s division held here in front of the Second Corps ; then followed Hoke, Longstreet’s corps, and Early’s as before noted. Lee’s position was about six miles from the main line of the Richmond exterior intrenchments, his right only about half that distance from the most advanced intrenchments. The Chickahominy was in its lowest stage of water, and could be crossed anywhere by infantry above Lee’s right. This proximity to the defences of Richmond, together with the condition of the Chickahominy, appeared to bring turning movements to an end, though from what took place subse¬ quently, when the Army of the Potomac was crossing the James, it appears probable that such a movement by our left would have brought on an engagement somewhere between the Chickahominy and Malvern Hill, though on conditions similar to those that had attended previous encounters. Lee’s right was secure. His left being among the wooded swamps of the heads of the Totopotomoy and Matadequin, made it difficult of attack. The front was the assailable part, though it had not been reported that it was practicable to carry it by assault ; and the question was whether to take the chances of an assault there, which, if successful, would give the opportunity of inflicting severe loss upon Lee when fall¬ ing back over the Chickahominy, as that must necessarily be attended with some disorder of his troops. General Grant decided to make the attack. As already stated, the order was issued fixing half-past four in the morning for the hour. It will be perceived that from Smith’s right near Woody’s to Bethesda Church, a distance by the line occupied of nearly three miles, no effective attack could be made upon the enemy ; the Fifth Corps not only occupied this line, but ex¬ tended nearly a mile to the right of it, uniting then with Burn¬ side. From Field’s division, which occupied a large part of the Confederate intrenchments opposite this long thin line 182 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. I from Bethesda Clrarch to Woody’s, Law’s, Gregg’s, and An¬ derson’s brigades had been sent to strengthen Kershaw, and Hunton’s brigade of Pickett’s division, on the right of Field, had been sent to reinforce Hoke. The 2d of June was a hot, sultry day, as those preceding it had been, and wherever troops and wagons moved the dust hung in dense clouds. About five o’clock in the after¬ noon it began to rain, and the rain continued, with slight in¬ termissions, all night, proving to be of great comfort to the men. The assaulting was to be done by the Second, Sixth, and Eighteenth Corps. Promptly at the hour these corps ad¬ vanced to the attack, under heavy artillery and musketry fire, and carried the enemy’s advanced rifle-pits. But then the fire became still hotter and cross-fires of artillery swept through the ranks, from the right of Smith to the left of Hancock. Notwithstanding this destructive fire the troops went forward close up to the main line of intrenchments, but not being able to carry them, quickly put themselves under cover, and maintained the positions they had gained, which in some places were but thirty, forty, and fifty yards from the enemy’s works. The loss in officers and men was heavy, and especially so in brigade and regimental commanders, who are the leaders in action. The greater part of the fighting was over in an hour or less, though attacks were renewed after that time. The killed and wounded of these three corps in that time exceeded 4,000. Including the Fifth and Ninth Corps, the total number killed and wounded was over 5, 600. It is probable, indeed, that the numbers were considerably larger than those I have given. The attack of the Second Corps was made by Barlow’s di¬ vision on the left, Gibbon’s on the right, Birney supporting them. Barlow formed in two lines of battle, the brigades of TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 183 Miles and Brooke in the front line, those of Byrnes and McDongall in the second line. Gibbon formed in two lines, the first in line of battle consisting of Tyler’s and Smith’s brigades, the second consisting of McKeon’s and Owen’s brigades, in close columns of regiments. Barlow7 advancing came against the salient work along the road from Despatch Station, which, after a severe struggle, he carried, captured two or three hundred prisoners, a color, and three guns, turning the guns upon the enemy, and fol¬ lowing them as they retreated from that portion of the line into their main works. But his second line did not get up in time to support the first, w7hich under the close musketry and artillery fire of the main works and a sweeping enfilade artillery fire which now opened on them, followed by an at¬ tack made by Breckinridge’s troops, reinforced by Hill’s, was forced out of the captured works ; but taking advantage of a slight crest some thirty to seventy-five yards distant from them, maintained a position there, putting themselves under cover in a short time. The gallant Colonel Brooke was severely wounded in the assault, falling at the moment his troops entered the enemy’s works. Colonel Byrnes, Twenty-eighth Massachusetts, and Colonel Morris, Sixty-sixth New York, tried and excellent officers, were killed. Gibbon had ordered his second line to follow the first promptly, push rapidly forward and pass over the front line in column, and effect a lodgment if possible in the enemy’s works, and then deploy. His line was cut in two by an im¬ passable swamp, which widened as he advanced toward the enemy. The troops pushed gallantly forward close up to the enemy’s works, under, General Gibbon says, a terrific fire of artillery and musketry. General Tyler fell early in the action, severely wounded. McKeon, following on the right of Tyler’s brigade, struggled against the heavy fire of the enemy until he and many of his command were killed, and 184 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. his ranks thinned and scattered. Colonel Haskell, Thirty- sixth Wisconsin, succeeding to McKeon’s command, was soon carried from the field mortally wounded in a second attempt to carry the enemy’s works. Colonel McMahon, One Hun¬ dred and Sixty-fourth New York, forming the left of Mc¬ Keon’s brigade, but separated from it by the swamps, gained the breastworks with a portion of his regiment, and whilst alongside of his colors, cheering on his men, fell, with many wounds, dying in the enemy’s hands, they capturing his col¬ ors and the men with them. A portion of Smith’s brigade also gained the enemy’s intrenchments, but, General Gibbon says, bffing unsupported were unable to hold them, for, he adds, General Owen, instead of pushing forward in column through Smith’s line, deployed on his left as soon as the lat¬ ter became fully engaged, and thus lost the opportunity of supporting the lodgment made by Smith and McMahon. To the names of the officers already mentioned must be added that of Colonel Porter, Eighth New York Heavy Ar¬ tillery, who was killed a few yards from the enemy’s works. The division, General Gibbon says, lost in this assault 65 officers and 1,032 men killed and wounded ; and from the 3d to the 12th of June, when it was occupied in perfecting its position and pushing forward works toward the enemy, constantly under fire, both artillery and musketry, day and night, it lost besides, 280 officers and enlisted men killed and wounded. The loss of the two divisions on this day, and until the army moved from Cold Harbor, was 2,217 officers and men killed and wounded. The assault of the Second Corps could not be renewed unless the enemy’s enfilading artillery fire could be silenced, and there were no good artillery positions available for that purpose, though guns were, as soon as practicable, put in covered positions for the purpose. But, anxious as both TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 185 v / General Grant and General Meade were that the attempt to carry the works shonld be renewed, if practicable, General Hancock did not consider it wise to make another assault. The Sixth Corps advanced to the attack, with Russell’s division on the left, Ricketts’s in the centre, Neill’s (Getty’s) on the right. The advanced rifle-pits were carried on the right, and then the assault on the main line was made, but was repulsed with heavy loss. Yet positions were gained and held close to the works, at some points only thirty or forty yards from them. 1 During all the time, besides the direct fire, there was an enfilade artillery fire that swept through the ranks from the right and from the left. The casualties of the corps were some 800 killed and wounded, among the number valuable officers. General Smith, in his report of this battle, gives a clear and brief account of the part taken in it by his command. He says : “In front of my right was an open plain swept by the fire of the enemy, both direct and from our right ; on my left the open space was narrower, but equally covered by the artillery of the enemy. Near the centre was a ravine, in which the troops would be sheltered from the cross-fire, and through this ravine I determined that the main assault should be made. General Devens’s division had been placed on the right to protect our flank, and hold as much as possi¬ ble of the lines vacated by the troops moving forward. General Martindale, with his division, was ordered to move down the ravine, while General Brooks, with his division, was to advance on the left, taking care to keep up the con¬ nection between Martindale and the Sixth Corps ; and if, in the advance, those two commands should join, he (Brooks) was ordered to throw his command behind General Martin- 1 The only reports on file are those of five brigade commanders. There are none from the corps and division commanders. 186 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. dale, ready to operate on the right flank, if necessary. The troops moved promptly at the time ordered, and, driving in the skirmishers of the enemy, carried his first line of works, or rifle-pits. Here the command was halted, under a severe fire, to readjust the lines.” Inspecting General Martindale’s front, General Smith found that he had to form a line of battle faced to the right to protect the right flank of the moving column (the enemy’s intrenchments making a partial re-entrant here), and that he could not advance farther unless the Sixth Corps covered his left from a cross-fire — a cross-fire, however, from which we have seen the Sixth Corps was also suffering. General Martindale was ordered to keep his column covered as much as possible, and to move only when General Brooks moved. General Martindale, hearing the firing in front of the Sixth Corps, mistook it for Brooks’s, and made three gallant assaults with Stannard’s brigade, but was repulsed each time. This brought so severe a cross-fire upon Brooks, who was forming his column of attack, that he was ordered to keep his men under shelter until it was over. The fire from the right came from a part of the enemy’s works against which no part of our attack was directed, and General Smith was unable to keep it down with his artillery. Reporting the condition in his front, General Smith said that his troops were very much cut up, and that he had no hope of being able to carry the works in his front unless the Sixth Corps could relieve him from the galling fire on his left flank. To this General Meade replied (eight a.m.) that General Wright had been ordered to assault without refer¬ ence to his, General Smith’s, advance, and that he, General Smith, must continue his assaults without reference to Gen¬ eral Wright, who but a short time before had reported that his assault was waiting for General Smith’s. To this General Smith says, General Devens’s command, which held his right, had been so much cut up in officers and TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 187 men during the two days previous, that he did not deem it in condition to do more than act on the defensive. Of the two . brigades of General Martindale’s division, General Stannard’s had been too much reduced by the assault to be sent in again, and Colonel Stedman’s brigade, in addition to having been repulsed, was holding a line he could not neglect. Of the three brigades of General Brooks, two had suffered severely during the first advance and the holding of the ground gained under a terrible cross-fire ; and there was left of fresh troops only the brigade of General Burnham, which was ordered to the front to form a column of attack. But the severe flank fire from the right, which General Smith says went through his line into the right of the Sixth Corps, must first be silenced ; and later in the day additional artil¬ lery was sent him for the purpose ; but at half-past one o’clock General Meade suspended all further offensive opera¬ tions, and directed corps commanders to intrench the posi¬ tions they held, and make reconnoissances with a view to moving against the enemy’s works by regular approaches from the advanced positions they held. The killed and wounded of the Eighteenth Corps num¬ bered about a thousand. The loss in leading officers on this day, as well as on the 1st of June, was severe. Among the killed on the two days were Colonel Meade and Lieutenant- Colonels Perry, Anderson, and Marshall, all commanding regiments. The order of General Meade suspending the attacks was issued upon receiving a despatch from General Grant, stating that as the corps commanders were not sanguine of success in case an assault was made, that further advance might be suspended for the present ; that advances to advantageous positions should be made by regular approaches, after due reconnoissance ; that to aid the expedition under General Hunter it was necessary to detain all the army then with 188 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’05. Lee until Hunter got well on liis way to Lynchburg. This would be more effectually done by keeping the enemy out of the intrenchments of Richmond than by forcing him into them. It should be mentioned that as early as seven o’clock General Grant had directed General Meade to suspend the offensive the moment it became certain that an assault could not succeed. General Burnside threw forward Generals Potter and Will- cox early on the morning of the 3d, and took the advanced rifle-pits of Early’s left (those taken by Willcox having been captured from him the evening before) and established these divisions close up to the enemy’s main line. One o’clock was fixed upon by him for an attack upon the main works by the three divisions, as by that hour it was expected that the ar¬ tillery put in position would silence the severe enfilading fire of the enemy. General Wilson wTas to co-operate by an at¬ tack on Early’s rear. The order suspending further offensive operations, how¬ ever, was received just as the skirmishers wTere about to move, but not long after Early attacked vigorously and was repulsed. The fighting was sharp during the day, the killed and wounded of the corps numbering about 800, and including, General Burnside says, some of their best officers and men. General Warren, co-operating with General Burnside, had General Griffin’s division, moving and attacking Rodes’s and Heth’s divisions in concert with Burnside’s troops and push¬ ing Early off from the Shady Grove Church road. While Warren was thus attacking from his right, Gordon attacked his right centre, but was repulsed. The Fifth Corps line was too extended for offensive operations, and about noon Birney’s division of the Second Corps was sent to hold its left. But the order suspending offensive operations was re¬ ceived by the time this division was in position. The losses of the Fifth Corps wrere some 400 killed and wounded. TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 189 General Wilson, after establishing Cesnola’s force on Burnside’s right, moved across the Totopotomoy to Hawes’s shop, attacked the enemy there, Barringer’s brigade, W. H. F. Lee’s division, and drove them from the rifle-pits, losing several valuable officers, Lieutenant-Colonel Preston killed, and Colonel Benjamin severely wounded. The enemy with¬ drew on the road to Enon Church in the direction of their former infantry intrenchments on the Totopotomoy. Gen¬ eral Wilson then attacked Heth’s left rear near Via’s, on the road running south from Hawes’s shop, engaging a brigade of three regiments, and got possession of their rifle-pits, which he held for an hour. Failing to connect with Burn¬ side’s infantry, he withdrew to Hawes’s shop. General Lee, in reporting the operations of the day to the Secretary of War at Richmond, says of this: “General Hampton encountered the enemy’s cavalry near Hawes’s shop, and a part of General Wm. H. F. Lee’s division drove them from their intrenchments.” General Early says : “ There were repeated attacks on Rodes’s and Heth’s fronts on the 3d, those on Cook’s brigade of Heth’s division being especially heavy, but all of them were repulsed. There was also heavy skirmishing on Gor¬ don’s front. During the day Heth’s left was threatened by the enemy’s cavalry, but it was kept off by Walker’s brigade under Colonel Fry, which covered that flank, and also re¬ pulsed an effort of the enemy’s infantry to get to our rear. As it was necessary that Heth’s division should join its corps on the right, and my flank in this position was very much exposed, I withdrew at the close of the day to the line pre¬ viously occupied, and next morning Heth moved to the right.” General Early does not mention his losses. About eight o’clock in the evening, the right of Barlow and the left of Gibbon were sharply attacked, but the enemy was repulsed. The Diary of Longstreet’s Corps says of this : 190 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OP ’64 AND ’65. ‘ ‘ At dark a final and furious assault is made on Martin, the right brigade of Hoke. Hunton also severely engaged.” General Lee, in reporting to the Secretary of War on the 4th of June, says: “Last night, after the date of my des¬ patch, Generals Breckinridge and Finnegan were attacked by the enemy as they were preparing to re-establish their skirmish line. The enemy wTas soon repulsed. Immediately afterward an attack was made upon General Hoke’s front, with a like result.” The lines were so close that an attempt to establish a picket line brought on a sharp contest, in which each side thought the other the attacking party. Although the lines were advanced by regular approaches (they were so close to the enemy’s intrenchments, and the ground was so open, they could not be advanced in any other way), yet an assault gave no promise of success. The army remained in position here until the night of the 12th, when it withdrew to cross the James River. The daily skir¬ mishing during that time was sharp, and caused severe loss in some divisions ; during the nights there was heavy artil¬ lery firing, and sometimes heavy musketry. The labor in making the approaches and strengthening the intrenchments was hard. The men in the advanced part of the lines, which were some miles in length, had to lie close in narrow trenches with no water, except a little to drink, and that of the worst kind, being from surface drainage ; they were ex¬ posed to great heat during the day ; they had but little sleep ; their cooking was of the rudest character. For over a month the army had had no vegetables, and the beef used was from cattle which were exhausted by a long march through a country scantily provided with forage. Dead horses and mules and offal were scattered over the country, and between the lines were many dead bodies of both parties lying unburied in a burning sun. The country was low and TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 191 marshy in character. The exhausting effect of all this began to show itself, and sickness of malarial character increased largely. Every effort was made to correct this ; large quan¬ tities of vegetables were brought up to the army, and a more stringent police enforced. So much was every one absorbed in the offensive operations against the enemy that, for a brief time, the police duties for the maintenance of cleanliness and health had not been as closely looked after as usual. The good effect of these efforts was soon apparent. According to the report of the Medical Director, Surgeon McParlin, the wounded brought to the hospitals from the battle of the 3d of June numbered 4,517. The killed were at least 1,100. The wounded brought to the hospitals from the battle of the 1st of June were 2,125; the killed were not less than 500. The wounded on the 1st and 3d of June were, therefore, 6, 642, and the killed not less than 1, 600 ; but adopting the number of killed and missing furnished Gen¬ eral Badeau from the Adjutant-General’s Office, 1,769 killed, 1,537 missing (many — most, indeed — of them, no doubt, killed), we have 8,411 for the killed and wounded, and for the total casualties, 9,948. Previous to June 1, and after crossing the Pamunkey, we have 1, 622 wounded, 1 400 killed, and about 1,000 missing, making a total of 10,433 killed and wounded, and a total of casualties of 12, 970. 2 1 Received at the hospitals from — Second Corps . Fifth Corps . Sixth Corps . Ninth Corps . Cavalry Corps . 732 wounded. 5C0 14 “ 76 “ 300 Total . 1,622 2 Surgeon McParlin further states in his report that the number killed, wounded, and missing from the time of crossing the Pamunkey to the evening of the 12th of June, may be estimated as follows, excluding the Eighteenth Corps. Number of wounded, according to the classified returns, 7,545 ; number of wounded, strag¬ gling, and unrecorded (slightly wounded, A. A. H.), 900 ; total, 8,445. Number killed, according to regimental reports, 1,420 ; number missing, 1,864. Total of 192 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. At tlie close of tlie day on the 3d of June there were many of our wounded lying between the lines and very near the enemy’s intrenchments, completely covered by the fire of his pickets and sharpshooters. But our men made extraordinary efforts by night to get in their wounded comrades, and so far succeeded that very few were left. There were many dead of both sides lying there unburied, and General Grant proposed an arrangement with General Lee for bringing in the wounded and burying the dead. This proposition was made on the afternoon of the 5tli, but no cessation of hos¬ tilities for the purpose took place until the afternoon of the 7tli, when a truce was agreed upon from six to eight in the evening. Yery few wounded were collected. Of those not brought in at night by their comrades, as before mentioned, the greater number had died of their wounds and exposure. The dead were buried where they lay. The number of casualties in the Army of Northern Virginia during this period, from the 27th of May to the 12th of June, are nowhere stated. General Lee reported to the Secretary of War, on the 3d of June, that his loss that day was small. Up to, and including, the morning of the 1st of June, they were probably nearly equal to our own ; in the afternoon of the 1st of June, less than ours, but still severe ; on the 3d of June, very much less than ours. According to the Tabular Statement of the “ Medical and Surgical History of the War,” the number of its wounded, from the 1st to the 12th of June, was 1, 200 ; its missing, 500. This would make its killed and wounded about 1,500. The authority for the statement is not given. The actual number was probably much greater. But even that number, when added to the probable number of killed and wounded between the 27th of May and midday casualties, 11,729. The losses in the Eighteenth Corps he estimates at 1,900 wounded, 500 killed and missing; total, 2,400. Grand total, 14,129. The num¬ ber of sick sent to general hospitals North, 3,000. Total loss, 17,129. TOTOPOTOMOY AND COLD HARBOR. 193 of tlie 1st of June, would give between three and four thou¬ sand killed and wounded for the whole period we are consid¬ ering, and, including the missing, not less than between four and five thousand. Besides the Confederate general officers already mentioned as killed or wounded, it is noted in the Tabular Statement of Casualties that General Kirkland of Hetli’s division, General Lane of Wilcox’s, General Finnegan of Malione’s, and General Law of field’s divisions were wounded. In the Diary of Longstreet’s Corps it is men¬ tioned that General Law was wounded. On the 5tli General Birney was returned to the Second Corps, and extended its left to the Cliickahominy. General Warren was withdrawn to the rear of Cold Harbor, and Gen¬ eral Burnside, with his left on Smith’s right, was extended along the Matadequin toward Allen’s mill-pond. On the 7th Griffin’s and Cutler’s divisions moved to the Cliickahominy, and held from the left of Hancock to Des¬ patch Station. Two attempts were made by Lee to attack the right flank and rear of our army — one on the 6th, the other on the 7th. On the 6th General Early moved out on the north side of the Matadequin, getting as far as Boslier’s on Burnside’s right flank, but becoming entangled in the swamps of that stream, and troops from Anderson’s corps failing to co¬ operate in time, probably owing to the same cause, he could effect nothing, and retired to his intrencliments. On the 7th he made a similar effort on the south side of the Matadequin, wrhich failed from the same cause.
