# Official Records XXXVI part 1: Sheridan Overland dispatches and report of May 13, 1866, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a University of Illinois scan; not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, garbled lines, split words, running headers, misprinted page numbers and footnote markers. Local headings are editorial. Bounded report passages only; dispatches and footnotes printed with a report are part of that report. No facsimiles or maps; tabular casualty inclosures are selected only where noted and are garbled in OCR.

## title

WAR OF THE REBELLION: A COMPILATION OF THE OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE UNION AND CONFEDERATE ARMIES. PREPARED BY The late Lieut. Col. ROBERT N. SCOTT, Third TJ. S. Artillery. PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF The Hon. REDFIELD PROCTOR, Secretary of War, BY Maj. GEORGE B. DAVIS, U. S. A., Mr. LESLIE J. PERRY, Mr. JOSEPH W. KIRKLEY, Board of Publication. SERIES I— VOLUME XXXVI— IN THREE PARTS. PART I— REPORTS. WASHINGTON: GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 1891.

## sheridan-heading

No. 190. Reports of Maj. Gen. Philip H. Sheridan, U. S. Army, commanding Cavalry Corps , including operations April 6- August 4.

## sheridan-1864-05-13

Bottom’s Bridge, Va., May 13, 1864. (Via Jamestown Island, 11 p. m., 14th. > General : I have the honor to report that at 5 a. m. on the 9th instant I inarched my command to Tabernacle Ctom* to W Je on your instructions. On examination I found that all hand with the command was half-rations tor one day. I the determined at once to march around the enemy s right flank gam the North Anna, and. if possible, the South Anna, t j enemy’s cavalry battle, as I thought that at either of those point. Chap. XLVIIL] RAPID AN TO THE JAMES. 777 should be able to obtain forage for my animals. On the evening of the 9th I reached the North Anna without serious opposition from the enemy. During that night I destroyed the depot at Beaver Dam, 3 large trains of cars, and 100 cars, 2 fine locomotives, 200,000 pounds of bacon and other stores, amounting in all to 1,500,000 of rebel rations ; and also the telegraph wire and railroad track for a dis- tance of about 10 miles, embracing several culverts ; recaptured 378 of our men, including 2 colonels, 1 major, and several other officers. On the morning of the 10th I resumed the march, crossing the South Anna at Ground Squirrel Bridge, and went into camp about day- light on the 11th. I captured Ashland Station. At this point I destroyed 1 locomotive and a train of cars, engine-house, 2 or 3 Gov- ernment buildings, containing large amounts of stores ; also de- stroyed 6 miles of railroad, embracing 6 culverts, 2 trestle bridges, and the telegraph wire for some distance. About 7 a. m. on the 11th I resumed the march on Richmond. All the in'ormation that could be obtained led me to believe that the rebel General Stuart was concentrating his cavalry at Yellow Tavern. On reaching that point I found such to be the case. I immediately attacked him, and after an obstinate contest I gained possession of the Brook turnpike, captured two pieces of artillery, driving his force back toward Ash- land and across the north fork of the Chickahominy, a distance of about 4 miles. At the same time a party charged down the Brook road, across the Chickahominy, and captured the first line of the enemy’s works around Richmond. During the night I marched via Brook road, and massed the whole of my command between the first and second lines of the enemy’s works on the bluffs overlooking the line of the Virginia Central Railroad and the Mechanicsville pike, my intention being to obtain the enemy’s works commanding the Mechanicsville pike, then to pass down the south side of the Chick- ahominy to the old Fair Oaks battle-ground, and there go into camp. After demonstrating upon the works I found them very strong, and 7iaVfrSv^ ^n^e.n^on °f assaulting. I then determined to recross the Chickahominy at Meadow Bridge, which had been partially destroyed by the enemy. In the course of about three hours the bridge . was repaired, under a heavy artillery fire from a battery belonging to the rebel cavalry. This cavalry and artillery were posted across the north end of Meadow Bridge to oppose my recross- ing I directed General Merritt, commanding First Division, to make the crossing, attack the enemy, and drive him off. This was handsomely done, the pursuit continuing as far as Gaines’ Mill. Burmg this same time the enemy, observing that I was recrossing he Chickahominy, marched out from his second line of works a brigade of infantry and a large number of dismounted cavalry, and attacked the divisions of Generals Gregg and Wilson. After a severe contest he was repulsed and driven behind his works. These divisions (Gregg’s and Wilson’s), after collecting the wounded, recrossed the Chickahominy without being followed up. On the afternoon of the 12th the corps encamped at Walnut Grove and Tames Mill. At 9 a. m. of the 13th (to-day) resumed the march, jind encamped at Bottom’s Bridge. I will here cross the Chicka- ommy, and comply, if possible, with the last condition of my orders. My command is in fine spirits with its success. I have jeen enabled to bring along with me all of the wounded, excepting' a out 30 cases of mortal wounds. These were, however, well cared or, and made as comfortable as possible in the farm-houses in the <778 OPERATIONS IN SE. VA. AND N. C. [Chap. XLVIII. ■country. My wounded, I think, will not exceed 250 ; total losses not over 350. The Virginia Central Railroad bridge over the Chick- ahominy, and other trestle bridges, one 60, one 30, one 20 feet, and railroad for a long distance north and south of the Chickahominy crossing, were destroyed. My horses are very much jaded for want of forage. My loss in them, however, up to the present time will not exceed 100. I am very much indebted to Generals Gregg, Wilson, and Merritt, division commanders, and Generals Custer and Davies, and Colonels Gregg, Devin, Chapman, McIntosh, and Gibbs, brigade command- ers. Their services are worthy of the very highest praise. All the officers and men of the command behaved splendidly. It is possible that I might have captured the city of Richmond by an assault, but the want of knowledge of your operations and those of General Butler, and the facility with which the enemy could throw in troops, made me abandon the attempt. I have the honor to be, general, yours, respectfully, P. H. SHERIDAN, Major-General , Commanding. Major-General Meade, Commanding Army of the Potomac.

## sheridan-1864-05-14

Headquarters Cavalry Corps, HaxalVs Landing , James River , May 14, 1864. General : I have the honor to report the arrival of my command at this point. The rebel cavalry are very much demoralized since the fights at Yellow Tavern and Meadow Bridge. I encamped at Walnut Grove from 2 o’clock of the 12th till 9 o’clock of the 13th awaiting an attack, but the enemy did not come on. I could not hunt him up, as my horses have been living on grass nearly all the time since I left, and were too weak and jaded. Major-General Stuart was badly wounded at Yellow Tavern, and Colonel Pate killed. The loss of the enemy at both Yellow Tavern and Meadow Bridge was very severe. I find that my command was attacked, while inside of the intrenchments at Richmond, by two brigades oi infantry, and the men feel greatly elated at driving them back be- hind their works. We remained inside the intrenchments from 1 p. m. of the 11th till 3 p. m. of the next day, and then whipped the enemy’s cavalry and infantry. The country passed through by m\ command is entirely destitute ; there is nothing for man or animals. All the country north of the J ames River is in this condition from ven best information. It will take me several days to get my comman< in condition for effective service. I have taken the greatest can of the horses ; in fact I have made regular marches, encamping every night, grazing the animals, and collecting supplies for th* men. Only three days’ rations were taken by tJie command. Ini has lasted six days. If I could be permitted to cross the Janie: River and go southward I could almost ruin the Confederacy, forward this by Lieutenant-Colonel Kingsbury, my adjutant-gen pral, who can give you many particulars, which will be given m nr detailed report. Every exertion will be made to get the comman in condition as soon as possible. I am sending my prisoners- between 200 and 300 — and my wounded by boat to-night. Chap. XLVIIL] RAPID AN TO THE JAMES. 779 Iii the report sent you from Bottom’s Bridge, giving details of property destroyed at Beaver Dam Station, I omitted to state that ninety wagons were also destroyed.

## sheridan-1864-05-25

Headquarters Cavalry Corps, Camp on Pole Cat Creek, May 25, 1864. General : I have the honor to notify you that I found my train at this place ; the trains of the army were a short distance in rear. I therefore went into camp here. One division of my command is camped on the right flank, one on the left flank of the trains, and the other in front. About seven-eighths of the horses of the corps are m good working condition ; six-eighths of the above number are in as good if not better condition than when I started on my expedi- tion. This is a minimum estimate. I think that two or three days will put them all in good order. I turned in at Haxall’s Landing 341 horses unfit to make the return trip. My total loss in horses will not exceed 400, including killed in battle and abandoned on the road shot. Hut lew animals were obtained in the country. My losses in killed and wounded from the 9th to the 25th of May are as follows, viz : 1 ot a 1 killed, 46. Wounded: Saved, sent to general hospital from liaxall s Landing and White House, 210 ; very slight and returned to duty 75; mortally, left in farm-houses on road, 40; badly, and captured by the enemy, 54; total, 379.* The 210 wounded sent to general hospital were transported in a captured train of rebel ambu- iances and ordnance wagons and the ordnance wagons of the corps. I he officers and men of the corps are in excellent spirits. 1 have on hand and ready for issue seven days’ rations of subsist- ence tor the men of the corps and a little less than one day’s forage tor the horses. My empty wagons should be permitted to go back t°r forage at once. I would be pleased to call in person upon the maior-general com- manding if he will grant the permission. I am, general, very respectfully, your obedient servant, P. H. SHERIDAN, Major-General, Commanding. P. S.— My total loss in captured by the enemy is between 75 and 80. P. H. SHERIDAN, , TT Major-General. Major-General Humphreys, Chief of Staff. For revised return of casualties during Sheridan’s first expedition, see p. 184.

## sheridan-1864-05-30

Headquarters Cavalry Corps, Old Church, May 30, 1864 — 7 p. m. The enemy’s cavalry collected in my front on the Cold Harbor road, not far from Old Church. I directed General Torbert, with his di- vision, to attack them about 1 o’clock to-day. Had a sharp engage- ment of nearly two hours. We defeated them and drove them down to Cold Harbor. It was a very handsome affair, and very creditable to General Torbert and his division. The enemy had a very strong position. They were driven from it, leaving a number Chap. XLVIII.] RAPID AN TO THE JAMES. 7 83 Z“f7dSL6rl 1 W™ S™ with him I have now ordered a strong force down the Mechanics- hls command g° dOWn &S aS General Warren and connect™ I inclose extracts from Richmond paper of this date Mv head quarters will he at Sayers’ house to-night My h d‘ Very respectfully, . P. H. SHERIDAN, Major-General , Commanding . Major-General Humphreys, Chief of Staff.

## sheridan-1864-06-16

Headquarters Cavalry Corps, Camp near Gainey's Bridge, Va., June 16, 1864—2 a. m. General : I have the honor to report to you the arrival of my command at this point, and also to report its operations since leav- ing: New Castle Ferry : , „ , . , I crossed the Pamunkey River on the 7th instant, marching via Aylett’s, and encamped on Herring Creek. On the morning of the 8th resumed the march via Pole Cat Station, and encamped 3 miles west of the station. On the 9th marched through Chilesburg and New Market, encamping on East Northeast Creek, near Young s Bridge. On the 10th marched via Andrews Tavern and Twymans Store crossing both branches of the North Anna, and encamped at Buck Childs’; about 3 miles northeast of Trevilian Station Mv intention was to break the railroad at this station, inarch through Mechanicsville, cut the Gordonsville and Charlottesville Railroad near Lvndsay’s house, and then to march on Charlottesville, but on arrival at Buck Childs’ house I found the enemy s cavalry m my immediate front. On the morning of the 11th, General Tolbert, with his division, and Colonel Gregg s brigade, of General Greggs division, attacked the enemy. After an obstinate contest drove hm from successive lines of breast- works, through an almost impenetra- ble forest, back on Trevilian Station In the mean time Genewd Custer was ordered with his brigade to proceed by a country real so as to reach the station in rear of the enemy s cavalry DnMS arrival at this point the enemy broke into a complete ™ut lea\nio his dead and nearly all of his wounded in our hands; also 20 officers, 500 men, and 300 horses. . - T fin_ These operations occupied the whole of the day. At night I en camped at Trevilian Station, and on the morning of the .13th com menced destroying the railroad from this point to Louisa Coui House. This was thoroughly done— ties burned and rails rend . unserviceable. The destruction of the railroad occupied until 1 o’clock of this day. Chap. XLVIII.] RAPID AN TO THE JAMES. 785 I directed General Torbert to advance with his division and Gen- eral Davies brigade, of General Gregg’s division, in the direction of Gordonsville, and attack the enemy, who had concentrated and been re-enforced by infantry during the night, and had also constructed rifle-pits at a point about 5 miles from Gordonsville. The advance was made, but as the enemy’s position was found too strong to as- sault, no general attack was made. On the extreme right of our lines a portion of the Reserve Brigade carried the enemy’s works twice, and was twice driven therefrom by infantry. Night closed the contest. I found on examination of the command that there was not a sufficiency of ammunition left to continue the engage- ment. The next day trains of cars also came down to where we were engaged with the enemy. The reports of prisoners and citi- zens were that Pickett s old division, or a portion of it, was coming to prevent the taking of Gordonsville. I, therefore, during th! night and next morning, withdrew my command over the North Anna, via Carpenter’s Ford, near Minor’s Bridge. In addition the animals were, for the two entire days in which we were engaged without forage, the surrounding country affording nothing but grazing of a very inferior quality, and generally at such points as were inaccessible to us.. Up to this time I could get no definite in formation as to the position of General Hunter. Report placed him and his command at Staunton, destroying the railroad. I had therefore, the choice of attempting to join him there, via Orange Court-House and Stanardsvil e, or retiring, and I resolved on the latter. 1 had at that time only one day’s rations for my men, but very little forage for my animals, and not sufficient ammunition on hand to risk a severe engagement. Living off the country was a tailuie ; very little forage could be obtained for the animals, and to attempt under such circumstances to join General Hunter would have jeopardized my command. I regret my inability to carry out your instructions. J J The cavalry engagement of the 12th was by far the most brilliant one i wt pr?Sieint campaign. The enemy’s loss was very heavy. Thev lost the f oilo wi ng-named officers in killed and wounded : Colonel McAllister, commanding regiment, killed ; Brigadier-General Ros- ser, commanding brigade, wounded ; Colonel Aiken, commanding egiment, wounded ; Colonel Custer [?], commanding regiment, wounded. My loss m killed and wounded will be about 575. * Of this number 490 were wounded. I brought off in my ambulances 377, all that could be transported. The remainder were (with a number of ffiteiTUnded^at.^ int? my hands) left behind. Surgeons and at- tendants were detailed and remained in charge of them. I captured ^nirfVmn°W W™h ime ?70 Prisoners of including 20 commis- sioned officers. My loss m captured will not exceed 160.6 These were Iharzlf dom thn Flnh ^ichi?an Cavalry, f This regiment gallantly about Sd00d?^n Gordonsville road, capturing 1,500 horses, and about 800 men, but was finally surrounded, and had to give them np. When the enemy broke they hurried between General Cus- of1* PennimH-^ 9 aiv? Colonel Gregg’s brigade, capturing 5 caissons nnington s battery, 3 of which were afterward recaptured, t CommlS/h^f <2?3uaItie® during Sheridan’s second expedition, see p. 186. 3fflce,^Srch 18, 188^ ® 1 A' Alger’ See Sheridan to Adjutant-General’s 50 R R— VOL XXXVI, PT I OPERATIONS IN SE. VA. ANI> N. C. [Chap. XLVI11. 786 leaving in their hands 2 caissons. A more detailed report will he made hereafter. I have sent staff officers forward to send to me as far as Dunkirk subsistence and forage. It is very essential that it should reach me at that point. . I will march down the north bank of the Mattapony m the expec- tation that 1 may be able to obtain some supplies through the country in that vicinity. None can be obtained south of the Matta- pony, between this point and the White House. The following troops were sent from Lee’s army and xiichmond to re-enforce Jones’ command in the valley: Breckinridge s corps, 4,000; 2 000 dismounted cavalry to Gordonsville ; the rebel cavalry under Hampton and Fitz. Lee, and Pickett’s old division or a part ot it. Pickett’s troops went either by the canal to Columbia, or by rail- road via Lynchburg to Charlottesville. Very respectfully, your obedient servant, gHERIDAN Majo r- General, Commanding . Major-General Humphreys, Chief of Staff, Army of the Potomac .

## sheridan-1866-05-13-opening

Headquarters Military Division of the Gulf New Orleans, La., May 13, 1866. General : I have the honor to make the following report of the On March 27, 1864, I was relieved from the command of the Sec ond Division, Fourth Corps, Army of the Cumberland, to take com mand of the Cavalry Corps, Army of the Potomac, and on the 4th of April, m General Orders, No. 144, current series, War Depart BmndJsSX COTPS’ thei* jying in the vicinity of m andy fetation , Va. The corps consisted of three divisions and was adjusted™8 follows ? frig^en" A % 1 ^ kBng. Ge! ! ing Arniy ^The officers and men were m pretty good condition, so far as health and equipment were concerned, but their horses were thin and very much worn out by excessive, and, it seemed to me unnecessary picket duty the picket-line almost completely encircling the infam out nn'itn' p17 ca“Ps of the army, covering a distance, if stretched out on a continuous line, of nearly 60 miles. The enemy, more wise had been husbanding the strength and efficiency of his horses bv sending them to the rear, in order to bring them out in the spring m good condition for the impending campaign ; however shortly after my taking command, much of the picketing was done awav with, and we had about two weeks of leisure time to nurse the Maftr TihlCh S° D1Uch dePeilded! consequently, on the 1th of ^a^i-W^en t^ie campaign opened, I found myself with about 10 000 f*?™ and the same number of horses in passable trim After carefully studying the topography of the countrv from the Rapidan to Richmond, which is of a thickly wooded character ; ® numerous and almost parallel streams nearly all uniting forming he York River, I took up the idea that our cavalry ought to fight the enemy’s cava ry, and our infantry the enemy’s infaftrv I was want^of m- ^iS imPJ®ssl0n sti11 more by the consciousness of a appreciation on the part of infantry commanders as to thp power of a large and well-managed body of horse but as it was dif ficult to overcome the established custom of wastin- cavllrv for the protection of trains, and for the establishme J of cSrdons abound a deeping infantry force, we had to bide our time

## sheridan-1866-05-13-richmond-raid

I received orders to go out and engage the rebel cavalry, and when out of forage, of which we had half rations for one day, I was to proceed to the James River, and replenish from the stores which General Butler had at Bermuda Hundred. Pursuant to this order the three divisions of cavalry, on the evening of this day, were con- centrated in the vicinity of Alrich’s, on the plank road to Fredericks- burg, and on the morning of the 9th commenced the march. It will hXlXXXn examlljati°u of map of Virginia, that there was but very little space for a large cavalry force to operate on the left wpre r fTm Spotsylvania to the Rappahannock, and that we r. le.^ b,e shut ill I therefore concluded to iarch around of tOTXw S ar“Y’ anT put my command, before fighting, south nLfilUf Where -1 exPe°ted to procure grain ; where I was confident that while engaging the enemy’s cavalry no timely assist- fulmfan^ co? d b,e Procured, and whence, if not success- ul, I could proceed west and rejoin our army, swinging around Gordons ville and Orange Court-House. 7 With thiJVtew we tth’S'Tf °U un tue ?lank road to Tabernacle Church; .bench to the Telegraph road ; thence down through Chilesburg to it a walk w^l??rg Nortb 4nna‘ Tbis movement was nfade f about iq ^pth're? dlv;^10ns on the same road-making a column >t about 13 nules m length— marching by the flank of the enemy I •oaflf crm-,}!1'18’ h°wever- to the combinations arising from separate X rarely wo/kmg as expected, and generally filling, he situutto^mifte-/0mmanderS are prompt and W understand leLsslrvthut +>fp “f®®’ engafementwas imminent, and it was dte^ary that the force be well together. As soon as the Ny, Po verena^pTpir011 gVmg an exoellent defensive line to the enemy z, ray* ™™i- “d our ‘wity *° ear the TaqRAver tl\e enemy’s cavalry came against the tras direoWI +^^niUan(* ^eneral Pavi,?s’ w^° had the rear brigade, Us with^w figh^ aS r®ar^ard’ following up the main column. esponsible^^fd1^ I.say<$hat he and hls command performed this i r ^ i t a-Pff tfymg duty with courage and good iudgment tregv aifd AATiem^ crossed North Anna at Anderson’s Ford ; T egg and Wilson encamped on the north side, engaging the enemy OPERATIONS IN SE. VA. AND N. C. [Chap. XLYIII. 790 up to a late hour at night. After Merritt’s division crossed, Custer’s brigade was ordered to Beaver Dam Station, on the Virginia Central Railroad, where he recaptured 375 Union prisoners, taken by the enemy in the Wilderness ; destroyed the station, 2 locomotives, 3 trains 100 cars, 90 wagons, from 8 to 10 miles telegraph wire and railroad, 200,000 pounds bacon, and other supplies amounting in all to about 1,500,000 rations, and nearly all the medical stores ot General Lee’s army. These stores had been moved from Orange Court-House to this point, either because General Lee wished to have them directly in his rear — the road used for hauling from Orange Court-House to Spotsylvania being on a parallel line to his line of battle— or because he contemplated falling back, or being driven back, to the North Anna. On the morning of the 10th Gregg and Wilson were again attacked, but their crossing was cov- ered by the division on the south side of the North Anna, and was effected without much loss. . . n An important point of the expedition had now been gained, and we had also obtained forage for our almost famished animals ; our next obiect was to husband their strength and prepare to tight. It now became apparent that the enemy, in following up our rear, had made a great mistake, and he began to see it, for, when we leisurely took the Negro Foot road to Richmond, a doubt arose m his mind as to whether his tactics were good, whereat he immediately hauled off from the rear, and urged his horses to the death so as to get m between Richmond and our column. This he effected, concentrating at Yellow Tavern, 6 miles from the city, on the Brook turnpike ; consequently the march on the 10th was without much incident, and we quietly encamped on the south bant of the South Anna, where we procured all necessary forage, marching from 15 to 18 miles. On the night of the 10th and 11th of May Davies brigade of Greggs division, was ordered to Ashland, and arriving before the head of the enemy’s column, which had to make a wide detour to reac Yellow Tavern, drove out a force occupying the town ; burnt a locomotive with train of cars attached; destroyed the railroad for some distance, and rejoined the mam column at Allen s Station, on the Fredericksburg railroad. From Allen s the entire comm«^ moved on Yellow Tavern, Merritt m advance, Wilson next, and Gregg in rear. The enemy here again made an error m tactics bj sending a large force to attack my rear, thus weakening his force in front fnabling me to throw all my strength on that which opposed my front, and fight this force with a small rear guard. Merritt gallantly attacked the enemy at Yellow Tavern, and got possession of the Brook turnpike. The enemy, still confident. Formed his line a few hundred yards to the east of this P1^ enfilad- ing it with his artillery fire, and making Yellow Tavern a hot place, but Gibbs and Devin held fast with [her r brigades ^£“^3 artillery, and Custer charged the enemy’s battery and line, supported by Chapman’s brigade, of Wilson’s division-xn fact by the whole of Wilson’s division, Gregg having one brigade available to support. Custer’s charge, with Chapman on his flank, was brilliantly execute , first at a walk, then at a trot, then dashing at the enemy s line and battery, capturing the guns and gunners and breaking the > which was simple enough to receive the charge m a stationary 1 - tion. In this assault General J. E. B. Stuart, commanding tl e my’s cavalry, was mortally wounded. Chap. XLVIIL] RAPID AN TO THE JAMES. 791 Qregg about the same time charged the force in rear with equal success, and ended the engagement. We captured a number of pris- oners, and the casualties on both sides were quite severe After Custer s charge and the enemy’s line was broken— one portion of which was driven toward Ashland, the other toward Richmond— a jGC?n jaissance sent UP the Brook turnpike, toward the citv dashed across the south fork of the Chickahominy, drove a small force from the exterior line of the works, and went inside of them I followed up this party, and found between the two lines of works a road leading to that from Mechanicsville to Richmond I thought we could go around on this across the Mechanicsville pike, south of the Chickahominy, and encamp next night (12th) at Fair Oaks, and determined to make the movement, being influenced to some extent m doing so by the reports from colored people, during the afternoon, that General Butler s force had reached a small stream about 4 miles south of Richmond, on the south side, and that I possibly could help him by a demonstration. Therefore, after making the wounded as comfortable a,s possible, we commenced the march about 11 o’clock on the night of the 11th, and massed the command on the plateau south of Meadow Bridge at about daylight ; torpedoes planted in the road-many of which exploded, killing several horses-being the only difficulty encountered. 6 At daylight on the morning of the 12th Wilson encountered the enemy s batteries on, or near, the Mechanicsville pike, and could not pass them. As soon as I was notified of this condition, Custer’s brigade was ordered to make the crossing to the north side of the Chickahominy at Meadow Bridge, but as the bridge was found to have been destroyed, and the enemy’s cavalry posted on the north side, I ordered Merritt s entire division to repair it, and to make the crossing at all hazards. During the time thus occupied, the enemy gave the working party great annoyance by sweeping the bridge with a section of artillery ; and Merritt, to drive away this section and the force supporting it, crossed a small force of two or three regiments, atta^cked dismounted, and was repulsed : still the work on the bridge continued, and when it was finished, Merritt crossed nearly all his division, dismounted, attacked the enemy, carried his mui temporary breast-works, and continued the pursuit to Gaines’ Aiil. Mean time the enemy advanced from behind his works at Richmond, and attacked Wilson and Gregg. Wilson was driven p S°T iC?nfasion’ ^ut 9regg was ready> having concealed a Heavy line of skirmishers m a bushy ravine, in his front, and when he enemy marched to attack, with more display than grit, this unexpected and concealed line opened a destructive fire with repeat- mg carbines, and some of Wilson’s men at the same time turning in hpl-,^ir+i?auk’ lmiG bJ°*ke disorder> and went into security the breast-works defending the city. The six batteries of USG<? b7 CaPtam Bobertson, chief of artillery, with great effect, and contributed much to our success. The enemy considered us completely cornered, but such was not the case, for E?™ engaged, scouting parties were sent along the Chicka- endPK t several fords found by them. This attack and repulse woundpH f2r balance ,°t the day we collected our Jnpr« 7 buried our dead, grazed our horses, and read the Richmond two vma11 newsboys having, with commendable enterprise, entered our lines and sold to the officers and men. Between 3 and 4 792 OPERATIONS IN SE. VA. AND N. €. [Chap. XLVII1. o’clock in the afternoon the remaining portion of the command crossed the Chickahominy and encamped at and between Walnut Grove and Gaines’ Mill. . , -r, ,, , On the 13th the march was resumed, encamping at Bottoms Bridge. On the 14th we marched through White Oak Swamp, and went into camp between Haxall’s Landing and Shirley, on the James River Our casualties on the march were 425.

## sheridan-1866-05-13-pamunkey-to-cold-harbor

On the 26th a movement of the army commenced in order to make the crossing of the Pamunkey River at or near Hanovertown. Torbert s and Gregg s divisions, with Russell’s division, of the Sixth Corps, took the advance to secure the crossings, with directions to demonstrate so as to deceive the enemy as much as possible in the movement. To accomphsh this end, Torbert was ordered to move to Taylor s Ford, on the Pamunkey, and demonstrate until after dark as if the crossing was to he made at that point, then to leave a small guard, quietly withdraw, and march to Hanovertown ford where the reai crossing was to be made. General Gregg was ordered to Littlepage s crossing of the Pamunkey, to demonstrate in the same manner, to retire quietly after dark, leaving a guard to keep up the demonstration, and march quickly to Hanovertown crossing tak~ fogowedth“cayTynt0°nbridge- RUSSeU t0°k Up tke marcb and On the morning of the 27th Custer’s brigade, of Torbert’s division made the crossing, driving from it about 100 of the enemy’s cavalrv and capturing 30 or 40 ; the balance of the division followed this- brigade, and advanced to Honovertown, where General Gordon’s, brigade of rebel cavalry was encountered, routed, and driven in ?reat confusion m the direction of Hanover Court-House, the pur- suit being continued to a little stream called Crump’s Creek Qrees- ng o? theriv?/0 ^ Hne’ RUSS611 encamped near the crosl We had been successful in our mission, and, upon the arrival of he army, on the 28th, it crossed the Pamunkey behind our line un- SppH™ / MaV ‘““ediately after ordered to demonstrate in the WUc 9* Mechamcsville, in order to find out the enemy’s where- mT .dlre.^ed Gregg’s division to move out, via Haw’s } 3 ^chanicsville road, but when about three-fourths of . mile m advance of Haw’s Shop it encountered the enemy’s cavalry, rhich was dismounted and behind a temporary breast- work of rails eKel vlg°rously attacked this force, which appeared to be the nno catvalry corPs, and a brigade of South Carolina troops, reported hlonel 7bd Wn h 9ng-range rifles, and commanded by a rst fivht ’• thTe CaP)llmans fought very gallantly in this their .rst tight, judging from the number of their dead and wounded, and ides^r+bCitPtUred' l Tlle, most determined efforts were made on both ices m this unequal contest, and neither would give way until late medln?!1^’ ^h6n Cnster’s (Michigan) brigad! was demounted! b^+i, 1 column of attack, and charged, with Gregg’s division tem^r7 IaSdnVen back’ living all his dead Ind his hne igaffementywHbkb “ T p ^session. This was a hard contested *’ Tth b®avy loss’ for tbe number of troops engaged to mHv hmL T/ WaS f°Ught [llTSt immediately in front of The im reast work«f army- wblcb was busily occupied throwing up east-works. After dark, our own and the enemy’s dead beinn i the’ morniuT of °tbhe % infantry, and went into camp hurch. g f the next day (the 29th) “ the vicinity of Old Tt’s^; JTtle at Haw’s 8a op ,but one brigade (Custer’s) of Tor- rumTcreXlino3 tbe other two, being posted on the orSP TW II ’ c°nld not be gotten up until relieved by the Sixth P • y arrived m the afternoon, however, but did not become 794 OPERATIONS IN SE. YA. AND N. 0. [Chap. XL VIII. seriously engaged, only demonstrating on the right of Gregg. After we had taken position at Old Church, Wilson’s division was ordered to the right of the army, and Gregg’s and Torbert’s pickets pushed out in the direction of Cold Harbor, which was occupied by the enemy in some force. As our occupation of this point was essen- tial to secure our lines to the White House, which was to be our base, its possession became a matter of deep interest. The enemy appeared to realize this also, for he. at a very early period, took pos- session of it, and pushed a force up to Matadequin Creek on the Old Church road, putting his front parallel with the Pamunkey— which was then our line to the White House— in order to make it danger- ous for our trains. This force encountered the pickets of the First Division at Matadequin Creek, but they held fast and fought gal- lantly until re-enforced by their division on the north side of the creek, which took up the contest. The fight then became general and was stubbornly contested, but the enemy finally gave way, and was pursued within 1-g- miles of Cold Harbor. In this fight Butlei s South Carolinians were again put in to receive the brunt, and many of them were killed and captured. On the morning of the 31st I visited Torbert and Custer, at Custer’s headquarters— Torbert’s di- vision having the advance — and found that they had already talked over a plan to attack and capture Cold Harbor, which I indorsed, and on the afternoon of the 31st the attack was made, and, after a hard-fought battle, the town taken. Gregg was immediately moved to the support of Torbert, but the place was captured before any of his troops became engaged. . , ,, Cold Harbor was defended by cavalry and infantry, and on the Old Church side the enemy had thrown up temporary breast-works of logs and rails. The fight on the part of our officers and men was very gallant \ they were now beginning to accept nothing less than victory After gaining the town, I notified army headquarters to that effect, but that the enemy in additional numbers were arriving there : that I could not hold it with safety to my command, and that I would move out, and did so ; just after we had left however, a dispatch was received directing that Cold Harbor be held at all haz- ards, and I therefore immediately ordered its reoccupation, changed the temporary breast- works thrown up by the enemy, so as to make them available for our troops, dismounted the cavalry, placing them behind these works, and distributing the ammunition in boxes along the line, determined to hold the place as directed. While this was being done the enemy could be heard giving commands and making preparations to attack in the morning. , Just after daylight June 1 he marched to the attack, and was permitted to come close in to our little works, when he received the fire of our batteries and repeating carbines, which were used wit 1 terrible effect, and was driven back in confusion ; still determined to get the place, after reorganizing, he attacked again, but with the same result. About 10 o’clock the Sixth Corps arrived and relieved the cavalry, which moved toward the Chickahominy , and coverec the left of the line until relieved by Hancock’s corps during the at- ternoon. While the balance of the cavalry were engaged at Cola Harbor, Wilson’s division was posted on the right of the army, near the head waters of the Totopotomoy Creek On being relieved by tne infantry from the Cold Harbor line the two divisions moved down the Chickahominy, encamping for the night of the 1st of June a>*70i!' pect Church and vicinity, and on the 2d we moved down the ChicK- €hap. XLVHL] RAPID AN TO THE JAMES. _ _ 795 W^Rri.S1 ^fther’ ta¥ng a Position on the north side, at Bot- tom s Bridge ; the enemy s cavalry occupying the south side, with JkJc111 P0511^0?, at tlle fords. No movements took place on the damage. 7 Shelled 0ur P0Sltl0n at very long range but did no P^ision marched back to Old Church, and on the 6th the Second Division was relieved at Bottom’s Bridge bv one brigade of Wilson’s division, and marched back to the same vicfnity thence both divisions moved to New Castle Ferry, where the trains' which had been sent to White House, reached us, with supplies for a march, since called the Trevilian raid.

## sheridan-1866-05-13-trevilian-and-saint-marys

receiyed instructions from General Meade corns^o Oha^SS^f61?1 t(^proceed with divisions of my corps to Charlottesville, for the purpose of cutting the Virginia Central Railroad, to unite, if possible, with Maj. Gen. D. Hunter whom I expected to meet at or near Charlottesville and brine* his command over to the Army of the Potomac. There' also appeared to be another object, viz, to remove the enemy’s cavalrv from fhP f?atfi!!de # the Chickahominy, as, in case we htempteho cross to Sj»k4hS"“ of ll“ A™> »' “» onTA£t& Headquarters Cavalry Corps, Army of the Potomac, Brig. Gen. J. H. Wilson, New Castle FerrV, June 6, 1864. ^ Commanding Third Cavalry Division : jewm march from’ n“w ^ to notify you that First and Second Cavahry Divisions^ DiirTn^*hia"1e?KrrOW’ takmg with him the ery respectfully, your obedient servant, T . , . ^ JAS. W. FORSYTH, Lieutenant-Colonel and Chief of Staff rJwcLffd bJlgade headquarters, we crossed the Pamunkev at n the MattaponrS Ayletf’® “4 Dunk^rk’ p y iviver. un tPe 8th we encamped 2 miles west of OPERATIONS IN SE. VA. AND N. C. [Chap. XLVIII. 796 Pole Cat Station. It was my intention to march along the north bank of the North Anna, cross it at Carpenter’s Ford, strike the railroad at Trevilian Station, and destroy it to Louisa Court-House, march past Gordonsville, strike the railroad again at Cobham Sta- tion and destroy it thence to Charlottesville as we proceeded. We, therefore, on the 9th of June, resumed the march along the Anna— our advance guard skirmishing, as it almost always did, with mounted men of the enemy— and encamped on East Northeast Creek, near Young’s Mill. During this day I learned that Breckinridge’s division of infantry was passing slowly up the railroad to Gordons- ville parallel to me, and that the enemy’s cavalry had left their posi- tion on the south side of the Chickahominy, and were marching on the old Richmond and Gordonsville road on Gordonsville. I his information was confirmed by a party sent to cut the telegraph wires along the railroad during the night. On the 10th the march was resumed; we passed through Twyman's Store, crossed the North Anna at Carpenter’s Ford, and encamped on the road leading to Trevilian Station and along the banks of the North Anna. Dur- ing the night of the 10th the boldness of the enemy’s scouting par- ties, which we had encountered more or less every day, indicated the presence of a large force. On the morning of the 11th we resumed the march on Trevilian, meeting at once and driving the enemy’s advance parties in our front Torbert had the leading division, and, at a point about 3 or U miles from Trevilian Station, encountered the enemy m full force behind a line of breast-works constructed in dense timber. Custer with his brigade, was ordered to take a wood road found on our left and get to Trevilian Station, or at least in rear of the enemy, and attack his led horses. In following this road he passed between Fitz Lee’s and Hampton’s divisions— the former being on the road leading from Louisa Court-House to where the battle commenced, the latter on the direct road from Trevilian to the same point— and on, without opposition, to Trevilian Station, which he took posses- sion of. As soon as I found that Custer had gotten to the rear of the enemy, the remaining two brigades- of Torbert s division were dismounted and formed line of battle, assailed the enemy s works, and carried them, driving Hampton’s division pell-mell and at a run back on Custer, at Trevilian, who commenced fighting in all directions. So panic-stricken was this division (Hampton s) and so rapidly was it pushed that some of it was driven through Custers lines, and many captured. While the First Division was thps en- gaged Gregg attacked Fitz. Lee on the Louisa Court-House road, an drove him in the direction of Louisa Court-House ; the PIP suit was continued until about dark. Hampton’s division made its way in the direction of Gordonsville, and was joined during the nigh } Fitz. Lee, who made a detour westward for that purpose. At night my command encamped at Trevilian Station, and troin prisoners, of which we had captured about 500, I learned that Hun- ter, instead of coming toward Charlottesville, as I had reason to sup- pose, was at or near Lexington, moving apparently on Lyncn uig that Ewell’s corps was on its way to Lynchburg, on the south sia of James River; and that Breckinridge was at Gordonsville oi Charlottesville, having passed up the railroad, as heretofore allude^ to I, therefore, made up my mind that it was best to give up tm attempt to join Hunter, as he was going from me instead ot coming toward me, and concluded to return. Directions were at once giver Chap. XLVIIL] RAPID AN TO THE JAMES. 797 to collect our own wounded and those of the enemy in hospitals, and to make provision for their transportation back in ammunition wagons and in vehicles collected from the country. I was still further influenced in my decision to return by the burden which these wounded threw upon me, there being over 500 cases of our own, and the additional burden of about 500 prisoners, all of whom must have been abandoned by me in case I proceeded farther • besides, one more engagement would have reduced the supply of ammunition to a very small compass. On the morning of June 12 we commenced destroying the railroad to Louisa Court-House, and in the afternoon 1 directed Torbert to make a reconnaissance up the Gordonsville road to secure a by-road leading over Mallory’s Ford, on the North Anna, to the Catharpin road, as I proposed taking that route in returning, and proceeding to Spotsylvania Court-House, thence, via Bowling Green and Dun- kirk, to the White House. In the reconnaissance Torbert became heavily engaged, first one brigade, then another, then the last, the battle, continuing until after dark. Gregg during this time was breaking up the railroad to Louisa Court-House. The result of Torbert’s fighting made it impossible to cross at Mal- lory s Ford without venturing a battle next day, in which case the remainder of our ammunition would have been consumed, leaving* none to get ba k with ; therefore, during the night of the 12th we moved back on our track, recrossed the North Anna at Carpenter’s Ford on the following morning, unsaddled our horses and turned them out to graze, as they were nearly famished, having had no food tor two days, and in the afternoon proceeded to the vicinity of Twy- inan s Store, where we encamped. The enemy, excepting a small party which General Davies dispersed with one of his regiments did not follow us. ’ ^ near Trevilian three hospitals containing many rebel wounded, and 90 of ours that were non-transportable, with medi- cmes hquors, some hard bread, coffee, and sugar. I regret to say that the surgeons left in charge were not well treated by the enemy v? ^0SPitals were robbed of liquors and stores. On the 14th the march was continued, and we reached the Catharpin road — upon which it was originally intended to move after crossing Mal- lory s h ord, and which would have saved much time and distance— and encamped at Shady Grove Church. On the 15th we encamped at Ldge Hill, on the Ta River, having passed over the battle-field ol Spotsylvania, and on the 16th at Dr. Butler’s farm, on the Matta- pony havmg marched through Bowling Green. Being as yet un- able to ascertain the position of the Army of the Potomac and uncertain whether or not the base at the White House had been dis- continued, I did not like to venture between the Mattapony and t amunkey Rivers, embarrassed as I was with wounded prisoners and about 2,000 negroes that had joined us, and therefore deter- mined to push down the south bank of the Mattapony far enough to enable me to send them with safety to West Point, where I ex- pected to find gun-boats and transports. Following this plan, we proceeded on the 17th to Walkerton and encamped, and on the 18th resumed the march through King and Queen Court-House, encamp- mg m its vicinity. I here learned that the base at the White House was not entirely broken up, and that supplies there awaited me ; there- to-™011 morning of the 19th I sent the wounded, prisoners, and S es to West Point, escorted by two regiments of cavalry, and OPERATIONS IN SE. VA. AND N. C. [Chap. XLVIII. 798 turning, marched to Dunkirk, on the Mattapony, a point at which the river was narrow enough for my pontoons to reach across. On my march from Trevilian to this point we halted at intervals during each day to dress the wounded and refresh them as much as possible. Nothing could exceed the cheerfulness exhibited by them; hauled as they were in old buggies, carts, ammunition wagons, &c., no word of complaint was heard. I saw on the line of march men with wounded legs driving, while those with one disabled arm were using the other to whip up the animals. On the 20th we resumed the march at an early hour, to the sound of artillery, in the direc- tion of the White House, and had proceeded but a short distance when dispatches from General Abercrombie notified me that the place was attacked. I had previously sent an advance party with directions to move swiftly, and to report to me by couriers the con- dition of affairs ; from these I soon learned that there was no occa- sion to push our jaded animals, as the crisis, if there had been one, was over, and therefore moved leisurely to the banks of the Pamun- key opposite White House, and encamped, the enemy holding the bluffs surrounding the White House farm. On the morning of the 21st Gregg’s division was crossed over dismounted, and Torbert s division mounted, and the enemy driven from the bluffs, and also from Tunstall’s Station in the evening, after a sharp engagement. 1 found here orders to break up the White House depot, and to move the trains over to Petersburg, via Jones’ Bridge. I immediately commenced breaking up as directed and making my arrangements to carry over and protect a train of over 900 wagons, knowing lull well that I would be attacked if the enemy had. any spirit left m him. On the morning of the 22d I sent Torbert in advance to secure Jones’ Bridge, over the Chickahominy, so that we could make the crossing at that point, and Gregg marched on a road parallel to the one on which the train was moving, and on its right flank, as it was the only flank requiring protection. The train was not attacked, but was safely parked on the south side of the Chickahominy tor the night. On the morning after Torbert had secured the crossing, the 23d the enemy attacked his picket post on the Long Bridge road, with Chambliss’ brigade, and drove it in, but on its being re-en- forced by six companies of colored troops belonging to Gretty s com- mand, the enemy was repulsed, and the picket post re-established. This brigade, I was told by the prisoners taken, was the advance ot the rebel cavalry corps, and through it Hampton had been advised o our having already secured the crossing of the Chickahominy. Gen- eral Getty had relieved General Abercrombie, and was m command of a small infantry force, composed mostly of the odds and ends ot regiments and batteries. On the 24th the march was resumed, with directions to cross the trains at Bermuda Hundred, where there was a pontoon bridge, io reach this point I was obliged to march through Charles City Court- House, thence by Harrison’s Landing and Malvern Hill, the latter of which was occupied by the enemy ; in fact, he held everything north of the James except the tete-de-pont at the (mossing, l or- bert’s division moved out on the Charles City Court-House road as an escort to the trains, and when in the vicinity of the Court-Hous the advance guard encountered the enemy and drove him across Herring Creek, on the road to Westover Church. As soon as this attack was reported to me, orders were immediately given to parK Chap. XLVIII.] RAPID AjST TO THE JAMES. 799 the train— the head of which was far beyond Charles City Court- House-at convenient points on the road, and Torbert was directed to push his whole division to the front to meet the enemy, while Gregg, who had marched on the road leading to Saint Mary’s Church for the purpose of protecting the right flank of the train, and who had also been attacked, was instructed to hold fast until all the transportation could pass Charles City Court-House. The train was immediately after put m motion and safely parked in the vicinity of Wilcox s Landing. At Saint Mary’s Church Gregg was attacked by the entire cavalry corps of the enemy, and after a stubborn fight which lasted until after dark, was forced to retire in some confusion but without any loss m material. This very creditable engagement saved the train, which should never have been left for the cavalry to escort.

## sheridan-1866-05-13-conclusion

It will be seen by the foregoing narrative that the idea advanced by me at the commencement of the campaign, viz, “that our cav- alry ought to fight the enemy’s cavalry, and our infantry the ene- 1 was yarned into effect immediately after the battle of the Wilderness. The result was constant success and the almost total annihilation of the rebel cavalry. We marched when and ^ssfulWG pleaSed ’ Were alwa^s the attacking party, and always suc- Dunng the period herein embraced I am led to believe, on infor- mation derived from the most reliable sources, that the enemy’s cavalry was superior to ours in numbers ; but the esprit of our men increased every day while that of the enemy diminished. In these thpPV^lp and^i1 a others afterward performed in connection with ?nd £PPomattox campaigns, we were obliged to live to a W “ ^ 0n C°?ntry* Fora^e had t0 be ^us obtained for our horses and provisions for our men, consequently many hardships were dnCr?o? 1 rfry brougllt °P th.e People, but no outrages were tolerated. I battle as twT^W ^ TP, y that :lines should engage each other in ™ in n at ,t.lle daello part— a part which would be kept up so long as those who live at home m peace and plenty could fine! the best youth of the country to enlist in their cause (I say the best for tem are al?Tays the best), and therefore do not regret the’sys- no? nl« Tg °n the ene“y. * country. Tliese men and women lid “‘T 3 how many were killed or maimed, so long as war did not come to their doors, but as soon as it did come in the shape of loss ™K>6rty+’ th6I Jearilestly Prayed for its termination. Aswan is a punishment, and death the maximum punishment, if we can by re- humanity advocates to poverty, end it quicker, we are on the’ side of th^rmov .foregoing brief sketch I have been unable to give iii detail nate Tenort’s118^ ^hlCaValr^an? IT*-1 have to trust to tbe subordi- otstlnTl , ke UP deficiency. In consequence of our Prisoners wWvJ6 w|re obliged to turn over our wounded and prisoners whenever and wherever opportunity offered, and often- ol R R — VOL XXXVI, PT I 802 OPERATIONS IN SE. VA. AND N. C. [Chap. XLVIII. times without receipts. I am also, therefore, unable to furnish an accurate list of either my casualties or prisoners captured from the enemy I think my casualties from May 5 to August 1 will number between 5,000 and 6,000 men, and that the captures in prisoners will exceed 2,000. We sent to the War Department from the 5th of May, 1864, to the 9th of April, 1865, the day on which the Army of North- ern Virginia surrendered, 205 battle-flags, captured in open field fighting ; it is nearly as many as all the armies of the United States combined sent there during the rebellion. The aflln pieces captured in the same period was between 160 and 170 , all in open field fighting. These captures of flags, colors, and artillery were made during the campaign the operations £ ^ich 1 related, the Shenandoah campaign, the march from W mchester ■ to Petersburg, and the Appomattox campaign. To the Sixth and Nine- teenth Corps, General Crook’s command, which, with Merritt s and Custer’s divisions of cavalry, composed the Army of the Shenan- doah and to the Fifth and Sixth Corps, which operated with me on the Appomattox campaign, a proportionate share of these captures belong^ ^ seen py this report that we led the advance of the army to the Wilderness ; that on the Richmond raid we marked out its line of march to the North Anna, where we found it on our return : that we again led its advance to Hanovertown, and thence to Cold Harbor ; that we removed the enemy’s cavalry from the south side of the Chickahominy by the Trevilian raid, and thereby materially assisted the army in its successful march to the James River and Petersburg, where it remained until we made the campaign m the valley - marched back to Petersburg, and again took its advance and led it to victory. In all the operations the percentage of cavalry casualties was as great as that of the infantry, and the question which had existed “Who ever saw a dead cavalryman . was set ^To^Generals D. McM. Gregg, Torbert, Wilson, Merritt, Custer, Devin J. Irvin Gregg, McIntosh, Chapman, Davies, and Gibbs, to the gallant officers and men of their commands, and to the officer of mv staff, I return my sincere thanks. . , , 7 1 am’, general, very respectfully, your ^edieffi^rvant, Major-General , V . S. Army. Bvt. Maj. Gen. John A. Rawlins, Chief of Staff , Headquarters Armies of the J J JJ United States, Washington, D. C. Casualties in the Cavalry Corps, Army of the; R commanding, from May 4 to July 30, loo4. Command. First Division Second Division Third Division. . Total .... Killed. 15 2° 14 24? 145 79 471 Wounded. 161 955 782 486 2,223 78 553 &54 992 1,85 a l,* 1,64 a Two enlisted men drowned.
