# George E. Pond, The Shenandoah Valley in 1864: Sheridan's Valley Campaign passages, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a Lincoln Financial Foundation Collection scan (Internet Archive shenandoahvalley00pond); not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers, footnotes interleaved with the text and duplicated page images where the scan repeats pp.155 and 222. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages on the engagements of Sheridan's Valley Campaign and one appendix passage on numerical strength; the appendix tables are largely garbled in OCR.

## guard-hill

Early was now receiving his expected reinforcements. First came McCausland's pair of brigades, of Chambersburg notoriety, or such parts of them as had escaped from Moore- field. Vastly more important were Kershaw's division of infantry, Fitz Lee's of cavalry, and Cutshaw's battalion of artillery, all under General Anderson, now commanding the First (Longstreet's) Corps, Army of Northern Virginia, -whom B. E. Lee, though robbing "the cradle and the grave," as Grant phrased it, for his own needs, yet spared for a cam- paign which, he saw, might have a decisive effect on the war. Early had sent a despatch to Anderson, explaining the purpose of his retreat, and asking him to come in through Chester Gap to Front Boyal, so as to guard the Luray Val- ley— Imboden being meanwhile sent to watch this Valley. Early also established a signal station on the westerly sum- mit of Three Top, the westernmost of the triple parallel ridges of the Massanutten Mountains, which here sink ab- ruptly into the plain. Sheridan learned in season one of the chief objects of the signalling from this station. At noon of July 11th, while still near Winchester, W7eber had sent him from Harper's Ferry this important message : "I have information from a source always found reliable that reinforcements under Hill and Longstreet are within five days' march of Early's pres- ent position, moving up the Valley ; that if attacked Early proposes to show fight and retire, until a junction can be GENERAL SHERIDAN'S MARCH TO STRASBURG. 127 formed with the advancing forces." Captain Leets sent a like telegram. Nevertheless, as Grant's message of the 9th had been positive the other way, Sheridan awaited more precise intelligence. "I am exceedingly anxious," he wrote to Halleck, the 12th, "to hear whether Longstreet has left to come here or not ; " and he notified Grant, the next day, that "reports from citizens here, Washington, and Harper's Ferry report Longstreet's Corps coming this way from Staun- ton ; but I still rely," he added, " on your telegram that it is not so." However, as measures of precaution, Devin's bri- gade of Merritt's cavalry division was sent to keep watch at Cedarville, seven miles east, on the Front Royal and Win- chester pike, and Wright, who had occupied Strasburg with his skirmishers that morning, was drawn back at night to the north side of Cedar Creek, with his pickets, as during the 12th, on the south side ; whereupon the enemy's outposts reoccupied Hupp's Hill. The morning of July 14th, Colonel N. P. Chipman, of the Adjutant-General's office, rode in hot haste into Sheridan's lines, escorted by a regiment of cavalry, with a despatch which he had brought from Washington through Snicker's Gap — a telegram from Grant to Halleck, written two days before, directing him to inform Sheridan that Lee had sent Early "two divisions of infantry, some cavalry, and twenty pieces of artillery" — for such the report then was, though the real force was soon afterward discovered to be one divi- sion of infantry and one of cavalry, with artillery. "He [Sheridan] must be cautious," said General Grant, "and act now on the defensive, until movements here force them to detach to send this way. Early's force with this increase cannot exceed 4.0,000, but this is too much for Sheridan to attack. Send Sheridan the remaining brigade of the Nine- teenth Corps. I have ordered to Washington all the hun- 128 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. dred-days men. Their time will soon be out, but for the present they will do to stand in the defences." ' On the receipt of this despatch, General Sheridan pre- pared to retreat ; for he considered this to be wiser than to remain where he was, in the presence of an enemy of strength as yet unknown. " So far as I have been able to see," he wrote Grant, "there is not a military position in this Valley south of the Potomac. The position here [Cedar Creek] is a very bad one, as I cannot cover the numerous rivers that lead in on both of my flanks to the rear. I am not aware that you knew where my command was when you ordered me to take up the defensive. I should like very much to have your advice." To Halleck he wrote that he had "taken up for the present the line of Cedar Run, but will, at my leisure, take position at Winchester. This line cannot be held, nor can I supply my command beyond that point with the ten days' rations with which I started. I expected to get far enough up the Valley to accomplish my objects, and then quickly return." During the 15th, Custer's and Gibbs's brigades of Merritt's division were sent to Cedarville and Stony Point, on the Front Eoyal pike, lest the enemy should turn that flank, and there was sharp skirmishing in the afternoon by the pickets of Wright and Crook beyond Cedar Creek, the Jersey brigade of 1 " The movement to the north side of the James River today developed the presence of Field's division of Longstreet's Corps which I supposed had gone to the Valley. Pickett's division is also here. We captured six pieces of artillery and over 100 prisoners. Longstreet's troops were under marching orders, and this move will detain it for the present. I think Sheridan is still superior to Early in numbers, but not sufficiently so to attack fortifications" (Grant to Hal- leck. August 14th). "It is now posit'. ve that Kershaw's division has gone, but no other infantry has. This reinforcement to Early will put him nearer on an equality with you in numbers than I want to see, and will make it necessary for you to observe more caution about attacking. I would not, however, change my instructions further than to ir<join caution" (Grant to Sheridan, August 14th). GENERAL SHERIDAN'S MARCH TO STRASBURG. 129 Eussell's division supporting Wright's line. Early's pickets resisted with increased pertinacity, at one time driving back the Union skirmishers on both sides of the pike, though the line was afterward re-established. During the night the Nineteenth Corps began the retreat. Its departure was not observed, and the Sixth and Eighth did not follow till 8 p.m. the next day, Wright marching all night and reaching Win- chester about five o'clock in the morning ; and the whole operation was conducted so secretly in the darkness au not to be discovered. At daybreak of the 17th the signal station on Three Top, which looked down into both camps, perceived that Sheri- dan's had been abandoned ; and, being notified of this, both Early's forces and those of Anderson pushed forward in pur- suit, the former from Strasburg and the latter from Front Eoyal. A part of Anderson's forces, the day before, cross- ing the Shenandoah, had encountered at the ford two of Merritt's brigades, Devin and Custer, who drove them across the river with heavy loss, nearly 300 prisoners, mostly of Kershaw's division, and two infantry flags being secured as trophies of this handsome exploit. Merritt, whose loss was but GO men, afterward withdrew to White Post.

## summit-point

When Early found that Sheridan had retired from the Clifton-Berryville line, where he would always be threaten- GENERAL SHERIDAN'S MARCH TO STRASBURG. 133 ing Winchester, being within a short march of it, he ven- tured to move his own forces, the 19th, to Bunker Hill, yet leaving all Anderson's troops to guard Winchester, while Ransom's cavalry, now under Lomax, who at Fisher's Hill had relieved Eansom, made reconnoissances to Martinsburg and Shepherdstown. Sheridan, however, knowing that Av- erell could easily cross the river and hold the north fords, cared little for these demonstrations. "In fact," said his orders to this officer, the night of the 19th, "the General rather desires that the enemy should cross ; " while to Grant he wrote that he had " left everything in that direction for them, but they have not accepted the invitation as yet." Early contented himself with going just far enough down the Valley to insure keeping the Baltimore and Ohio Rail- road broken, and to be where he could get grain and forage ; ' for Sheridan had burned the Valley above Winches- ter. Thus three days of comparative quiet passed. The force which Anderson brought with him consisted, as has been said, of Kershaw's division, Cutshaw's battalion of artillery, and two brigades of cavalry under Fitz Lee. Anderson ranked Early, but declined to take command, not being sent there for the purpose of superseding him. Al- though Sheridan knew from the prisoners he had taken that these reinforcements had arrived, he could not be sure that others were not on the way, and all his information was to the effect that at least one additional division of Longstreet's old corps was already in the Valley. Indeed, it seemed very improbable that Anderson himself, who now commanded the corps, would accompany a single division of it to the Valley, while the greater part remained at Richmond. 1 " No wheat has been burned in this country, and if we can stay here we can live. I have sent Lomax to Martinsburg. I think Fitz Lee had better try and Bhove the enemy back on the Berryville road" (Early to Anderson, August 19th). 134 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Grant's scouts, on the other hand, brought him news totally different from Sheridan's reports, and some uncertainty was thus caused. August 16th Grant wrote that " Fitz Lee's division is not in the Valley. We took quite a number of prisoners from it yesterday, north of the James. Kershaw's division has gone to the Valley, and probably two brigades of Wilcox's division. Some cavalry has gone, but I do not know whose. I would not advise an attack on Early in an intrenched position, but would watch him closely with the cavalry, and if he attempts to move north, follow him." Sheridan answered the next day that " Kershaw's division is here, and Wickham's and Lomax's brigades of Fitzhugh Lee's cavalry division ; also another brigade from Ream's Station. One division of A. P. Hill's corps is reported here. My impression is that troops are still arriving." The 17th, Grant wrote that his movement to the north of James River had " undoubtedly prevented sending reinforcements to the Valley," and that a large part of Early's force was likely to be recalled. " Be prepared to move at any moment. If you find Early sending off any of his troops, strike suddenly and hard." Sheridan rejoined that all his reports were that Early was steadily receiving reinforcements ; and the 19th he again wrote as follows: "I receive constant reports of the passage of troops across to this Valley from Culpepper. I have taken the defensive until their strength is more fnlly developed. I still think that two divisions of infantry have come here, and Fitzhugh Lee's cavalry." The 20th, Grant responded that "As stated in previous despatches, no division or brigade has gone from Lee's army to the Valley except Kershaw's and Fitz Lee's." While the Confederate strength and purposes thus re- mained obscure, Early and Anderson determined, the 21st, to attack Sheridan in a combined movement, the former GENERAL SHERIDAN'S MARCH TO STRASBURG. 135 proceeding through Smithfield towards Charlestown, while Anderson was to advance by the direct road that runs through Summit Point.. Sheridan's cavalry pickets on the Opequon were so quickly driven in that Early pressed at once against the Sixth Corps, advancing the divisions of Bodes and Raruseur. A sharp engagement ensued. Rick- etts was transferred from his position in reserve to the left of the corps line, and the lost position was regained at night- fall, though with the loss of 260 killed and wounded, mainly in Getty's division. The Eighth Corps drew up to co-ope- rate on the left and the Nineteenth on the right. But the attack was over ; for Anderson, moving from Winchester and having a somewhat longer road to travel, did not take part, his advance having been handsomely retarded by Merritt's cavalry division at Berry ville and Wilson's at Summit Point. The consequence was that dusk found him still at the latter place, where accordingly he went into camp. At midnight Sheridan drew in Merritt and Wilson, and moved the whole army back to Halltown, which was a far better, and, indeed, an impregnable position. For, with a river on either flank, and a compact line stretching between them, the Sixth Corps on the right, the Nineteenth in the centre, and the Eighth on the left, his fine corps of cavalry watch- ful, strong intrenchments all along his front, and aided by the heavy guns of the Heights, he had the best defensive posi- tion in the Valley.1 While Sheridan was at Cedar Creek, Mosby with a few score men made a dash at Berry ville upon one of his trains 1 "My position at best being a very bad one, and as there is much depending on this army, I fell back and took a new position in front of Halltown" (Sheridan to Halleck, August 22d). " Some of my scouts report Pickett's and Field's divisions here, and that they will go through Snicker's Gap. I do not believe they are there, but the rebels have been very bold " (Sheridan to Augur, August 23d).

## smithfield

Early occupied three days in demonstrating against Hall- town, principally on the fronts of Crook and Emory. Find- ing the position impregnable, he left Anderson facing the Halltown lines, with Kershaw's division, McCausland's cav- alry, and one regiment of Fitz Lee's, and, August 25th, sent the main part of Fitz Lee's force to Williamsport, while he himself moved, with Eodes, Ramseur, Gordon, and Wharton, and their artillery, northward to Shepherdstown, Cutshaw remaining with Anderson. The alleged purpose of this 138 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. seemingly imprudent division of his forces was " to keep up the fear of an invasion of Maryland and Pennsylvania." Eitz Lee started on his way through Leetown and Martins- burg. Early, following, turned off at Leetown, and between this place and Kearneysville came upon the greater part of Merritt's and Wilson's divisions, under Torbert, who, sup- posing he had only cavalry to deal with, attacked sharply, driving back Wharton in confusion. That Torbert's troop- ers were immediately afterward roughly handled is riot to their discredit, since they were confronted by four divisions of infantry, though Breckenridge's corps was the only force much engaged. Pressing against the Union cavalry, Early cut off the brigade of Custer ; but this vigorous soldier, by great exertions, escaped through Shepherdstown across the Potomac, the Confederate commander fortunately having no cavalry at hand with which to follow him. Wilson and the remainder of Merritt found their way back safely, by differ- ent roads, to the army. In this affair there were losses on each side, Colonel Monaghan, Sixth Louisiana, commanding a brigade, being among the Confederate killed. When Merritt and Wilson came back to the Union lines with the account of what had befallen them, preparations were made for the emergency. "Early and Breckenridge," telegraphed Sheridan to Halleck, " moved this morning in the direction of Shepherdstown. It is possible that I may have to cross the river to the north side, should the enemy cross." To Grant he said that there was not much doubt of the presence of two divisions of Longstreet's corps. " The cavalry were forced to give up Shepherdstown, all but one brigade coming back to Halltown. This brigade, it is sup- posed, crossed at the Shepherdstown ford. I cannot say whether the enemy will attempt to cross in the morning — they must be very strong to do so. My information is that THE SHENANDOAH LINES IN SEPTEMBER. 139 Early marched with that intention. The enemy are in very strong force. I will not give up this place," he added, con- fidently, " and hojDe to be able to strike the enemy divided. I hardly think that they will attempt to go to Washington." He hurried Wilson across the Potomac to Boonsboro, to hold the South Mountain gaps, and next day directed Averell to unite with Wilson, should Lee ford at Williamsport. "Wilson," he said, " is at one of the lower crossings of Antietam. You would then be strong enough to take care of the enemy's cavalry until I could get Merritt's division with you." But Early's project, whatever its real nature may have been, had already come to an end ; for Fitzhugh Lee, reach- ing the Potomac, found Averell's cavalry guarding the fords on the north side, and after a little skirmishing, drew off to- ward Shepherdstown. Meanwhile.. Anderson had been left in so small force be- fore Halltown, that Crook, reconnoitring, the 26th, with Duval's division and a part of Thoburn's, Lowell's cavalry co-operating, broke the enemy's skirmish line, and reported that he had also driven two brigades from their position behind earthworks. Lowell captured 7 or 8 officers and 69 privates. Crook's infantry loss was 141 killed and wounded. The Confederate commander had now found it hopeless to attack Sheridan in front at Halltown ; impossible to get at his river-protected flanks and rear, with Maryland Heights behind ; and perilous to invade the North, with three divi- sions of cavalry, one of them beyond the Potomac, free to fall on his trains. He resolved to move back to his old position, west of the Opequon. The 26th he marclied his infantry from Shepherdstown to Leetown, and the following day from Leetown to Bunker Hill, while Anderson moved back, the night of the 26th, from the Halltown front to Stephenson's Depot. 140 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Lest rumor should, as usual, magnify and distort Early's latest demonstration, Sheridan wrote to Halleck that "the movement of the enemy toward Shepherdstown yesterday amounted to nothing. It did not disturb me, nor cause me to make any changes, except to send one division of cavalry to Antietam Creek, on the north side. No attempt was made to cross the ford, although it was left open for the enemy. They must have retired to the vicinity of Charles- town. I think I can manage this affair. I have thought it best to be very prudent, everything considered." The same night Grant informed Sheridan, that, after the great battles just delivered around Petersburg, ending in the seizure of the Weldon Eailroad, " all troops will be ordered back from the Valley, except what they believe to be the mini- mum number to detain you. I think," he added, "I do not overstate the loss of the enemy in the last two weeks at 10,000 killed and wounded. Watch closely, and if you find this thing correct, push with all vigor. Give the enemy no rest, and if it is possible to follow to the Virginia Central Koad, follow that far. Do all the damage to railroads and crops you can. Carry off stock of all descriptions and negroes, so as to prevent further planting. If the war is to last another year, we want the Shenandoah Valley to remain a barren waste." These views accorded with Early's latest movements, and Sheridan wrote to Washington that " the indications to-day are that they will fall back out of the Valley." The main army lay quiet that day, but the morning of the 28th, it moved J forward to Charlestown, meeting no 1 General Grant had written Lo Sheridan as follows : " If you are so situated as to feel the enemy strongly without compromising the safety of your position, I think it advisable to do so. I do not know positively that any troops have re- turned yet from the Valley, but think you will find the enemy in your immediate THE SHENANDOAH LINES IN SEPTEMBER. 141 opposition. Sheridan had apparently fixed upon the Clif- ton-Berryville line as the true counter-position to occupy, whenever Early established . himself at Bunker Hill ; for there he could strike the turnpike south of Winchester, should it become advisable to resume the offensive, or could retire to Halltown should the enemy be found in too great strength. Toward this line he now moved, yet by gradual approaches, as the country was very open, and the enemy's purposes not fully known. While the infantry advanced to Charlestown, Averell crossed from Hagerstown through Williamsport to Martinsburg, and Wilson also returned south of the Potomac at Shepherdstown, and Custer at Harper's Ferry. Merritt moved forward to Leetown, and there finding a cavalry force, handsomely defeated it, driv- ing it with the sabre to Smithfield and across the Opequon. The next day, two of Early's infantry divisions expelled Merritt from Smithfield and re-established the Confederate cavalry there ; but Bicketts's division of the Sixth Corps being hurried to Merritt's relief, drove out the enemy's troopers and definitely secured the position for Merritt. The loss of Gibbs's brigade, Merritt's division, was 35 killed and wounded.

## berryville

A new and decisive element was now to enter into the campaign. Four weeks had elapsed since Lee sent Ander- son to Early's relief, and he now desired his return. Af- fairs in the Valley seemed to justify this recall, for Early had been able to maintain himself a long time at Bunker Hill, and to keep his opponent confined within a short radius of Harper's Ferry. On the other hand, the campaign at Petersburg had brought Lee to a desperate need of troops. Since the departure of Kershaw and Fitz Lee, Grant had extended his right to Deep Bottom, north of the James, thus compelling a similar Confederate prolongation to protect Fiichmond ; and he had seized the Weldon road, to regain which his opponents had made desperate assaults, at great cost. Accordingly, Lee informed Early of his need of the troops temporarily lent him, and this notification is the key to Early's moves at this juncture. The 31st of August, Anderson had withdrawn from Ste- phenson's to Winchester ; thence, three days later, Septem- ber 3d, he started with his command toward Berryville, to recross the Blue Bidge on the way to Bichmond. But it chanced that while, up to this time, the road had been open, this was the very day on which Sheridan was finishing his reoccupation of the Clifton-Berryville line, which, as has been seen, in repeating the original arrangement, positioned Crook at Berryville. Merritt and Wilson had been sent to THE SHENANDOAH LINES IN SEPTEMBER 145 reconnoitre beyond the new infantry left, moving- through Millwood and White Post to Front Royal pike. Accord- ingly Anderson, marching to Berryville, which he reached an hour before sunset, stumbled upon the Eighth Corps going into camp there — the surprise being mutual ; and an engagement resulted between Crook and Kershaw, which only night put an end to. About three score prisoners were captured from Anderson ; Crook's total loss was 166. An- derson had his trains with him, homeward-bound to Peters- burg ; but the darkness which immediately followed fa- vored concealment of this fact, and Early, learning of the unexpected encounter — for Sheridan's reoccupation of the Clifton-Berryville position had not attracted his attention — hurried at dawn of the 4th with three divisions to Ander- son's aid, Gordon being left to cover Winchester. He found Kershaw extended in skirmish line, as yet not fully under- standing what he had in his front ; and fearing that the nature of Anderson's movement might become known, when it would be followed by a cavalry attack on his trains, Early left an infantry division in line on Kershaw's left, and then moved across toward what he had presumed to be Sheridan's right, to withdraw attention from Anderson by demonstrating there. A march along rising ground gave him for the first time a full view of the new Union position, which, by the aid of field-glasses, he could see extending to Summit Point, strengthened by intrenchments, at which the troops were still digging, all along the front. It was decided that An- derson must return to Winchester, and start for the Blue Ridge again by a more southerly road, carrying him past the Union left. Early therefore withdrew his whole army across the Opequon — after a spirited skirmish at Berryville, in which Torbert, returning from the left, was involved — Anderson's trains going first.

## opequon

The very air seemed laden now with omens of victory. With Kershaw out of the way, had doubts prevailed as to the result of a pitched battle, Early would have removed them by choosing this moment for giving freer rein than ever to his main error in the campaign. Had he not wofully mis- taken his young opponent's character, the elder general would at once, on losing Kershaw, have so repositioned his forces as to be able to retire up the Valley to Stiasburg the moment his adversary should give sign of attack. The ser- vice rendered him, it is true, by the departing troops, had gone little beyond the immediate purpose for which they had been sent. A singular ill-fortune even had attended whatever movements Anderson's troops had taken part in. On three occasions during his brief stay he had lost infantry prisoners to Union cavalry— once, near Front Eoyal, on arriv- ing, to Merritt ; a second time, near Winchester, to Mcin- tosh ; a third, near Halltown, to Lowell. It had not been his luck to strike Sheridan's left and rear at Cedar Creek, and a subsequent attempt at co-operation was also frustrated — the one of August 21st, when Sheridan retired from Charlestown to Halltown. But while Early cannot there- fore have felt as if an invaluable source of reliance had been taken away from him, in the departure of Kershaw and Cut- shaw for their own corps at Petersburg, yet so serious a sub- 7* 11 154 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. traction of numerical strength should have led him at once to alter his campaign to suit the new contingency. He had retreated up the Valley in August the moment his opponent menaced him from the precise Clifton-Berryville line he now reoccupied. Yet his own strength was now greater than then by only a single division of cavalry, while his oppo- nent's was greater by two divisions of cavalry and part of a division of infantry. If in August it was a sound military move to seek a more defensible line, it was now a move ab- solutely necessary. "What Early actually did at this junc- ture was not only to fail to occupy a position that would se- cure retreat as soon as his enemy should move upon the pike between Winchester and Strasburg, but to send a large part of his army to Martinsburg, twenty-two miles north of Win- chester. This movement was made in the following manner. The 17th of September, hearing that the railroad was again under repair, be went from Stephenson's with Bodes's and Gordon's divisions, and Braxton's artillery, to Bunker Hill, and next day with Gordon, a part of Lomax's cavalry and a few guns, to Martinsburg. Having driven away Averell, who was found there, he regained Bunker Hill, where he left Gordon with orders to return to Stephenson's the next morning, whither Bodes marched that night. Thus, on the eve of a day destined to witness a great and decisive battle, the Confederate forces were strung along the pike — cavalry at Martinsburg, Gordon at Bunker Hill, Bodes on the way to Stephenson's, W7harton with King's battery at Ste- phenson's, Bamseur with Nelson's battery across the Berry- ville pike. Early's venturesome journey to Martinsburg had also greatly aided his opponent's plans. For when, the 18th, Averell sent word that he had been attacked by two infantry divisions, Sheridan eagerly changed the orders of march he THE BATTLE OF THE OPEQUON. 155 had prepared to issue, and, instead of directing his forces south of Winchester to Newtown, moved them directly against the former place, in the hope of striking the two di- visions supposed to be there, and thus easily overwhelming his adversary in detail. It turned out that Rodes and Gor- don returned in season to take part in the main action ; but this fact did not diminish the alacrity and confidence with which the knowledge of Early's division of his forces had in- spired the Union generals. For the new move had dis- pelled the anxiety always felt in regard to the army's com- munications in a move to the pike south of Winchester ; and the battle was to be delivered precisely where at the outset Sheridan had desired. The Union commander's plan was to move his infantry, preceded by a division of cavalry, along the Berry ville pike against Winchester, and the other two divisions of horse to Stephenson's. His orders were, as usual, clear and precise. Torbert was to advance across the Opequon from Summit Point, with Merritt's division, and to form a junction near Stephenson's with Averell, who was to move up the pike for this puiq>ose from Darksville. Wilson was to march rapidly along the Berry ville pike, carry the crossing of the Opequon, and charge through the long ravine beyond, toward Win- chester. The Sixth and Nineteenth Corps, the former in advance, and Emory reporting to Wright on reaching the Opequon, were to move along the Berry ville pike as thus cleared by Wilson. The Army of West Virginia was to march across country, taking position in reserve at the cross- ing of the Opequon. The terrain of the battle now to be fought demands a brief description. Opequon Creek, rising half a dozen miles south of Winchester, pursues its course down the Valley THE BATTLE OF THE OPEQUON. 155 had prepared to issue, and, instead of directing his forces south of Winchester to Newtown, moved them directly against the former place, in the hope of striking the two di- visions supposed to be there, and thus easily overwhelming his adversary in detail. It turned out that Eodes and Gor- don returned in season to take part in the main action ; but this fact did not diminish the alacrity and confidence with which the knowledge of Early's division of his forces had in- spired the Union generals. For the new move had dis- pelled the anxiety always felt in regard to the army's com- munications in a move to the pike south of Winchester ; and the battle was to be delivered precisely where at the outset Sheridan had desired. The Union commander's plan was to move his infantry, preceded by a division of cavalry, along the Berry ville pike against Winchester, and the other two divisions of horse to Stephenson's. His orders were, as usual, clear and precise. Torbert was to advance across the Opequon from Summit Point, with Merritt's division, and to form a junction near Stephenson's with Averell, who was to move up the pike for this purpose from Darksville. Wilson was to march rapidly along the Berry ville pike, carry the crossing of the Opequon, and charge through the long ravine beyond, toward Win- chester. The Sixth and Nineteenth Corps, the former in advance, and Emory reporting to Wright on reaching the Opequon, were to move along the Berryville pike as thus cleared by Wilson. The Army of West Virginia was to march across country, taking position in reserve at the cross- ing of the Opequon. The terrain of the battle now to be fought demands a brief description. Opequon Creek, rising half a dozen miles south of Winchester, pursues its course down the Valley 156 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. four or five miles to the east of that city, and, continuing in its general direction parallel to the pike, joins the Potomac below Falling Waters. The watershed which enables it to share with the Shenandoah the drainage of the lower Valley is Limestone Ridge. The turnpike from Berryville to Winchester, after crossing the Opequon, passes through a wooded ravine or canon. Eunning nearly due east into the Opequon, and crossing the Valley pike about a mile south of Winchester, is Abraham's Creek ; while a nearly parallel little affluent, about a mile and a half north of Winches- ter, is Eed Bud Run, the Berryville pike being between them. The selection by the Confederates of Stephenson's Depot, six miles north of Winchester, as a central point for massing troops, was obviously due to the convergence there of four roads that led from positions occupied by Sheri- dan's forces — from Martinsburg, Charlestown via Smithfield, Summit, and Berryville via Jordan's Springs. The distance from Berryville to Winchester is ten and a half miles, the crossing of the Opequon on the pike being about six from the former point. Both from Berryville, therefore, on the Union left, and from Summit Point on the Union right, the intervals to be passed over before reaching the enemy's lines were not serious. The region in the suburbs of Win- chester was undulating, covered here and there with patches of woods, but generally high and open, with meadows, corn- fields and some houses. Abraham's Creek runs through a deep hollow, but there is high open ground beyond on the Front Royal and Millwood roads, while to the north the country slopes to the Red Bud, which is lower and more marshy ; and north of the Red Bud the country is open, and excellent for cavalry. Early's position prior to his movement of two corps to Martinsburg was this : Ramseur, with Nelson's artillery, a THE BATTLE OF THE OPEQUON. 157 mile east of Winchester, across the Berry ville pike, along an elevated plateau between Abraham's Creek and Bed Bud Run ; Bodes, Gordon, Wharton, with Braxton's and King's batteries, at Stephenson's ; one division of cavalry picketing the Opequon, extending its outpost line northward, and then crossing the Martinsburg pike westward toward the moun- tains, to cover the left ; the other division picketing the right along the Millwood and Front Royal roads to the Shenandoah. The morning of September 19th broke auspiciously. Sheridan's army was astir by one or two o'clock, and march- ing by three, in order to reach the enemy betimes. Wilson, galloping through the Berryville gorge, which is two or three miles long, Mcintosh's brigade in advance, at dawn carried the earthwork at the mouth of the defile, capturing some of its garrison. The infantry followed in the path thus cleared. The Sixth Corps, Getty's division leading, crossed the country to a point on the Berryville pike about two miles from the Opequon. There the head of the Nine- teenth was found, ready to turn in, and was halted by Wright, to whom Emory had reported, until the Sixth should pass. The troops marched on either side of the pike, the artillery, ambulances, and such of the train as was carried taking the macadamized road. Then the column crossed the Opequon near the junction of Abraham's Creek, and thence moved through the ravine. Debouching there, it found Wilson still in his captured earthwork, unmolested. Just beyond this work, rolling ground offered sufficient pro- tection for deploying the column ; and the troops that had been halted in the ravine being gradually drawn up on the line, the first stage of the enterprise was successfully accom- plished. The position now taken up was two miles from Win- 158 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Chester , but as the enemy was more than a mile in front of the city, the Sixth Corps went into line under a heavy artillery fire, to which the Union guns soon replied. The Third Division, Eicketts, was on the right of the pike, the Second, Getty, on the left ; the First, Eussell, in reserve. Four batteries, as they came up, were placed on the corps front, under charge of Colonel C. H. Tompkins, Chief of Artillery. The formation was designed to be in two lines, but the Second Division was mostly placed in one line, in order to cover its ground. Wilson took position on the left of the Sixth Corps. Infantry on marches lasting many days often tire cavalry ; but for brief tramps the horsemen have the advantage. It had seemed long from Wilson's attack at 5 o'clock until 9, and it was to seem a delay still more trying before the in- fantry lines should be fully formed. Marching two corps, one behind the other, fording a stream and moving through a long gorge, a distance of six or eight miles, consumes many hours ; and there had been additional distances for subdivisions to make across country before striking the pike. The Nineteenth Corps had been halted to allow the Sixth to pass, and was further impeded by the guns and wagons of this corps ; but Wright, at Emory's request, at length ordered these, except one battery, to the side of the road, so that the Nineteenth might have a better chance.1 Still it was almost noon before the line was ready to move forward, the 1 Sheridan, with his characteristic study of details and careful preparation, had ordered that only the necessary trains should be taken : " Corps and other independent commanders will have their commands in readiness to march at 9 o'clock p.m. — to-night. All regimental and other wagons that will inconvenience the quick movement of the troops will be parked at Summit Point with the sup- ply train, and sent under guard to Harper's Ferry at 3 o'clock p.m. to-day" (Confidential Circular, September 18th). THE BATTLE OF THE OPEQUON. 159 Second division, Grover's, of the Nineteenth, having eome ia upon the right of the Sixth, the First, Dwight's, being held as a reserve in the rear, and the last of the Sixth Corps batteries ha'ving come up.1 During the morning hours, Eamseur's division had been the only infantry immediately confronting Sheridan at Win- chester, aided by Nelson's battery. Jackson's and a part of Johnson's cavalry, under Lomax, watched the valley of Abraham's Creek and the Front Boyal road, on Rarnseur's right, and a detachment of Johnson the space betwixt his left and the Red Bud. But while the Union line was form- ing in front of Ramseur, Gordon and Rodes were hurried from Stephenson's, and the former, arriving first, between ten and eleven o'clock, was placed in the timber on Ram- seur's left near the Red Bud, Johnson's cavalry detachment being moved to the right for this purpose, while Rodes, when he came up, was positioned between Gordon and Ramseur. Had the Union march through the ravine been as rapid as was hoped, Ramseur might have been overwhelmed before aid could arrive. The change in the situation was that 1 Wright, a week later, having his attention called by Emory to an entirely ill- founded statement imputing to the latter's fault a delay in marching up his corp=, answered as follows : "According to the order of march, you were to follow the artillery and trains of the Sixth Corps, and when the head of the column reached the pike it was met by yours, which was then halted 03' my order, to per- mit my command to pass. That you moved up as rapidly as practicable, after it had been decided to park the trains on the east side of the Opequon, instead of taking them across, I have had no reason to doubt ; nor is there the slightest doubt that your command passed the trains, and moved forward through the de- file by which the battle-ground was reached as rapidly as infantry could be moved. As an act of justice to yourself and corps, I have brought the matter to the notice of the Major- General commanding this army, and take pleasure in saying that he will effectually correct the misstatement in his next despatch to Lieutenant-General Grant.-1 Sheridan wrote that he had seen a statement that the Nineteenth Corps was late in coming into the battle at Winchester. " I was entirely unconscious of this," he said, "until I saw it in the paper; " and he de- clared the assertion to be incorrect. 160 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Sheridan had now unexpectedly to fight Early's whole army. At twenty minutes before mid-day, the line moved across the open to the belt of woods opposite, where thfe flashes of the enemy's cannon had told of his presence. No sooner had the infantry gone forward than the battle became at once deadly, and so continued through the day, being fought without field-works. On the left, south of Abraham's Creek, near Greenwood Church and school-house, Wilson moved along the Senseny road, which runs parallel to the Berry- ville pike, more than a mile distant from it, here holding Lomax in check, and very soon forcing him back. The Sixth Corps, pressing forward on both sides of the Berry ville pike, through an almost open country, drove back Bamseur and Bodes. The Nineteenth Corps sharply attacked Gordon. Grover, in advance, was formed with his First and Third Bri- gades, Birge and Sharpe, in the front line, and the Fourth and Second, Shunk and Molineux, in the second. The ef- fort to keep connection with the left of the line made a gap which was filled by bringing Molineux into the front line between Birge and Sharpe. Grover now assailed the enemy's left with great effect. " Evans's brigade of Gor- don's division," says Early, "which was on the extreme left of our infantry, received a check from a column of the enemy, and was forced back through the woods from behind which it had advanced, the enemy following to the very rear of the woods, and to within musket range of seven pieces of Braxton's artillery which were without support. This caused a pause in our advance, and the position was most critical, for it was apparent that unless this force was driven back the day was lost. Braxton's guns, in which now was our only hope, resolutely stood their ground." The success thus gained against the Georgia brigade, THE BATTLE OF THE OPEQUON. 161 which was driven into the woods,1 broke up the continuity of the Union infantry line. Even before this, Colonel Keifer, commanding the right brigade of Ricketts, which formed the right of the Sixth Corps, had noticed that the turnpike, on which the division was dressing, bore to the left, causing an interval between it and the left of the Nineteenth Corps, and he had pushed three regiments into this space. Lieuten- ant-Colonel Neafie, commanding the One Hundred and Fifty- sixth New York, of the Third Brigade (Sharpe's) of Grover's division, whose regiment was on the left of that corps, says, " I was ordered to advance and guide on the right of the Sixth Corps, which order I executed, and in order to do so I was obliged to oblique my regiment very much to the left. The advance was made under a very severe fire." Braxton's grins, concentrating against the triumphant Union assail- ants, soon had a visible effect in checking their advance ; and at this moment Battle's brigade of Rodes's division, which had just arrived from Stephenson's, and had formed in the rear of Evans, came through the woods in a charge — fresh troops at a critical hour. They struck the thinly cov- ered junction of the right of the Sixth and the left of the Nineteenth Corps, and quickly supported on their flanks by the remainder of Bodes and all of Gordon, the broken bri- gade rallying with the rest, they succeeded in driving back Ricketts's division of the Sixth Corps and Grover's of the Nineteenth, while the whole line to some extent felt the ef- fect and came back somewhat toward the position in front 1 " Charged with fixed bayonets at double quick, broke his lines on the active front of the brigade, and drove him through and out of the woods. As the troops entered the woods, I was ordered by General Grover to halt and hold that position, and not to go further into the woods, but the charge was so rapid and impetuous, and the men so much excited by the sight of the enemy in full retreat before them, that it was impossible to execute the order, and the whole line pressed for- ward to the extreme edge of the timber " (Report of General Birge.) 162 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. of the ravine from which it had advanced. This temporary advantage, which caused the chief loss of prisoners suffered by the Union forces, cost Early the life of Eodes, one of the most experienced and skilful of Confederate division commanders. At this juncture Eussell's division of the Sixth Corps splendidly improved a golden opportunity. Ordered at once to move up into the front line, now needing rein- forcement, this change brought it into the gap created by the Confederate charge, and continuing its advance it struck the flank of the hostile force which was sweeping away the Union right, and aided by the Fifth Maine battery, which enfiladed the enemy's line with canister, at once turned the tide. The enemy retreated, the line was re-es- tablished, the fugitives were gathered from the woods in which they had taken refuge, while the gallant division took position on the right of its corps. But in the hour of his triumph Eussell had fallen.1 " His death," said Sheri- dan, " brought sadness to every heart in the army." The 1 The report of the operations of the division was made by Major Dalton, A. A.G. " The enemy," he s.iys, " having pushed back the Second Division of the Nine- teenth Corps and a portion of the Third Division of this corps, moved down toward the pike, delivering a severe fire of musketry from the woods and corn- fields on the right. The Third Brigade (Edwards) was now rapidly moved by the flank to the righc of the pike, then forward with the First Brigade (Campbell), under a heavy fire, to a crest commanding the woods and fields through which the enemy moved. This advance was very much assisted by the First New York Battery, commanded by Lieutenant Johnson, which did splendid execution, and was fought with gallantry under a very annoying musketry fire. At this time. General Upton moved his brigade into line to the right of the pike at an oblique angle to it, thence forward into the woods, delivering heavy volleys into masses of the enemy, who were coming up. This fresh fire from the Second Brigade [Upton] soon caused the enemy to fall back, so that the whole line moved forward to a position which was easily held till the latter part of the afternoon, though oc- casionally sharp musketry fire was interchanged. While personally superintend- ing the advance of the First and Third Brigades to the crest previously referred to, and which he considered of the utmost importance, General Russell was killed by a piece of shell which passed through his heart — he had just before received a THE BATTLE OF THE OPEQUON. 163 broken portion of Bicketts's line was quickly re-formed be- hind the First Division, now under Upton, and again moved forward, while Dwigkt's division having taken the place of Grover's on the right of the line, the latter was promptly rallied and brought up. It was now long past midday, and after the fierce and con- tinuous struggle which had included Sheridan's initial ad- vance, his recoil under the charge from the Confederate left, and his rally and re-advance toward Early's position in the woods, there was a comparative lull, which the Union com- mander employed in preparing for a culminating effort with his full strength. The Army of West Virginia, which had been left in reserve, was now moving on the scene. Sheri- dan's original purpose had been to use it on the left for seiz- ing the Valley pike, when he had supposed that he would have but half the enemy's force to meet at Winchester, and that it would attempt escape to Strasburg ; but the temporary repulse of the Union right, and the strength developed by the enemy there, made it evident that whatever danger was to bullet wound in the left breast, but had not mentioned this to any of his staff, continuing to urge forward his troops." General Upton's account is as follows : "After marching about half a mile, the troops on the right of the pike gave way ; line was immediately formed, and soon after Lieutenant-Colonel Kent gave me the order to move the brigade to the right. The brigade was faced to the right and marched across the pike into a narrow belt of timber, where the second line was halted and faced to the front. The Second Connecticut continued the march, inclining to the right, making our line oblique to that upon which the enemy was advancing. Bayonets were fixed, and instructions given not to fire till within close range. The enemy's left, ex- tending far beyond our right, advanced till within two hundred yards of our line, when a brisk flank fire was opened by the One Hundred and Twenty-first New York and Sixty-fifth New York, causing him to retire in great disorder. The Second Connecticut immediately moved forward and opened fire. The whole line then advanced, driving the enemy and inflicting a heavy loss in the killed and wounded. The brigade was halted at the edge of the wood, which position it held till the attack was renewed in the afternoon. On the left of the brigade the Thirty-seventh Massachusetts Volunteers rendered invaluable service in support- ing Stevens's [Fifth Maine] Battery." 164 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. be apprehended would come from that flank — this, indeed, was probable at the outset, since the absent Confederate divisions, hurrying in from Stephenson's and beyond to Ramseur's relief, or driven in by the cavalry there, must necessarily fall upon the Union right. Leaving a small portion of the corps to guard his trains, Crook was ordered to move the rest rapidly to the front, on the pike. Thoburn, marching forward with the First and Third Brigades of his division, found the ravine " filled with wagons, artillery, ambulances, and stragglers," seriously im- peding his progress and that of Duval, commanding the Second Division. Thoburn, under Crook's direction, formed in two lines, Wells the first and Harris the second, on the right of the pike, behind the heavy wood, in front of which Emory was fighting, and then moved forward to Emory's right, connecting closely with ifc and compactly filling the space to the swampy hollow drained by Red Bud Run. Duval went on the north side of the run, holding Crook's right. Sheridan at that moment arrived, and directed Tho- burn, as soon as Duval was up, and connecting with him, to charge directly through the woods in his front. A rousing cheer announced Duval's approach, and both he and Tho- burn rushed at the woods with a confident eagerness that broke Gordon's division, which was at that point. But this was not the only fresh force that now threatened the Confederate left. Torbert, setting out early in the morning with Merritt's division, had crossed the Opequon at Ridgway's and Locke's fords, while Averell had come up the Martinsburg pike. Merritt dispersed the enemy's pick- ets, but a mile and a half beyond found himself checked by Wharton's division of infantry and King's battery, which were at Stephenson's, and had advanced to meet him. The incident was vexatious ; but Averell, driving the enemy in THE BATTLE OP THE OPEQUON. 165 his own front, comprising Imboden's cavalry, now under Smith, and McCausland's, now under Ferguson, all the way up the pike from Darksville to Stephenson's, thus came into the rear of the infantry facing Merritt, which thereupon abandoned its position. Only with difficulty and some hard fighting did Breckenridge succeed in bringing off Wharton on the pike from Stephenson's, arriving at "Winchester about 2 p.m. Patton's brigade was left to help Fitz Lee's cavalry to withstand Torbert ; but before long the latter was driving in both Patton and Fitz Lee, " the cavalry," says Early, " coming back in great confusion, followed by the enemy's." To add to the stress, Wilson, far on the left, had so threat- ened the Millwood and Valley pikes, that Early was com- pelled to weaken Fitz Lee, even in his need, by detaching Wickham's brigade, so as to secure a route for a retreat, which was all he could now hope for. He had also at first moved two of Wharton's three brigades toward his right, where he feared being cut off; but almost immediately these were sent back, for by four o'clock Crook and Torbert were simultaneously attacking Early's left flank — Averell on the west of the Martinsburg pike, Merritt on the east, and Crook on Merritt's left. Crook, on entering the fight along Red Bud Bun, had struck Patton's infantry brigade and Payne's cavalry, which had been trying to hold back Torbert from coming in on the rear of Early's left flank. Breckenridge was accordingly now employing the other two brigades of Wharton and King's battery in checking Torbert. As Breckenridge's line was necessarily at right angles with the Martinsburg pike, its flank was in turn exposed to Crook, who was advancing between Wharton and Gordou. The latter, therefore, put in Evans's brigade to fill' this gap ; and Thoburn soon re- ceived a flank fire. He saw he must change front to the 166 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. left, " but the instincts of the soldiers," he says, with a fine frankness, " prompted to the proper movement ; before my commands could be conveyed, each man was marching and facing toward the enemy's fire. Colonel Duval's division crossed Red Bud Run or morass at this point, and his com- mand and my own mingled together and acted together until the pursuit was over. 'Tis true our lines were broken and gone ; but had we moved in such a manner as to preserve our lines, the enemy would have escaped unhurt, or else driven us back." While Crook and Torbert were coming in on the right, the Sixth and Nineteenth Corps had been advanced with equal success on their fronts, driving Rainseur and Rodes steadily back to Winchester. For "as soon as the firing was heard in rear of our left flank," says Early, " the infantry commenced falling back along the whole line." A mile of such progress on both flanks brought the Union troops close to the town, where a lino of breastworks, constructed early in the war, gave the shattered Confederate forces some refuge, and batteries were planted there and also at the toll- gate and the cemetery. Wickham, hurrying back to Early's left, now took position on Fort Hill, confronting Averell. The remainder of the Confederate line was as before, namely, Fitz Lee, Wharton, Gordon, Rodes, Raniseur, and Loniax, the latter partly opposite the Union left, and partly at the junction of the Millwood and Valley jukes, the for- mer of which Wilson held. The effort to retain this line was fruitless. "The enemy's cavalry," says Early, "again charged around my left flank, and the men began to give way again." As day ended, Early's forces broke through Win- chester in complete retreat. " I never saw our troops in such confusion before," wrote a wounded and captured Confederate officer in his diary. "Night found Sheridan's hosts in full and exultant possession of much-abused, beloved Winchester. THE BATTLE OF THE OPEQUON. 167 The hotel hospital was pretty full of desperately wounded and dying Confederates. The entire building was shrouded in darkness during the dreadful night. Sleep was impossible, as the groans, sighs, shrieks, prayers, and oaths of the wretched sufferers, combined with my own severe pain, banished all thought of rest. . . . Our scattered troops, closely fol- lowed by the large army of pursuers, retreated rapidly and in disorder through the city. It was a sad, humiliating sight." The Sixth Coips, on the left, moved over to the pike south of Winchester, but as it had been a hard and long day of marching and fighting, there was no attempt at infantry pur- suit, and probably nothing would have been gained by push- ing these tired troops after the flying enemy. The cavalry only followed him up the pike to Kernstown, where Eam- seur, by maintaining his organization, effectually covered the retreat, which afterward, under the shelter of the dark- ness, was continued toward Strasburg. The Union forces were overjoyed at their success, and their enthusiasm became unbounded when General Sheridan, with Generals Wright, Emory, and Crook, rode in front of their lines. The com- mander-in-chief, elated with his first victory as the leader of an army, hastened to indite a despatch which told the story of the day in the electric phraseology that soon came to be popularly associated with him : " We have just sent them whirling through Winchester, and we are after them to- morrow. This army behaved splendidly." The note of ex- ultation was taken up throughout the North, and the phrase " whirling through Winchester " was on every tongue. Grant ordered each of his two Richmond armies to fire a salute of one hundred guns, and added in his despatch to Sheridan, " If practicable, push your success and make all you can of it," and President Lincoln, on the day after the battle, at the suggestion and urgent wish of Grant, gave the victor the 168 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. well-merited appointment of brigadier-general in the regu- lar army, besides the permanent command of the Middle Division, to which his appointment had till then been but temporary. Congratulations from all sides poured in, but none heartier than the following : " Have just heard of your great victory. God bless you all, officers and men. Strongly inclined to come up and see you. A. Lincoln." Grant followed his first terse despatch with a longer one : ' ' I congratulate you and the army serving under you for the great vic- tory just achieved. It has been most opportune in. point of time and effect. It will open again to the Government and to the public the very important line of road from Baltimore to the Ohio, and also the Chesapeake Canal. Better still, it wipes out much of the stain upon our arms by previous disasters in that locality. May your good work con- tinue is now the prayer of all loyal men." The conflict had been a bloody one. The Union loss was from 4,900 to 5,000 men, and of these about 4,300 were killed or wounded, the killed including Eussell, and the wounded Generals Upton, Mcintosh, who lost a leg, and Chapman, and Colonels Duval, commanding a division, and Sharpe, commanding a brigade. The exact figures are not ascer- tainable, since in the following table the losses of Crook's Army of West Virginia include the very slight casualties it suffered at Fisher's Hill, while those of the other three corps embrace only Winchester : Killed. Wounded. Missing. Total. Cavalry Corps 65 313 375 105 658 267 1,434 1,228 840 109 48 453 8 441 1,685 1.956 953 3,759 618 5,035 THE BATTLE OF THU OPEQUON. 169 Early's loss was from 3,900 to 4,000. He officially re- ported the casualties of the infantry and artillery in this battle to be 3,611 ; ' and supposing his cavalry loss to be in the same ratio as that of the Union cavalry, i.e., about one- eleventh of the whole, we reach the figures already indi- cated. Of his casualties nearly 2,000 were prisoners ; and many of his wounded, also, were left in the Winchester hos- pitals or elsewhere along the Valley. Among his killed were Generals Eodes and Godwin and Colonel Patton, a 111 In this battle the loss in the infantry and artillery was: killed, 226; wounded, 1,567 ; missing, 1,818 — total, 3,011. There is no full report of the cav- alry, but the total loss in killed and wounded from September 1st to October 1st is : killed, 60 ; wounded, 288 — total, 348 ; but many were captured, though a good many are missing as stragglers, and a number of them reported missing in the infantry were not captured, but are stragglers and skulkers" (Early to Lee, October 9th). Sheridan stated that " most of the enemy's wounded and all of their killed fed into our hands,'' and Surgeon Brinton reported to Surgeon-General Barnes, two or three days after the battle, as follows : •' On my arrival here I found about 4,000 Union and 1,200 rebel wounded." On a subsequent day he telegraphed again : " I sent yesterday (September 22d) TOO wounded to Sandy Hook Hospital. There are still 3,800 here, including 700 rebels. I learn that more wounded men are on their way to this place from the fiont [i.e., Fisher's Hill]. An unsigned memorandum or enclosure, accompanying Early's report of the battle, gives this statement of the killed and wounded in the aitillery : Killed. Wounded. Total. 89 42 32 23 13 597 285 364 194 68 686 327 396 217 81 199 1,508 1,707 Early's report, however, as has been said, gives the number of killed and wounded as 1,793 — the slight discrepancy being not unusual. It will be under- stood, of course, that Early's old division was commanded by Ramseur, and Breckenridge's by Wharton. In the Nineteenth Corps earlier returns had indicated a greater loss in the bat- tle of the Opequon. A return of the Second (Grover's) Division, made the next day, XI.-8 170 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. brigade commander; among his severely wounded, Gen- erals Fitz Lee and York. By promptly recognizing his im- pending defeat, Early was able to save his trains and stores, and the transportable portion of his sick and wounded ; but he left as trophies to the victor five pieces of artillery and nine battle-flags, captured on the field. September 20th, near Strasburg, was, by brigades, as follows, for the ten days preceding. Killed. Wounded. Missing. Total. Strength. 94 58 38 33 2 348 344 215 141 6 271 262 74 21 0 713 664 327 195 8 1,495 1,268 3. Sharpe 4. Shnnk 796 1,194 137 225 1,054 628 1,907 4,890 The last column in this table is the aggregate " effective strength," officers and men, after action, showing also that the division had an effective strength of 6,797 men just before the battle. But the remarks on the original return are that "the lists of killed and wounded ai-e made up from actual knowledge ; the missing will be greatly decreased, as men are constantly coming in." This last statement proved to be true, according to the revised table given in the text. A return of the whole Nineteenth Corps by divisions for the ten days preceding September 20th, which is nearly equivalent to the losses at Winchester, since there were not fifty casualties apart from that battle, was as follows : Killed. Wounded. Missing. aggregate Casualties. £ O C3 o 1 o a! o o £ O c a> "3 o H 03 U s o a 3 "3 o 1 . Owight 6 ID 25 65 206 71 225 21 98 414 977 435 1.054 io 10 60 618 60 628 27 106 133 539 1,801 566 1,907 271 296 1,391 1,489 678 688 2,340 2,473 These casualties were reduced by the arrival of many who were missing, and perhaps also by the return to duty of some of the wounded before the date of the revised records. THE BATTLE OF THE OPEQUON. 171 This battle of the Opequon — for so the engagement was styled by General Sheridan, to distinguish it from previous contests around Winchester — restored the lower Valley to Union control, from which it was never again wrested ; it permanently relieved Maryland and Pennsylvania from the periodical invasions to which they had been subjected during three years, and the national capital from further humilia- tions. This result had been accomplished by a battle which, taken with its sequences, inflicted upon the Confederate forces losses in troops nearly as great as those which were sustained by the Union arms — an experience fatal to the fast dwin- dling forces of the South. The moral effect of this victory on the North was most wholesome. The discouragement which had prevailed re- garding operations in the Shenandoah Valley, over which a sinister fortune had brooded since the year 1861, wholly dis- appeared. The magnetism the young commander exercised upon his troops spread through the country, and henceforth caused his fortunes in the Valley to be watched with the eager expectation and hearty good-will which fall to the lot of the favorite soldier. As to his unfortunate antagonist, his chagrin manifested itself in a declaration, more than two years later, that he could only attribute his escape from utter annihilation to the incapacity of his opponent; that "instead of being pro- moted, Sheridan ought to have been cashiered for this bat- tle;'' and that "a skilful and energetic commander of the enemy's forces would have crushed Eamseur before any as- sistance could have reached him, and thus insured the de- struction of my whole force ; and, later in the day, when the battle had turned against us, with the immense superiority in cavalry which Sheridan had, and the advantage of the open country, would have destroyed my whole force, and 172 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. captured everything I had." In his ill-concealed vexation, the Confederate general here passes upon himself as severe a condemnation as his most bitter detractors could frame ; for the act of leaving Ramseur isolated was his own ; and the great superiority of the Union cavalry was, or should have been, as well known to him before as after the battle at Winchester, and should have dissuaded him from risking an engagement in that open country. Early deserves, never- theless, the credit of great vigor and skill in fighting the battle thus forced upon him, and in saving his trains and his army out of the ruin his opponent bad prepared for him. The battle of the Opequon was universally accepted as a vindication of Sheridan's views and policy. His belief that he ought to wait until Early should be weakened, before as- saulting him, had been shown to be one that comported with extraordinary energy ; and a striking feature of the action of the Opequon had been the personal presence and supervision of Sheridan at every important point in the front line. If it be true, as Sheridan's report says, that " at Winchester, for a moment, the contest was uncertain," might not the presence of Kershaw at that juncture have turned the scale the other way ? Beyond question, the confidence with which the Union general that day inspired his troops proved invaluable in the subsequent stages of the campaign.

## fishers-hill

At daylight, Sei^tember 20th, Sheridan marched up the Valley pike, the Sixth Corps on the left, the Nineteenth on the right, and the Eighth bringing up the rear, in pursuit of the enemy. The cavalry had preceded, Averell on the Back road, Merritt on the Valley pike, and Wilson on the Front Royal pike. Early simultaneously retreated to his old posi- tion on Fisher's Hill, two miles south of Strasburg. Fisher's Hill offers the first strong defensive line to a force advancing from Winchester. Here the main Valley, twenty miles wide below, narrows to four, through the inter- position of the isolated Massanutten chain, which rises half way between North Mountain on the west and the Blue Kidge on the east. The westernmost tier of the Massanut- ten system is composed of Peaked Ridge and Three Top, lying in the same straight line, and substantially a part of the same upheaval. Its western base is washed by the North Fork of the Shenandoah, which turns sharply to the east around the north terminus of Three Top, at Strasburg, and makes a confluence with the South Fork ten miles be- yond, near Front Royal. Cedar Creek winds southward into the North Fork just below Strasburg, while to a rivulet which adds its waters to the North Fork, two miles above the town, is given the expressive name of Tumbling Run. West of the North Fork runs the Valley pike from Strasburg 174 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. to Staunton, and by its side the then broken and disused Manassas Gap Railroad. Fisher's Hill is the precipitous bluff beyond and overhanging Tumbling Run, which at that point still further narrows the Valley. Here Early halted, the hill with the Shenandoah beyond protecting his right, while to seal his left against approach he began to erect ad- ditional works across the Valley, westward to the North Mountain. The pike, which runs over the hill in a depres- sion, was for a long distance under fire from his guns ; and so secure did he feel, that the ammunition-boxes were taken from the caissons and placed for convenience behind the breastworks. His line was substantially the same as when he had occupied this position in August, Wharton being on the right, Gordon next, then Pegram (commanding Ram- seur's old division), then Ramseur (now transferred to Rodes's former division), and finally Lomax's cavalry, dis- mounted, on Ramseur's left. Fitz Lee's cavalry, now under Wickham, was sent to the right, to prevent the flanking of Fisher's Hill through the Luray Valley, the chief position selected for him being at Millford, on the pike, about twelve miles above Front Royal. Here the South Fork nears the Rlue Ridge, leaving a narrow defensible gorge between. Early, while at Fisher's Hill, was deprived of the services of Breckenridge, who received orders from Richmond to return to Southwest Virginia. With Breckenridge, Rodes, and Fitz Lee gone, he had fewer lieutenants on whose aid and vig- ilance to rely. During the afternoon of the 20th, Wright and Emory ar- rived at Cedar Creek, and crossing, went into position on the heights fronting Strasburg, with the Sixth CorjDS on the right, and the Nineteenth on the left, the latter extending nearly to the Front Royal road, which, in fact, was crossed by a detached subdivision ; while the Eighth, when it came THE BATTLE OF FISHER'S HILL. 175 up, was halted upon the left bank of the stream. By evening the Union pickets occupied the northern part of Strasburg and the Confederate pickets the southern. Throughout the 21st, Sheridan was occupied in posi- tioning his main infantry line, which, advancing through the town, drove the enemy's skirmishers back to the de- fences at Fisher's Hill. "When the morning mist cleared away, Early was found to have been busy through the night in further strengthening his position with works of earth and stone and in throwing down abatis. Starting out with his staff early in the day, Sheridan rode from one end to the other of the picket line, noting the ground. Accom- panied by General Wright, he reconnoitred especially the right flank, and there, well in advance, the chief point to oc- cupy was seen to be the high land on the north of Tumbling Run, confronting the enemy's main position. Wright at once sent three regiments, two from his Third Division and one from the Second, to seize this spot ; but the enemy also knew its value, and repulsed the Union forces. The remain- der of Warner's brigade of the Second was added, and the position most gallantly carried by Warner. From that time till sundown the axes of the pioneers resounded, making a way for planting the artillery on the important vantage- ground thus secured, while the excellent view now obtain- able showed that the enemy had not ceased his defensive labors. But neither gradual approaches nor experimental assaults on these frowning heights formed the sum of the purposes of the Union commander. He resolved to repeat his tactics of the Opequon by again turning the enemy's left flank with Crook's command, doing this with all secrecy, since the Con- federate station on Three Top commanded both camps. At the same time he proposed to move Torbert up the Luray 176 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. f Valley, there getting past the enemy's right flank, if possible, and crossing Massanutten to his rear. The night of the 21st he sent this despatch to Grant : " General Wilson's cavalry division charged the enemy at Front Royal pike this morn- ing, and drove them from Front Royal up the Luray Val- ley for a distance of six miles. I directed two brigades of the First Cavalry Division, with General Wilson's divi- sion, to follow the enemy up that Valley, and to push them vigorously." The Sixth Corps continued its lodgment on the valuable line it had gained, confronting the enemy along Tumbling Run. The difficult ground, densely wooded, broken by ledges and cut up by ravines, made this an all-night task ; and at daybreak the Nineteenth was shifted to the right and front of its first position, occupying the ground held on the 21st by the Sixth, with which latter its right then connected. The skirmish line of the Nineteenth, extend- ing to the left, and its reserves along the railroad, were not changed, nor the regiment ordered to reconnoitre the extreme left the day before. The troops intrenched, and the artillery was placed in position. Sheridan finding the enemy's right impregnable, and planning to turn his left, had already by degrees moved the two corps well to the right ; but to connect with Crook when the latter should reappear on the scene, besides hiding his movements in the interim, Ricketts's division of the Sixth Corps, which was already on the right, took a desirable position, during the afternoon, still farther to the front, very handsomely driving in the enemy's skirmish line, aided by the three rifle batteries of the Sixth Corps. Averell came up on the right of Ricketts. The Second Division of the corps was then moved to the right and front, connecting with Ricketts, and the First to connect with the Second. It was hardly half a THE BATTLE OP FISHER'S HILL. 177 mile from the ridge thus gained to the Fisher's Hill trenches across the ravine. These movements occupied the day ; and Early, fearing rather than hoping attack, thought it had begun with the last movements of Ricketts and Averell. When he saw their advance, "orders were given" he says, "for my troops to retire after dark, as I knew my force was not strong enough to resist a determined assault." Just before sunset, Crook, who, with admirable silence and secrecy, had been all day moving toward and then along Little North Mountain, under the cover of the woods, till he had gained the enemy's left flank and rear, rushed across the intervening space, and, before the enemy could recover from his surprise, was over his intrenchments. " Had the heavens opened," writes one officer, "and we been seen descending from the clouds, no greater consternation would have. been created." More quickly than the story can be told, the divisions of Thoburn and Duval swept along the enemy's left flank, taking his line in reverse, and driving before them the astonished dismounted cavalry of Lomax. In a few minutes Ricketts had joined his right to Crook's left, and the remainder of the Sixth Corps and the Nineteenth, taking up the charge, descended into the ravine of Tumbling Rim, with a head- long rush over fields, walls, rocks, and felled trees. Making their way across the brook, they were soon scrambling up heights that it had seemed madness to attack, while Sheri- dan and his -admirable staff were on every part of the line, shouting " Forward ! Forward everything ! " and to all in- quiries for instructions the reply was still, " Go on, don't stop, go on ! " Formations were little heeded in the rush : but the whole Confederate line broke from its trenches, Lomax's dismounted cavalry on the left giving way first, whereupon Ramseur and Pegram were routed in turn. " My 178 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. whole force retired in considerable confusion," says General Early. In truth, between sundown and dark every portion of the strong position at Fisher's Hill was carried, the action being so rapid that the enemy had not even time to get his guns out of position upon the pike, and sixteen of them were captured by the Union forces. Early fled in disorder, under ' cover of the darkness, through Woodstock to a point about four miles beyond, called Narrow Passage, just north of Edenburg. Sheridan pushed after him all night with Devin's brigade of Merritt's cavalry and the Nineteenth and Sixth Corps, both corps re- porting to Wright, and the Nineteenth in advance,1 as far as Woodstock ; but the darkness rendered this pursuit unavail- ing. Devin received instructions from Sheridan himself, Torbert being in Luray Valley, but " found the roads blocked up with our infantry advancing," and only reached the head of the column about ten o'clock. He then got two guns in position, and opened on the enemy's rear, but was afterward sent into the fields on the left of the turnpike, on a line parallel with the head of the infantry. The latter, since the night had been thus employed, were halted from dawn till afternoon of the next day for sleep and food. Unfortunately Torbert did not succeed in driving Wick- J "The advance was made with as much rapidity as the darkness and the nature of the ground would permit. About 9.30 p.m. our skirmish line was fired at, and by some unfortunate mistake, the regiments in the rear, not belonging to my command, opened fire upon my reserves and skirmish line, from which I lost a number of men. Hardly had we advanced a distance of a mile before a brisk fire was again opened upon us from musketry and artillery, and again I sustained a fire from our own troops in the rear. The enemy was evidently pre- pared to meet us at this point, wire and other obstacles had been placed to delay the skirmish line, and two pieces of artillery were well trained upon the road. After a short delay, the advance was again made, and the enemy driven with but little opposition. The road was found strewn with the remains of burning wagons, and a large number of prisoners was captured by this command and sent to the rear. At 3.30 a.m. we bivouacked on the south side of Woodstock'" (ilolineux's Report). THE BATTLE OF FISHER'S HILL. 179 ham's cavalry from, its strong defensive position at Millford, and hence the portion of Sheridan's plan which contem- plated cutting off the enemy's retreat by seizing the pike at New Market, was not carried out. The 21st Torbert had moved through Front Royal into the Luray Valley, with the divisions of Merritt and Wilson, excepting Devin's bri- gade of the. former, which was left to guard the rear of the army at Cedar Creek. He found Wickham, with his own and Payne's brigade, posted on the south side of Gooney Run. At 2 a.m. of the 22d, Custer's brigade was sent back across the South Fork, with orders, says Torbert, to march around the enemy's flank to his rear, as he seemed too strong to attack in front ; but Torbert, on moving forward at daylight, found that the enemy had retreated to a still stronger position on the south side of Millford Creek, with his left on the Shenandoah and his right on a knob of the Blue Ridge, occupying a short, compact line. The bank of the creek seemed to Torbert too precipitous for a direct at- tack ; and " not knowing," he says, " that the army had made an attack at Fisher's Hill, and thinking that the sacri- fice would be too great to attack without that knowledge, I concluded to withdraw to a point opposite McCoy's Ferry." The 23d, Wilson crossed McCoy's ford, and Merritt went back through Front Royal, where he skirmished with Mosby, driving him off with loss. During the afternoon " news was received of the victory at Fisher's Hill, and directions to make up the Luray Valley." Both divisions at once moved forward and bivouacked at Millford Creek, which the enemy had evacuated.1 Had they been able to 1 "Its operations [the cavalry's] up the Luray Valley, on which I calculated so much, were an entire failure. They were held at Millford by two small brigades of Fitz Lee's cavalry, and then fell back toward Front Royal, until after they had learned of our success at Fisher's Hill" (Sheridajf to Grant, September 25th). 180 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. move the day before across the South Fork through Massa- nutten Gap, a powerful body of horse would have been in the rear of the enemy, upon his line of retreat ; but Early was fully alive to this danger, and had guarded against it with Wickham's force. Sheridan's loss at the battle of Fisher's Hill was only about 400 men; Early's, between 1,300 and 1,400, the language of his despatch to Lee being as follows : " The loss in the infantry and artillery was 30 killed, 210 wounded, and 995 missing ; total 1,235.' I have been able to get no report of the loss in the cavalry, but it was slight." As Lomax received the brunt of Crook's attack, he must have suffered his share of the loss ; and since Sheridan reported that he had 1,100 prison- ers, the difference of 105 between Early's and Sheridan's tally can be safely ascribed to the cavalry, thus making Early's total loss 1,340, besides some cavalry killed and wounded. Winchester and Fisher's Hill were really parts of the same move. If we take the two together, we have a total loss for Sheridan as follows : Cavalry Corps Sixth Corps Nineteenth Corps Eighth Corps . . . Killed. 65 237 286 105 693 Wounded. 267 1,634 1,275 840 4.016 Missing. 109 51 455 623 441 1,922 2,016 953 5,332 In the affair of Fisher's Hill the cavalry losses are not in- cluded, but they could hardly bring the total up to 5,400. 1 The unsigned memorandum accompanying Early's despatch to Lee, spoken of on a previous page, gave these details of the killed and wounded : Ramseur, 105 ; Pegram, 64; Gordon, 49; Wharton, 14; Artillery, 29; total, 261, 32 being killed and 229 wounded. THE BATTLE OF FISHERS HILL. 181 This is almost exactly Early's loss for the two battles — nearly 4,000 at Winchester and over 1,350 at Fisher's Hill. Thus Sheridan's victories had been won with a loss on his part only equal to the enemy's, while the guns, the flags, the military positions, and the moral effect were his prizes. Besides, in ratio to his total strength he had suffered a loss far less than the enemy's, and it was precisely this fact that was to ruin the Confederate campaign in the Valley. He had taken a great number of prisoners — a matter of vital consequence in the wan- ing days of the revolt — while he had lost very few, the highest proportion to the total casualties being in the cavalry.1 1 The returns of Crook's West Virginia army, as has already been noted, lumped its casualties at Winchester and Fisher's Hill, but the other two corps (the cavalry being too little engaged to be included) suffered as follows at the latter point : Sixth Corps Nineteenth Corps Killed. Wounded. Missing. Aggregate. 210 47 237 GO Here, also, some discrepancies occur in earlier reports. A list of casualties for the Nineteenth Corps at Fisher's Hill, made out six days later, September 28:h, at Harrisonburg, runs as follows : Division. Killed. Wounded. Missing. Total. 4 8 29 47 9 '2 33 57 9 12 85 2 99 A list of the killed and wounded in the corps in both battles, made at the same date and place, called "Casualties for the ten days ending September 29th," and there were hardly a score after September 22d, gives those of the First Division, exclusive of the missing, as 83 killed and 474 wounded — total 557 ; the Second Division, 254 killed and 1,125 wounded — total 1,379 ; the reserve artillery, 9 wounded. This would make the total of killed and wounded of the corps in both battles 1,945, instead of 1,561, as in the text. But no doubt the revised figures of the text are the more accurate. 182 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Fisher's Hill was the corollary of Winchester. It was a hurricane battle, totally unlike the one delivered three days before ; and the Union troops were as palpably inspirited by their previous triumph as the Confederates were unnerved from the same cause. Early expressly attributes the capture of so many of his men to their attempt to " make their way across the North Fork to Massanutten Mountain, under the impression that the enemy had possession of the Valley pike in our rear." The turning of the enemy's left flank at Win- chester made the repetition of this manoeuvre at Fisher's Hill the more easy of accomplishment, the fugitives instinctively bolting for the right of their line, even though they scat- tered among the mountains in so doing. And that the effect of Winchester was not greater on the troops than it was on their commanders, is attested by the promptness and auda- city with which Sheridan attacked Fisher's Hill, a position vastly stronger than any his adversary had occupied in the Lower Valley ; while Early, who had been underrating his opponent, parading before his fortified front at Halltown, and unhesitatingly scattering his divisions along the pike to Martinsburg, had, just before being attacked at Fisher Hill, given the order to retreat from this stronghold, simply because he observed that an assault on him was contemplated. Early's second reverse was not due to any mistaken esti- mate in regard to the natural strength of his position, but to his delay to occupy it until he no longer had men enough to properly cover it. The time to hold Fisher's Hill was when Kershaw's departure had imperilled his communica- tions between that point and Winchester. The first line he took up in the Valley, that of the Opequon, was admirably selected for its purpose. Although it risked a swift ad- vance from Harper's Ferry to Winchester, yet this movement would in turn be exposed to an assault from Bunker Hill THE BATTLE OF FISHER'S HILL. 183 on its rear. Thus Early's Opeqnon position, differing from the simpler and more obvious device of a line stretched across the pike, where the rivers and mountains gave a nar- row passage, was really less hazardous than it seemed. In addition, as his opponent, in proceeding from Halltown to Winchester, occupied two marches for that purpose, the first one carrying him to the Clifton-Berryville line, Early had always ample time to retreat up the Valley, without accejot- ing battle. This line of the Opequon was advantageous in constantly threatening Maryland, and in keeping the rail- road broken. But when the Union commander was found stationing himself permanently on the Clifton-Berryville line, and when Early's own army was weakened by the de- tachment of Kershaw, a few hours' march might at any time bring Sheridan to the outworks of Winchester; and even Stephenson's D5pot as a main camp was too far north to escape the necessity of accepting battle. In the case of an attack still farther south, on his communications, Early might have been in a still worse plight. Besides, he had remained in the Lower Valley till he had exhausted his supplies. He had already been receiving his food from the Upper Valley, on a long line, exposed to the attacks of cavalry, in which arm his opponent was very strong. "Nearly the whole of our bread," he says, "was obtained by threshing the wheat and then having it ground by details from my command, and it sometimes happened that while my troops were fighting, the very flour which was to furnish them with bread for their next meal was being ground under the protection of their guns.1 Latterly our 1 " I think now that Sheridan is superior to Early — besides the latter being where it must take a good part of his force to collect supplies for the balance" (Grant to Halleck, August 29th). Some of the first prisoners taken in the August advance from Halltown were Confederate soldiers threshing wheat in barns. 184 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. flour had been obtained from the Upper Valley, but also by details sent for that purpose. The horses and mules, in- cluding the cavalry horses, were sustained almost entirely by grazing." Why then did he remain, under such circum- stances, between Winchester and Martinsburg ? We must resort again to his own explanation : " I knew my danger, but I could occupy no other position that would have en- abled me to accomplish the desired object. If I had moved up the Valley at all, I could not have stopped short of New Market, for between that place and the country in which I was there was no forage for my horses ; and this would have enabled the enemy to resume the use of the railroad and canal, and return all the troops from Grant's army to him." Still, Early could not forever hold on to the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, with Sheridan's strong army many miles south of it, threatening his rear. Sooner or later, he must abandon it. The railroad, after all, was but one of several Union lines between East and West, and holding it deprived him of the same opportunity for threatening his immediate adversary's communications that the latter had for molesting his. When at last he went by compulsion to Fisher's Hill, it was with a force too broken and dispirited to hold it. Writing to Lee from Port Republic, three days after his second discomfiture, Early used the following language : li The enemy's immense superiority in cavalry and the inefficiency of the greater part of mine has been the cause of all my disasters. In the affair at Fisher's Hill the cavalry gave way, but it was flanked. This would have been remedied if the troops had remained steady, but a panic seized them at the idea of being flanked, and, without being de- feated, they broke, many of them fleeing shamefully. The artillery was not captured by the enemy, but abandoned by the infantry. My troops are very much shattered, the men very much exhausted, and many of them without shoes." THE BATTLE OP FISHER'S HILL. 185 Two days later, the 27th, Lee replied from Petersburg as follows : "As far as I can judge at this distance, you have operated more with divisions than with your concentrated strength. Circumstances may have rendered it necessary, but such a course is to be avoided if possi- ble. It will require the greatest watchfulness, the greatest promptness, and the most untiring energy on your part to arrest the progress of the euemy in his present tide of success. All the reserves in the Valley have been ordered to you. Breckenridge will join you or co-operate, as circumstances will permit, with all his force. Rosser left this morning for Burkesville (intersection of Danville and Southside Railroads), where he will shape his course as you direct. I have given you all I can. You must use the resources you have, so as to gain success. The enemy must be defeated, and I rely upon you to do it. I will endeavor to have shoes, arms, and ammunition supplied you. Set all your offi- cers to work bravely and hopefully, and all will go well." On the North this second great victory had an effect no less cheering than the first. Grant again ordered a salute of one hundred guns. "Keep on," he said to Sheridan, "and your good work will cause the fall of Richmond." Stanton sent orders for the firing of one hundred guns each to Wal- lace, Oadwalader, Couch, Heintzelman, Hovey, Burbridge, Rosecrans, Pope, Curtis, Steele, Washburne, Rousseau, Can- by, Payne, and Brayman — a salvo of fifteen hundred guns for Fisher's Hill.

## toms-brook

As soon as Early found that Sheridan was moving down the Valley, he pushed his forces in pursuit.1 The positions of the two armies during the four days pre- vious bad been as follows : Sheridan's infantry at Harrison- burg, and his cavalry, except Powell, seven miles beyond, at Mount Crawford ; Early's infantry at Mount Sidney, seven miles above Mount Crawford, with his cavalry close to Tor- bert's.2 There had been skirmishing along the North Kiver, both at Mount Crawford and at Bridgewater; while the 2d of October a Confederate reconnoissance had been repulsed. Powell, moving back to Luray, had thence sent Major Fara- bee, First Virginia Cavalry, to destroy the railroad bridge at the Rapidan, from which exploit he returned by way of Cul- pepper and Sperryville. It was the morning of October 6th when Sheridan left Harrisonburg, and that night he camped at Rude's Hill. Reinforced by Kershaw, Early was already stronger than at any time since his defeat at Winchester, and his aggressive 1 "General Early reports Sheridan's whole force commenced retiring down the Valley the night of the 5th. Our troops followed them through Harrisonburg the next day " (Lee to Seddon, October 7th). 2 "General Early moved to the vicinity of Mount Crawford on the 1st instant. The enemy is north of North River, his cavalry occupying the north banks of that stream" (Lee to Seddon, October 4th). 9* A 202 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. instincts were again alert.' But lie had learned the need of circumspection, and patiently awaited the arrival of Eosser, who, besides bringing his brigade from. Petersburg, was to take command of Fitz Lee's division, in place of Wickkam. Eosser drew up October 5th, and Early had prepared to" move out toward Sheridan at Harrisonburg, when the next morning his pickets brought him word that the Union army was retiring. Eosser came to his task with fresh energy. His brigade, it is true, had been worn down by a hard march from Eich- mond, during which the men got little to eat, and the horses needed rest ; but at least it was full of confidence. Eager to redeem the cavalry mishaps in the Valley, he instantly pressed Custer on the Back and Middle roads, attacking him at Brock's Gap, through which Dry Eiver enters the North Fork, about twenty -seven miles from "Woodstock ; and Lomax moved down the Valley pike against Merritt. This officer camped the following day within two miles of Wood- stock, and Custer near Columbia Furnace ; "the rear-guard of this column," says Torbert, referring to Custer's, " was fight- ing all day." Powell in the Luray Valley kept his relative position with the other forces by moving down to Millford. Early's infantry arrived that night, the 7th, at New Market, and Sheridan's the next day at Strasburg, while Merritt, covering the rear, reached Tom's Brook, which crosses the Valley pike, three miles south of the town, at the foot of Bound Top. Thence Torbert hurried him back to the aid of Custer, whose rear-guard had been harassed throughout the march. Sheridan, resenting this boldness of an enemy so lately 1 Sheridan also had received some reinforcements, but of much less consequence : " About 5,000 men leave here to day for General Sheridan. Send them forward with trains " (Halleck to Stevenson, September 23d). THE BATTLE OF TOM'S BROOK. 203 routed, directed Torbert to start out at daylight and " whip the rebel cavalry or get whipped himself." Torbert was in the saddle at dawn of the 9th, and, continuing the disposi- tions of the- day before, Merritt was to move Lowell up the pike, the Second Brigade on his right, and the First on the right of the Second, connecting with Custer. A spirited fight of two hours ended in the rout both of Lomax and Eosser, Merritt chasing the former twenty miles up the pike to Mount Jackson, and Custer driving Rosser on the Back road to Columbia Furnace. Merritt captured five cavalry guns and Custer six — as fair a division of spoils as was pos- sible with an odd number of pieces to share. About 330 prisoners fell into the hands of the victors, together with ambulances, caissons, a battery forge, the headquarters wagons of Rosser, Lomax, Wickham, and Pollard, and other wagons, forty-seven in number — in brief, almost " every- thing on wheels." Of this engagement Torbert enthusiastically reported that " the cavalry totally covered themselves with glory, and added to their long list of victories the most brilliant one of them all, and the most decisive the country has ever wit- nessed." Sheridan promptly sent the tidings to Grant : "I directed Torbert to attack at daylight this morning, and finish this ' savior of the Valley.' . . . The enemy, after being charged by our gallant cavalry, were broken and ran. They were followed by our men on the jump, twenty-six miles, through Mount Jackson and across North Fork of the Shen- andoah. I deemed it best to make this delay of one day here and settle this new cavalry general." The engagement at Tom's Brook was a fine offset to the check received by Torbert at Millford, for the same two Union divisions had now routed the combined divisions of Lomax and Rosser, inflicting a loss of about 400 men, while Torbert had but 9 204 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. killed and 48 wounded. Some of the captured artillery was fresh from the " Tredegar "Works " ; and with the five guns taken at Winchester, the sixteen at Fisher's Hill, and the eleven at Tom's Brook, point was given to the jest that can- non sent from Richmond to the Valley were marked "P. H. Sheridan, care of General Early." The moral effect of Sheridan's victory at Tom's Brook was very great. The Confederate cavalry in the Shenandoah Val- ley had been feeble, compared with the infantry, and Sheri- dan, while at Charlestown, had remarked that it was " in poor condition " and was kept so close to the infantry that his own large and well-appointed corps of horsemen could not get at it. Fitz Lee's contingent had strengthened it, but the battle at Winchester and the subsequent defeat at Fisher's Hill, in both of which the cavalry held the flank that was turned by Crook, had again greatly dispirited it. The arrival of Bosser had revived the hope of restoring the cavalry to passable efficiency ; for though this officer pos- sessed more dash than discretion, he had gained a success in this region early in the year,1 and had been so fortunate at Bichmond that his men returned to the Valley confident of victory there. The assurance with which Bosser chal- lenged Custer all the way down from Harrisonburg showed that he had no conception of Sheridan's mounted strength, though his fatal zeal was probably due in part to the excite- ment of his men at seeing their farms and houses in flames ; for many of Early's cavalrymen were from this region. Their eagerness to exact retribution brought upon them double mortification and suffering, and the disaster of Tom's Brook 1 Toward the end of January Rosser had captured at Moorefield a train of ninety-five wagons, with valuable subsistence stores, had destroyed the railroad property at Patterson's Creek, with the bridges over the Potomac and the canal, and had brought off 1,200 cattle, 500 sheep, and 80 prisoners. THE BATTLE OF TOM'S BROOK. 205 crushed all hope of effecting anything with the Confederate cavalry, and almost dazed Rosser's immediate command.

## cedar-creek

Sheridan directed Torbert to move Merritt's division to Front Royal, that same night, with a view of sending it through Chester Gap toward the Virginia Central Railroad, and of reinforcing the expedition with Powell's division. He accompanied Merritt's command in person as far as Front Royal, intend- ing to pay his postponed visit to Augur at Rectortown, and • thence, by the repaired road, to proceed to Washington, ac- cording to Stanton's request. But when he had reached Front Royal, just before the cavalry was setting out on its errand, he received a startling message from Wright, who, as senior officer, had been left in charge of the troops at Cedar Creek : " General, I en- close you despatch which explains itself. If the enemy should be strongly reinforced in cavalry, he might, by turn- ing our right, give us a great deal of trouble. I shall hold on here until the enemy's movements are developed, and THE BATTLE OF TOM'S BROOK. 213 shall only fear an attack on my right, which I shall make every preparation for guarding against and resisting." The following was the despatch enclosed : " To Lieutenant-General Early : " Be ready to move as soon as my forces join you, and we will crush Sheridan. " Longstkeet, Lieutenant- General." This message had been taken from the signal flag at the Confederate station on Three Top. There was something very strange about it, and, as far as the present writer is aware, no complete solution of the mystery has ever been given — although now that its fictitious character is known, it would be easy to offer several conjectural clues, of vary- ing degrees of value. But it was of great worth to Sheri- dan. For, although he was naturally inclined to consider it a ruse, yet, as Wright's language implied, one of the divi- sions of cavalry had been taken away from the position at Cedar Creek ; and in any possibility of attack Sheridan did not wish his subordinates there to want for any troops that he could give them. Hence, with his habitual pru- dence, which in this instance was to prove of great value, he put off the cavalry expedition, and gave Torbert direc- tions to return to the lines at Cedar Creek. But should Sheridan himself also return, or should he continue his journey to Washington ? There had been re- cent reconnoissances and skirmishes, which indicated that Early was at Fisher's Hill in some force, and an attack by him, with the aid of Longstreet's troops, would be no trifling affair. On the other hand, the intercepted despatch was very obscure, false alarms about Longstreet had been sounded ever since Sheridan came to the Valley, and the settlement of the disputed policy affecting the Manassas Gap Railroad, the operations against Gordonsville, and the 214 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. despatch, of troops to Petersburg, had become urgent and imperative. .Besides, the Secretary himself had already — three days before — requested his presence at Washington. Sheridan was entitled to presume that his four lieutenants would be specially watchful over their commands during his absence. He sent to Wright the following note : " Major-General H. G. Wright, Commanding Sixth Army Corps : " General — The cavalry is all ordered back to you. Make your posi- tion strong. If Longstreet's despatch is true, he is under the impres- sion that we have largely detached. I will go over to Augur, and may get additional news. Close in Colonel Powell, who will be at this point. If the enemy should make an advance, I know you will defeat him. Look well to your ground, and be well prepared. Get up everything that can be spared. I wili bring up all I can, and will be up on Tues- day, if not sooner." Sheridan then rode on the same morning to Eectortown, where he took the precaution to telegraph to Halleck, be- fore two o'clock, that an intercepted despatch " would indi- cate that Lorjgstreet was marching to join Early with con- siderable force, and was not far off ; " and he inquired whether he had heard of any such movement. Several hours passed without an answer. Sheridan still waited, for the matter was important. At length, at 5 o'clock, he again telegraphed to Halleck, repeating the exact words of the in- tercepted message. "Wright, in command," he added, " has made every preparation to meet the threat of Long- street, if the despatch should be true, and I feel confident of good results. I would like to see you. Is it best for me to go to see you?" A reply at last answered both despatches, indicating that in the meantime Halleck had consulted the Lieutenant-General at City Point : " General Grant says that Longstreet brought with him no troops from Richmond, but I have very little confidence in the information collected THE BATTLE OF TOM'S BROOK. 215 at his headquarters. If you can leave your command with safety, come to Washington, as I wish to give you the views of the authorities here." Then Sheridan went forward to Alexandria. One sign of aggressiveness on the part of the enemy's cav- alry attracted Torbert's attention immediately on his return to Cedar Creek. Merritt had resumed at noon of the 16th the position on the right and rear of the Sixth Corps, from which he had set out the evening before,1 and Custer had remained where he could watch the fords near the Back road. That night Eosser, whose scouts had reported that one of Custer's brigades was apparently detached from the main body, was allowed by Early to undertake its capture with a brigade of infantry mounted behind the same num- ber of cavalry ; and the whole of the Confederate army was moved out at dawn, to cover Eosser's return. However, he found only a picket of three officers and two score men of the First Connecticut Cavalry, instead of a brigade, and these he captured. Perceiving that the left of the line needed cavalry, Sheri- dan had directed Wright to " close in Colonel Powell ; " ac- cordingly, Moore's brigade of Powell's division was moved in several miles to Buckton ford, on the Shenandoah, so 1 " October 15th. After dark, the First Division (Brigadier-General Merritt) was ordered to move to Front Royal. The Second Division (Colonel Powell) was or- dered to concentrate at the same point. Both of these divisions being designed for a ra!d on Charlottesville and Gordonsville, I moved to the Shenandoah near Front Royal in the afternoon, to go in command of the expedition, which was to start on the morning of the 16th. . . . " October 16th. The First Division (Brigadier-General Merritt) was ordered back to the army, and took position on the right of the infantry. The Second Division was ordered to resume its old position, and I returned to the army on Cedar Creek. Brigadier-General Custer made a reconnoissance in his front, but could fini no enemy outside of their lines on Fisher's Hill" (Torbert's Report). "At 12 M. the brigade returned to camp, near Middletown" (Devin's Report). 216 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. that its pickets might connect with Crook's on the infantry- left.1 The other two brigades remained posted near Front Royal, to prevent Lomax from coming down through Lnray Valley past the Union left, so striking the pike in the rear. Crook's command worked at prolonging the line of intrench- ments in its front. In Early's camp, meanwhile, there was busy study. Sheri- dan's torches had laid waste the Valley, the provisions and forage which the Confederate general had brought from New Market were nearly exhausted, and he was forced either to attack or retreat. He chose the former alternative. For not only would attack, he thought, delay that meditated transfer of forces to Grant's army, whose importance Sheri- dan had been so quick to see, but in addition Early had some ground for hoping to win at least a partial success, since he had received heavy reinforcements, amounting, ex- clusive of the Valley reserves that may have joined him, to nearly 5,000 men. Having reached this determination, he set about planning an attack. Gordon, taking a brigade, went forward to Hupp's Hill, to find whether Sheridan's position was forti- fied, and reported that it was ; Early, therefore, resolved to take the intrenchments in reverse. Pegram was sent to re- connoitre the Union right, but the project of turning that flank was abandoned, "because," as Early wrote to Lee two days later, "the greater part of the enemy's cavalry was on his right, and Eosser's attempt had caused that flank to be closely picketed." There, also, the banks of Cedar Creek were found to be high and precipitous. Yet, on the other 1 " October 17th. The same day, one brigade of Second Division (Colonel Powell) was moved nearer the infantry, and posted at Buekton'sford, on the Shen- andoah River, connecting their pickets with the left of the infantry " (Torbert a Report). THE BATTLE OF TOM'S BROOK. 217 hand, " to get around the enemy's left was a difficult under- taking, as the river had to be crossed twice, and between the mountain and river, where the troops had to pass to the lower ford, there was only a rugged pathway." Early, how- ever, upon the whole, decided that the chances of success would be greater here, " from the fact that the enemy would not expect a move in that direction, on account of the diffi- culties attending it, and the great strength of their position on that flank." Careful examination by Gordon and by Cap- tain Hotchkiss, of Early's staff, from the signal station on Three Top, also showed that Sheridan's left flank "was lightly picketed, and that there was but a small cavalry picket on the North Fork of the Shenandoah, below the mouth of the creek." From Three Top Gordon and Hotchkiss could look down into both camps — rivers, hills, roads, fords, woods, and clearings all spread out before them, and not less clearly the troops and the tents, the guns and the parapets. Not only did they discover the positions of Sheridan's forces, but they had found that it was possible to move infantry along the base of Three Top, on the edge of the river, so as to cross below Cedar Creek. The North Fork makes a bend in front of Fisher's Hill, by Strasburg, enclosing there several farms, which were occupied by Payne's brigade of cavalry. The proposed flanking route first forded the Shen- andoah from the right of the position at Fisher's Hill, then traversed this bend and crossed again at Mclnturff's and Bowman's fords, the former being a few hundred feet below the mouth of Cedar Creek, and the latter half a mile below. Moving thence through the dense woods, a column of in- fantry could be secretly placed less than half a mile from Crook's camp, taking it in reverse. The ground fronting Cooley's house was seen to be favorable for forming the XI.— 10 218 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. troops in the attack. We can hardly exaggerate the advan- tage of the bird's-eye view from Three Top. For this turning movement were set apart the divisions of Gordon, Eamseur, andPegram, all under Gordon, with Payne's brigade of cavalry, the latter being directed to try to capture Sheridan at the Belle Grove House, for his absence was not known. Early was to manage the divisions of Kershaw and Wharton, and all the artillery, since this could not be moved on the blind path taken by Gordon. The cavalry were to co-operate — Rosser to move with two brigades, his own and Wickham's, on the Back road across Cedar Creek, and attack Custer at 5 a.m., while Lomax was to come down through the Luray Valley, cross the river, and strike the Valley pike wherever he might find the battle going on. The execution of the plan followed hard on its conception. Immediately after dark of the 18th, Gordon, crossing the North Pork, proceeded to the foot of Three Top, and there halted to give the troops a few hours' sleep. An additional intrenchment being reported by Pegram as thrown up on Crook's lines since Gordon and Hotchkiss made their exam- ination, Early, lest this work should in any way interfere with Gordon's plan, at a late hour altered the line of march of the force under his immediate command, allowing Wharton to proceed, as before, over Hupp's Hill, but de- flecting Kershaw to the right near Strasburg, so as to strike Cedar Creek at the left of Sheridan's line, a short distance above the mouth of the creek. Stealthily, an hour after midnight, the Confederate col- umns moved forward. Since silence was essential to suc- cess, swords and canteens were left in camp, lest their clinking should betray the march ; while the artillery was massed on the pike at Fisher's Hill, there to wait until the hour set for the infantry attack, when it was to move at a THE BATTLE OF TOM'S BROOK. 219 gallop through the town to Hupp's Hill — for an earlier advance might betray the secret by the rumbling of the heavy wheels, in the dead of night, over the macadamized road. Early accompanied Kershaw, his centre column, and " came in sight of the Union fires at 3.30 o'clock ; the moon," he adds, " was now shining, and we could see the camps." Kershaw was halted under cover, and while his men shivered in the chill night air, Early, during the hour that followed, pointed out precisely how and when this part of the attack should be made. Kershaw was to " cross his division over the creek as quietly as possible, and to form it into column of brigades as he did so, and advance in that manner against the enemy's left breastwork." The scene was memorable. The Union camps on the hills beyond the creek wrapped in slumber ; a corps of infantry, Jackson's old corps, and a brigade of cavalry, stealing along the base of Massanutten, to gain the rear of its unsuspect- ing foes ; in the background forty guns and more, awaiting the signal to rush down the pike ; an infantry division creeping over Hupp's, and another crouching yonder nearer the creek. Before five o'clock, Early ordered Kershaw for- ward again, and after a time came the welcome sound of a light crackle of musketry on the Confederate right, where Union picket stations had been set near the fords at which Gordon was crossing. This petty sound did not disturb the dreaming camps, but to the attent ears of Kershaw and Wharton it was the signal of attack. Kershaw quickly moved down to the creek ; and meanwhile, as if nature had enlisted to aid in this enterprise, the moon had vanished, and a thick fog, clouding the landscape, now hid from sight the Confederate march. CHAPTER Xm. THE BATTLE OP CEDAR CREEK. The morning of October 19th brought to the Union camps little presage of the approaching peril. The enemy's cav- alry dashes and his disclosure of infantry on Hupp's Hill had been looked upon by many as bravado, the prevailing belief being that Early's army could not risk serious at- tack. The plans for sending away the Sixth Corps and a division of cavalry had additionally lulled the troops into a certain sense of security, not wholly disturbed by the tem- porary recall of the Sixth. The daily reconnoissances from both flanks had confirmed this prevailing impression ; while those of Tuesday, October 18th, had been specially reassur- ing.1 A reconnoitring brigade, Colonel Harris's, of General Crook's command, even reported that night that the enemy had apparently retreated up the Valley. As the destruction of the crops and forage made it necessary for Early, while keeping troops at Fisher's Hill, to haul supplies from Staun- ton in wagons, the Union commanders had been expecting for some days that he would either attack or retreab ; hence 1 "October 18th. All quiet, and cavalry in same position. Reconnoissances showed no enemy in their immediate front " (Torbert's Report). "About 9 o'clock of that evening [the 18th] 1 was called upon by Major-Gen- eral Crook, commanding the Army of West Virginia, who reported that the re- connoissance of a brigade sent out by him that day to ascertain the position of the enemy, had returned to camp and reported that nothing was to be found in his old camp, and that he had doubtless retreated up the Valley" (Wright's Report). THE BATTLE OF CEDAR CREEK. 221 the report tliat he had chosen the latter course occasioned no surprise. The probability is that the reconnoitring of- ficer, in reporting that nothing was to be found in the en- emy's old camp, referred to the position temporarily occu- pied on Hupp's Hill, from which, five days before, Early had shelled the lines of this very command ; and this position the enemy had certainly abandoned. The further belief that he had retreated up the Valley was of course erroneous ; yet the very part of the army destined for attack by the en- emy that same night was unfortunately the one most likely to be influenced by this error. If the reconnoitring party, returning through its own lines, spread amongst its com- rades ' its news of the enemy's departure, a movement de- signed for precaution may have tended to lessen vigilance where it chanced to be specially needed. Wright, at all events, immediately ordered two more reconnoissances, and since the evening was already misty, after a fine autumn day, the time of their departure was expressed in the in- structions as "at daylight in the morning, or as soon there- after as the fog will permit of objects being clearly distin- guished"— one from the Nineteenth Corps, up the pike to Strasburg, and the other by the cavalry on the Back road. The object is, said the orders, "to ascertain if the enemy is still on the line of Fisher's Hill in force, and the General desires the troops pushed far enough to the front to accom- plish this object." The army of Sheridan was camped on the left bank of Cedar Creek, just above its junction with the Shenandoah. Such are the bends of the creek that at that point the three infantry corps, in facing it, fronted somewhat southerly, so 1 "Relying upon the report of our reconnoitring party, all slept in confidence and security. But. notwithstanding that report. Early was near at hand" (His- tory of the Thirty-fourth Massachusetts, of Thoburn's Division). 222 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. that although its general direction is by no means east and west, the army was yet visually spoken of as being on the " north," instead of the east bank of the creek. Owing to these same bends, in taking advantage of the ground, the three corps were positioned, as we have seen, partly en echelon — the Eighth near the junction of the creek and the river ; the Nineteenth, at the right and rear of the Eighth ; the Sixth, at the right and rear of the Nineteenth. The creek could be waded everywhere, as could also, for that matter, the Shenandoah itself in that season and in that neighborhood, the main value of the fords here as elsewhere in the Valley, during the summer and autumn of 1864, being that at them the' high banks fall away or are cut down, so that easy access is given to wagons that may desire to cross ; and this advantage was equally needful for the orderly pas- sage of troops and trains. The steep banks of the creek were in themselves defences along a large part of the line, and far beyond the extreme right of the infantry. Crook's corps, the Army of West Virginia, on the left of the pike, was encamped in two portions. The First Division, Thobnrn, in front, and on the extreme left of the infantry line, occupied a round hill or high mound, and was in- trenched, with the line of works facing in general toward the junction of the creek and the river. This knoll with its guns commanded two fords of the creek, one on the right, near by, connecting with the pike just beyond the bridge, and the other several hundred yards distant, in front, leading by a dirt road to Strasburg. There were woods to the left, ex- tending part way across Thoburn's front. The Second Divi- sion, Duval's, now under Colonel E. B. Hayes, and Kitch- ing's provisional division, were in rear or north of Thoburn, on another hill, or another part of this same hill, close upon the pike. This second elevation was the highest on the 222 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. that although its general direction is by no means east and west, the army was yet usually spoken of as being on the " north," instead of the east bank of the creek. Owing to these same bends, in taking advantage of the ground, the three corps were positioned, as we have seen, partly en echelon — the Eighth near the junction of the creek and the river ; the Nineteenth, at the right and rear of the Eighth ; the Sixth, at the right and rear of the Nineteenth. The creek could be waded everywhere, as could also, for that matter, the Shenandoah itself in that season and in that neighborhood, the main value of the fords here as elsewhere in the Valley, during the summer and autumn of 1864, being that at them the' high banks fall away or are cut down, so that easy access is given to wagons that may desire to cross ; and this advantage was equally needful for the orderly pas- sage of troops and trains. The steep banks of the creek were in themselves defences along a large part of the line, and far beyond the extreme right of the infantry. Crook's corps, the Army of West Virginia, on the left of the pike, was encamped in two portions. The First Division, Thoburn, in front, and on the extreme left of the infantry line, occupied a round hill or high mound, and was in- trenched, with the line of works facing in general toward the junction of the creek and the river. This knoll with its guns commanded two fords of the creek, one on the right, near by, connecting with the pike just beyond the bridge, and the other several hundred yards distant, in front, leading by a dirt road to Strasburg. There were woods to the left, ex- tending part way across Thoburn's front. The Second Divi- sion, Duval's, now under Colonel E. B. Hayes, and Kitch- ing's provisional division, were in rear or north of Thoburn, on another hill, or another part of this same hill, close upon the pike. This second elevation was the highest on the THE BATTLE OF CEDAR CREEK. 223 Union line, thirty feet higher even than the highest part of the ridge across the pike, on which the Nineteenth Corps was encamped, and at its treeless summit one hundred and ninety feet higher than the level of the creek. The position was not intrenched, but Hayes and Kitching could either reinforce Thoburn, from whom a wooded hollow separated them, or, facing to the left, could defend the pike from an enemy coming in there. The Nineteenth Corps, at the right of the Eighth, and west of the pike, was encamped on an elevated plain, being separated from the Sixth Corps by Meadow Brook, a rivulet feeding Cedar Creek in a direction generally like that of the pike. The corps was compactly established and intrenched in a space of three-fourths of a mile, the creek in its front, the right of its First Division on Meadow Brook, and the left of its Second on the pike. On this left was the greater part of its artillery, which commanded the road and the bridge across the creek. The line of intrenchment was nearly one hundred and twenty feet above the creek, to which the ridge fell off somewhat abruptly ; and the plain rose gradually in the rear of the intrenchment. Back of this camp, on elevated ground, was Belle Grove House, the headquarters of Sheridan and also of Crook, the portion of the Commanding General's staff that had not gone to Wash- ington with him continuing to occupy it during his tempo- rary absence. The Sixth Corps, beyond Meadow Brook, was not in- trenched. Its position was a supplementary one, in reserve, and it was intended that the corps should be foot -loose for use anywhere on the main line, which had been formed with the expectation of sending the Sixth to City Point. The cavalry were in the positions before indicated — Merritt's camp near that of the Sixth Corps, on the right of the in- 224 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. fantry line, at Middle Marsh Brook ; Custer's about one mile and a half beyond Merritt's, watching the fords where the Back and Mine Bank roads cross the creek, and the neigh- borhood of Kupp's Mill ; Moore's brigade, two miles or more beyond Crook's left, at Buckton's ford, where the Front Koyal road leads to Middletown ; the rest of Powell's division at or near Front Royal. As events turned out, it might have been much better to transfer Merritt again to the left of Crook. For though this change would not neces- sarily have prevented Kershaw's advance directly on Crook's front, it would, of course, have prevented Gordon's corps from being formed unperceived in front of Cooley's. Possibly such a change might have forced Early to choose a different form of surprise and attack — putting his main column on Kershaw's path, for example, or even assailing the other flank. Suppositions apart, "Wright, save for drawing in Moore, seems to have retained the line as he found it when his corps entered it the 14th of October. Long before sunrise, a ringing volley of musketry startled the men of Thoburn's division from their sleep ; and as they came bewildered from their tents to learn the cause, over every part of their parapets, through the darkness and the fog, rushed Kershaw's infantry.1 The position was swept in an instant, with its seven guns, from which not a shot had been fired. Such of Thoburn's men as escaped capture fled to the rear, which was the only thing left for 1 A battalion of the Fifth New Vork Heavy Artillery was on picket from Tho- burn's division, and the Thirty-fourth Ohio from Hayes's. " The evening be- fore the battle the regiment [Thirty-fourth Ohio], under command of Lieutenant- Colonel L. Furney, was sent on picket. In the morning, before dawn, when the surprise occurred, the colonel and 18 of his men were taken prisoners. The colonel escaped at Mount Jackson, and joined his command a few days there- after. The loss of the Thirty-fourth in this affair was 2 killed, 12 wounded, and IS prisoners" (Ohio in the War). THE BATTLE OF CEDAR CREEK. 223 them to do. Kershaw turned the guns on the retreating- troops, since he had no artillery of his own ; and leaving him to advance against Hayes's camp on the further knob of the ridge, at the pike, Early rode back to Hnpp's Hill, to urge forward Wharton's division and Carter's artillery.1 Boused by the noise of the firing, Emory was quickly at the pike, followed by Crook from Belle Grove and Wright from his headquarters, the latter having simultaneously heard Kershaw's volley firing on the Union left, and Bosser's lighter rattle on the Union right. They all exerted them- selves at once to form a line for the defence of the road, with Crook's Second Division (Hayes) and Kitching's provisional command as a basis, the Nineteenth Corps aiding, while Wright sent to Bicketts, commanding the Sixth Corps (Col- onel Keifer being in charge of the Third, Bicketts's, division), to hurry two divisions forward to the pike. Happily the orders given for a reconnoissance from Emory's front at day- light had caused Grover's Second Brigade, Molineux, to be standing ready to move ; and this brigade was immediately available, a part of it being sent by Emory to the new pike line, and the rest holding the trenches in the proper front of the Nineteenth Corps.'2 1 The point where Kershaw crossed the creek is given on the official map, and hence in the map of the present volume, as near the house of J. Roberts. It may be well to note that Roberts did not live there at the time of the battle, nor dur- ing the summer of 1882, when the writer was examining the region, so that it might be misleading to speak of this important point in the opening scene as Roberts's ford, he being only a temporary resident there at the time of the mil- itary survey made ten years ago. 2 "I caused breakfast to be prepared for the men at an early hour, and at the appointed time we were in line awaiting orders. At about 5.40 a.m. I heard the sound of heavy firing in the direction of the position of the Eighth Corps, and apprehending an attack, immediately ordered my command into the rifle-pit% turning out a few sharpshooters to give me early intimation should an attack be made in my front. Shortly afterward I received orders to detach two regiments to my left to support the battery which commanded the pike and ground about the main bridge, and accordingly I sent the Twenty-second Iowa and Third Mas- 10* 22G THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Under ordinary circumstances this effort to form a line at the pike would have been entirely effective against the force which had destroyed Thoburn, while at the same time enough of the Nineteenth Corps could have been left to guard its trenches facing the creek,1 to hold off the advance of Wharton — for the latter had now come nearly to the creek, capturing a few pickets on that side of the stream, and Early's artillery was exchanging shots with the Union guns. But at this moment, while the Union troops were intent on the approach of Kershaw, who was already firing upon Hayes's camp with the artillery captured in Thoburn's, a second and no less startling surprise fell upon them. Sheltered by the fog till close at hand, and also greatly aided by the clamor that had gone on since the beginning of Kershaw's Fachusetts dismounted cavalry. By this time a battery of the enemy, directly in my front, on the other side of the creek, opened a fire of shell upon us, and the mist, breaking from the Valley, discovered a line apparently prepared to attack us. It was not long before a fire of shell, enfilading our line from the left, with an- other directly in my rear, and a sharp musketry fire from the same direction (the position occupied by the Eighth Corps), showed me that the enemy had outflanked lis ; I sheltered my men as much as possible in the rifle-pits, and awaited orders. In the meantime the troops on my left and the batteries passed me. together with the two regiments of this brigade which had been sent in support of the batteries, all apparently striving toward the pike (these two regiments mentioned rejoined me subsequently) ; and finding that we were completely outflanked, that the re- treat was general, and that my men were rapidly falling from a fire they could not return, and "that a line of battle was being formed in the rear by the Sixth Corps, I moved out by the flank, in good order, detaching the Eleventh Indiana, by order of Brevet-Major General Emory, to hold the hollow stone wall near the headquarters of the Second Division " (Molineux's Report). 1 Brigadier-General McMillan, in temporary command of the First Division, Nineteenth Corps, says he was directed by Emory to put the Second Brigade on Grover's left, nearly perpendicular to the intrenchments, to resist the enemy then coming in from the rear. "I put the Second Brigade, Colonel Thomas, in the po- sition indicated, occupying a deep ravine and thick copse of wood, from which it was soon driven by overwhelming force, but not until completely flanked, and nearly one-third of its members were killed, wounded, or captured." McMillan meanwhile had ordered his First Brigade, Colonel Davis, to hold the hill as long as possible with the Thirtieth Massachusetts and One Hundred and Fourteenth and Ninetieth New York. Those troops gallantly obeyed their orders. THE BATTLE OF CEDAR CREEK. 227 attack, Gordon came through the woods in a direction nearly perpendicular to the pike, and suddenly burst upon the left flank of the divisions of Kitching and Hayes, which had no intrenchments. Already shaken by the disaster of their comrades, who were streaming through their camp to the rear, the remainder of Crook's corps broke under this for- midable onslaught from a wholly unexpected quarter, and thereby uncovered the position of the Nineteenth Corps, which was immediately brought under a concentrated fire that enfiladed and took in reverse its entire line of works. It being impossible to maintain the original position, Wright commanded this corps to fall back.1 Conjectural comparisons in regard to the behavior of dif- ferent commands were never more out of place than as ap- plied to this morning's calamity. An attack like Kershaw's, successfully initiated at that hour, against a single unarmed division, as thoroughly surprised as if it had had no pickets out, could not have resulted otherwise than it did, no matter what troops might have been thus assaulted. Nor was it remarkable that the remainder of Crook's bewildered forces, and the portion of the two divisions of the Nineteenth Corps that had joined them, should have been unable to withstand a quickly following combined assault of Ramseur, Pegram, Gordon, Kershaw, and Wharton, the greater part of it coming in upon the rear. It is even probable that had the attack of Kershaw not been delivered at all, and the sur- prise been wholly left to Gordon, the same or a greater success would have been achieved, and Thoburn's division captured as a body, instead of largely dispersed. It should 1 " Seeing that no part of the original line could be held, as the enemy was already on the left flank of the Nineteenth Corps, I at once sent orders to the Sixth Corps to fall back to some tenable position in rear : and to General Emory, commanding the Nineteenth Corps, that as his left was turned, he should fall back and take position on the right of the Sixth" (Wright's .Report). 228 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. further be observed that though Early's army was smaller than Sheridan's, he was able, by concentrating first against the Eighth Corps, then against the Nineteenth, and then against the Sixth, to have the more powerful force at the ac- tual points of conflict. It must not be supposed that Crook's command had broken to the rear with no attempt whatever to show fight ; its loss that day was 46 killed and 268 wounded, as well as 533 missing. From it had been cap- tured seven guns, ten caissons, and sundry wagons ; the Ohio battery escaped, and fired its guns during the retreat. The Nineteenth Corps lost eleven guns, through being unable to get them away from the crest of the hill when Gordon crossed the pike in rear of the intrenchments ; and even the Sixth Corps afterward lost six, so that twenty-four pieces in all fell into Early's hands. Most of Crook's am- bulance train, many army wagons, much camp equipage, and more than 1,300 prisoners were also captured during this dis- astrous morning. As for the gallant Thoburn, he had yield- ed his life in breasting the tide of his ill-fortune. The Sixth Corps was now coming on the scene, halting first on a wooded knoll not far from the pike, and holding off the enemy there. Emory was directed to place his corps on the right of the Sixth,1 which immediately began to re- ceive the combined assault of Gordon's corps and Kershaw's division. Kicketts was soon wounded, and the management of the corps thereafter devolved on Getty, while the senior officer of Getty's division was Grant, of the Vermont brigade. Fog and smoke still shrouded both the combatant forces, but Early soon learned that the Sixth Corps had been able to " take position so as to arrest our progress." The first i '• The Sixth Corps, of which two divisions were on the march to the support of the left, at once moved to the rear, on receiving instructions to that effect, as did the Nineteenth Corps" (Wright's Iteport). THE BATTLE OP CEDAR CREEK. 229 stand of much consequence beyond the wooded knoll first occupied was near Middletown,1 about a mile to the rear of the camp of the Second Division of the corps. This divi- sion,2 in the hard task of retiring slowly and checking the enemy at every available point, performed superb service, whose importance to the fortunes of the day cannot be ex- aggerated ; for, being on the extreme left of the infantry, near the pike, it bore the brunt of the attacks. In the position taken up on the ridge west of Middletown, the Sixth Corps batteries were in or near the cemetery. The enemy was forced by this halt to consolidate and strengthen his own line, and Ramseur and Pegram, who confronted the Union left, reported that they must have assistance, as they could not break through ; accordingly Wharton, some of whose men, after crossing Cedar Creek on the pike bridge, had rushed from their ranks to plunder the Nineteenth Corps camps, was ordered forward to their aid. Getty's own division, now under Grant, was posted with Bidwell's bri- gade on the left, nearest the pike, the Vermonters in the 1 " It [the Sixth Corps] was? found posted," says Early, "on a ridge on the west of the pike and parallel to it, and this corps offered considerable resistance. The artillery was brought up and opened upon it, when it fell back to the north of Middletown, and made a stand on a commanding ridge running across the pike." Although the lines of the elaborate official map are reproduced, as the best at- tainable authority, in the one which accompanies the present volume, they are to be regarded as only approximating the actual lines of the battle. There is con- siderable evidence to show that a temporary stand was made by a portion of the Nineteenth Corps immediately on the arrival of the Sixth, not far from the Bplle Grove House, where some of the regiments could see their own camps plundered by the Confederate soldiers : still, temporary halts, which did not affect the course of the battle, are naturally not represented on the map. Wright's report indicates but two lines as undertaken by him, apparently view- ing any intermediate ones as temporary halts to check the enemy. The first of these was the one broken by Gordon's onset before the Sixth Corps came up, "on a ridge to the eastward of and nearly parallel to the pike," that is, at the camps of Hayes and Kitching. The second was the one north of Middletown. 2 "A portion of the First Division, under Generals Wheaton and Mackenzie, and a part of the artillery of the corps, also behaved admirably " (Wright's Report). 230 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. centre, and Warner on the right. A fresh attacking divi- sion, thrown in at such a juncture, not seldom carries ail before it ; but Wharton's was greeted with a tremendous fire, under which his whole line recoiled. Bushing forth from their places in the cemetery and the adjoining grove, Grant's command drove Wharton down the hill ; but Early's artil- lery, which had followed close, checked the gallant counter- charge with a withering fire from eighteen or twenty guns, and the division fell back, Bidwell being among the mor- tally wounded.1 Three hours had now elapsed since the opening of the battle. It was between eight and nine o'clock, and the sun had dispelled the fog, allowing the Union generals to see what there was in their front, and how best to meet it. From causes which soon became better understood, the vigor of the enemy's attack was slackening. The peculiar character of the engagement thus far was explicable. The position en echelon of the Union corps had caused each to be farther north than the one on its left ; hence, when Early turned the left of the Cedar Creek line, the successive marching across of the Union forces to confront him, brought them farther and farther down the pike. Thus the Second Division of the Sixth Corps, if it marched by the shortest cut to the main road, would already be two and a quarter miles in rear of 1 " Whi'e I was endeavoring," says Early, " to discover the enenvy's line through the obscurity, Wharton's division came back in some confusion, and General Wharton informed me that, in advancing to the position pointed out to him by Generals Ramseur and Pegram, his division had been driven back by the Sixth Corps, which he said was advancing. He pointed out the direction from which he said the enemy was advancing, and some pieces of artillery which had come up were brought into action. The fog soon rose sufficiently for us to see the en- emy's position on a ridge to the west of Middletown, and it was discovered to be a strong one. After driving back Wharton's division he had not advanced, but opened on us with artillery, and orders were given for concentrating all our guns on him." THE BATTLE OF CEDAR CREEK. 231 Thoburn's camp, and fully a mile below the point where Gordon's column first struck the pike ; while if Merritfc's men should ride from their camp by the shortest straight line to the pike, they would come upon it at Middletown. Again, the very success of the morning attacks of Gordon and Kershaw had caused them to pursue their retreating enemy across and west of the turnpike ; so that the Sixth Corps, when encountered, was well over to the Confederate right. These two elements in the situation forced the vic- torious assailants to laborious changes of position before they could secure a line that would properly confront the two corps not surprised and now getting into supporting position, namely, the Sixth and Torbert's. The attack of Early's reserve division, Wharton, on the Union left, was repulsed, as has been seen ; but when repetitions of Whar- ton's attempt and a concentration of Early's artillery threat- ened to once rnore turn that flank, the Union troops with- drew north of Middletown, fully two miles to the rear of Getty's camp. After Early had brought up his fagged lines to this new position, he found his task increasing in diffi- culty, for the Union cavalry now extended beyond the pike. The manner in which this force had entered into the main battle requires an explanation. When, before daylight, firing had broken out simultane- ously on the right and left, Torbert's first effort was to check Rosser, who appeared on the Back road and attacked Cus- ter. Hardly were adequate arrangements made for this purpose, before a rush of stragglers came through the cav- alry lines, going to the right and rear. " I deployed my escort, First Ehode Island Cavalry," says Torbert, " as did Brigadier-General Merritt his, the Fifth United States Cav- alry. After an hour or two's work it proved to be a fruitless effort. The escorts were drawn in, and officers sent farther 232 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. to the rear, to form the men. By this time the enemy had come near enough for the cavalry batteries to open on them, which they did. The enemy did not bring their lines in the open country between them and the cavalry, but kept them under cover of the woods. Between nine and ten o'clock I was ordered by Major General Wright, commanding the army temporarily, Major-General Sheridan being temporarily absent, to move my whola cavalry force on the left of the army." Torbert promptly made this transfer, which occu- pied but a short time ; and he left three regiments to picket the right and to hold Bosser from the pike on that flank, while a horse battery also remained there until the infantry line at that point was ordered back, when it rejoined Devin's brigade on the left. Moore's command, which had been stationed at Buckton's ford picketing the left flank, after being cut off from the main army by Gordon's movement, had promptly regained it at Middletown. While the Union generals had thus secured the valua- ble assistance of the greater part of the cavalry in the main stress of battle, Early was little aided by this arm. Payne's brigade was all the mounted force he had at the pike. A piece of good fortune, among much ill-luck for the Union forces, was this collapse of the Confederate cav- alry. Neither Bosser nor Lomax was able to strike the pike, although Early's surprise of the infantry camps had filled it with fugitives. Bosser had indeed promptly attacked Cus- ter, on the Back road, at Kupp's Mill, but there, as in Emory's front, a reconnoissance had been ordered for day- break ; and besides, Bosser's minor attempt, two days be- fore, put the Union horsemen on their guard against sur- prise. Lomax had crossed the river at Front Boyal, after much delay from Powell's force, which fortunately was there confronting him, and his whole division was occupied all THE BATTLE OF CEDAR CREEK. 233 day in pressing back Powell's two brigades to Stony Point and Newtown,1 so that he did not reach the main battle-field, but returned to Luray Valley the way he came. The feeble- ness of Rosser's efforts can be best judged from the fact that the entire loss of Custer's division in the all-day battle, end- ing in a pursuit which yielded scores of cannons, caissons, and wagons, was 2 killed and 22 wounded. Indeed, the greater part of the Union mounted forces had been left free to aid in holding the pike ; while the inestimable value of this service is attested by Early's haunting anxiety lest the cavalry should flank him there. The best fruit of Tom's Brook was plucked at Cedar Creek. The Union line, then, as has been said, was at length drawn or driven back a mile and a quarter northeast of Mid- dletown, and four miles in rear of Thoburn's camp. Yet Early was no nearer his goal ; for, after having reckoned as one advantage of attacking the Union left the massing of the cavalry on the other flank, he found this powerful force threatening to envelop his own right. He therefore crowded his troops further to the east. Pegram, moving through Middletown, took position across the pike ; Ker- shaw was put into the gap left by Pegram ; Wharton, re- formed, was, with YVofford's brigade, which had become separated from Kershaw's division, put east of the pike, to check Torbert. But discouraged, at length, by the presence of the Union cavalry, and by Getty's gallant resistance, Early determined 1 " During this time the Second Brigade, Second Division (Colonel Powell com- manding division), fell back slowly by order on the Front Royal and Winchester pike to Stony Point, and then to a point near Newtown, followed by the rebel General Lomax1s division of cavalry, where they remained a greater part of the day. Colonel Powell thus prevented the enemy's cavalry from getting on the pike to attack our trains and rear " (Torbert's Report). 234 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. to essay an attack from his other flank,1 and sent an aid to direct an immediate advance there. This officer, says Early, returned with the report " that he delivered my order to General Kershaw, but the latter informed him that his divi- sion was not in a condition to make the attack, as it was very mnch scattered, and there was a cavalry force threatening him in front. Lieutenant Page also stated that he had seen Gordon's division in Kershaw's rear re-forming, and that it was also much scattered, and that he had not delivered the order to General Gordon because he saw that neither his division nor Kershaw's was in a condition to execute it ! '' The discreditable fact was that not only had the enforced lull occurred which is so familiar where troops have been marching and fighting since midnight, but in addition Early's organization was broken by the absence of men plundering the captured camps.2 Meanwhile had occurred the most dramatic incident in the annals of the Valley. Journeying from Rectortown to 1 " Discovering that the Sixth Corps could not be attacked with advantage on its left flank, because the approach in that direction was through an open flat and across a boggy stream with deep banks, I directed Captain Powell, serving on General Gordon's staff, who rode up to me while the artillery was being placed in position, to tell the general to advance against the enemy's right flank, and attack it in couj unction wit"i Kershaw, while a heavy fire of artillery was opened from our right " (Early's Memoir). 2 Early"s official report to Lee the day after the battle, confesses this fact : ' • So many of our men had stopped in the camp to plunder (in which I am sorry to say that officers participated), the country was so open and the enemy's cavalry so strong, that I did not deem it prudent to press fnrther, especially as Lomax had not come up. I determined, therefore, to content myself with trying to hold the advantages I had gained, until all my troops had come up, and the captured property was secured." In the same report he spoke of the extraordinary inability of his left to advance, when ordered to do so : " Word was sent to Gordon, who had got on the left with his division, and Kershaw, who were then also to swing around and advance with their divisions; but the3' stated in reply that a heavy force of cavalry had got in their front, and that their ranks were so depicted (by the number of men who had stopped in the camps to plunder) that they could not advance them." THE BATTLE OP CEDAR CREEK. 235 Washington the night of the 16th, Sheridan had completed his business there the next morning, the 17th, and had hur- ried by the noon train to Martinsburg. ' Finding himself again in the Valley, with no apparent urgency for his pres- ence at Cedar Creek, he deemed it expedient to remain and finish the business on which Colonels Alexander and Thorn had accompanied him. The morning of the 19th found him at Winchester ; and when, about 7 o'clock, an officer on picket reported the sounds of artillery, he gave no special heed to the matter, supposing that this firing resulted from a reconnoissance. However, about two hours later, mounting his horse, he rode through Winchester, and then the sound of the artillery made a battle unmistaka- ble ; while at Mill Creek, half a mile beyond the town, he found trains and troops already there from the broken line. Hastily giving orders to park the retreating trains, and to use the spare brigade at Winchester to form a cordon across the pike and fields, so as to stop the stragglers, Sheridan dashed up the pike, with an escort of twenty men. He called to the fugitives to turn about and face the enemy ; and, as he well phrases it, "hundreds of the men who, on reflection, found they had not done themselves justice, came back with cheers." On reaching the army, then eleven and a half miles from Winchester, he was received with a tempest of joy and enthusiasm.2 1 " General Sheridan has just been here. He has not yet fully decided about the Manassas road, but will do so in a day or two. He has gone back with Coloneis Alexander and Thorn, to make a fuller reconnoissance" (Halleck to Grant, October 17th, 12.30 P.M.). 2 " Far away in the rear was heard cheer after cheer. What was the cause? Were reinforcements coming ? Yes, Phil. Sheridan was coming, and he was a host. . . . Dashing along the pike, he came upon the line of battle. ' What troops are those ?' shouted Sheridan. 'The Sixth Corps,' was the response from a hundred voices. ' We are all right,' said Sheridan, as he swung his old 236 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. When Sheridan arrived, the enemy had just been forced to relinquish his latest attempts to seize the pike, yet had not completed his arrangements for attacking the Union right ; and the only parts of the army which Sheridan found engaged were the Second Division of the Sixth Corps and the cavalry, while even these were comparatively little engaged. Affairs at the pike, therefore, being no longer urgent, he proceeded at once to the most important task now demanding attention, namely, that of securing a strong for- mation of his line.1 For, in the concentration of exertions on the one side to carry, and on the other to hold the turn- pike as the key-point of the battle, both the Union and the Confederate lines, as a whole, were much broken ; and mov- ing and fighting across several miles of uneven ground had left divisions disjointed, and some in rear of others. Sheri- dan, therefore, rode off to personally aid his staff in bring- ing up all his available troops on a line about perpendicular to the pike, extending Getty's line, while, as the left was now more than adequately guarded, he caused all of Custer's hat and dashed along the line toward the right. ' Never mind, boys, we'll whip them yet, we'll whip them yet ! We shall sleep in our old quarters to-night ! ' were the encouraging words of the chief as he rode along, while the men threw their hats high in air, leaped and danced and cheered in wildest joy " (Three Years in the Sixth Corps). 1 "One thing at once struck me as curious — that the stream of men was now going toward Middletown. Astonished, I left Wheaton and galloped over to the pike, where I learned that Sheridan had just passed up— as well as can be ascer- tained, it was half past eleven o'clock — and directly after, meeting General Forsyth, chief of staff, I received orders to go to Newtown, form a guard, and collect all the stragglers I could, and bring them up to the front. This I proceeded to do, and finally collected about two thousand men of all corps, and brought them up and turned them over to the command of General Crook, then on our extreme left and rear. From the time the Sixth Corps became engaged, at about nine a.m. , until Sheridan came up, about noon, the attacks of the enemy were on the whole feeble and ineffective. . . . Sheridan rode along his line, seeing for himself all his troops, and saying a word or two as he went along to encourage them, to which they responded with cheers '' (Colonel B. W. Crowninshield's Cedar Creek). THE BATTLE OF CEDAR CREEK. 237 cavalry to be brought together on the right.1 From the moment that he saw the situation of the battle, he had de- termined not to allow the enemy to remain in possession of the field, but to recover it as soon as all should be ready for attack. This assurance he gave to the troops as he rode along the lines, and the splendid inspiration of his pres- ence was the best omen of coming victory. We must now turn again to the lines of the assailants. Astonished at the reports brought him from his left, Early had proceeded thither to direct an attack. About one o'clock he succeeded in getting some of his troops ready, and the Nineteenth Corps and Wheaton's division of the Sixth were assaulted ; but the enemy was easily repulsed. The affair might have proved, however, very serious, had not the Union right been strengthened by Sheridan, and made ready to receive the onset, a temporary breastwork of rails and logs having been hastily thrown up. The repulse of Early's left told him that fortune had quitted his standards. He thenceforth contented himself with the endeavor to get his prisoners and his captured guns and wagons back to Fisher's Hill. But at four o'clock Sher- idan ordered an advance, and the whole Union line gallantly responded. Wright was on the left, Emory on the right, Crook in column in reserve, Merritt and Custer on the left and right flanks. The enemy had improved the two or three hours that had elapsed since he ceased his aggression to establish himself behind stone walls, and to make other de- fensive preparations. But his dread of being flanked by the cavalry caused him to so extend his lines as to make them 1 "I hastened from Winchester, where I was on my return from Washington, and found the armies between Middletowu and Newtown, having been driven back four miles. I here took the affair in hand, and quickly united the corps — formed a compact line of battle just in time to repulse an attack of the enemy " (Sheridan to Grant, Ootober 19th, 10 p.m.). 238 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. unduly thin. Still, in Emory's front the advance was stoutly contested, until a spirited dash of a portion of Dwight's division, under the personal direction J of Sheridan, put the enemy to flight at that point. The tactical movement se- lected had been a left half-wheel — the same that Sheridan had employed at Winchester and Fisher's Hill ; and Dwight's division, which was on the wheeling flank, made such pro- gress that a portion of it came under the fire of a Sixth Corps battery, which was nearer the pivot. Grover, of the Nineteenth Corps, and Wheaton, of the Sixth, on their fronts handsomely broke the enemy's line ; while of the infantry and cavalry at the pike it is enough to say that they fought with the vigor they had exhibited throughout the battle. Custer, on the right, charged with his usual spirit. Now consternation spread along the Confederate ranks, until division after division gave way, and the army that had swept over the field in triumph at dawn was a mass of fugi- tives at night. Though Sheridan's opponents were among the choice troops of the South, who, up to a month before, had considered themselves invincible, at least in the Valley, yet never was greater rout seen on a battle-field since Bull Kim.'2 1 General Dwight now resuming charge of the division, McMillan had returned to his brigade. "The Second Brigade," says McMillan, '-encountered a most murderous fire from a hidden enemy on the right and rear. At this critical mo- ment I wheeled the Second Brigade, and, by Colonel Davis's assistance, two of his regiments to the right forming a line perpendicular to the one of direct at- tack, in a few moments drove the enemy flying from his cover. After moving to the right a short distance, I began to get my command in its former position to the left and front, when Major-General Sheridan rode up and told me to move to the left, so as to complete the line as when it first advanced. So rapidly had we driven the enemy that horsemen could with difficulty get through the woods as rapidly. After changing the direction of the troops by direction of Major Forsyth, of Major-General Sheridan's staff, 1 halted my command to wait for General Cus- ter to get into position to protect my right." 2 Early's own language sustains the truth of the assertion in the text : "A por- tion of the enemy had penetrated an interval which was between Evans's brigade, on the extreme left, and the rest of the iine, when that brigade gave way, and THE BATTLE OF CEDAR CREEK. 239 The Union line, hurrying over the field, captured fugitives by scores. At Cedar Creek the infantry pursuit stopped, but the cavalry kept on. A bridge across a little brook be- tween Strasburg and Fisher's Hill broke down, and at once the road became blocked with a mass of guns, caissons, am- bulances and wagons. Custer and Devin, swooping upon these, gathered them up ; for the disorganized mob took to the fields, neither attempting to check the pursuit nor to save anything. During the evening Dwight's division crossed the creek, and camped at Hupp's Hill. Early's loss in this engagement seems to have been about 3,100 — 1,860 killed and wounded, and " something over 1,000 prisoners," according to his own account ; but about 1,200 had fallen into the hands of Sheridan. Twenty-four Con- federate guns were captured ; the twenty-four lost by the Union troops in the morning were all retaken, with all the captured ambulances, and fifty-six of Early's ; and a number of battle-flags were among the spoils. The cavalry also set fire to scores of abandoned wagons and ambulances. The only trophies retained by Early were 1,429 prisoners, whom he had taken the precaution to send betimes to the rear, and to forward to Richmond, where they arrived a few days later. The Union loss in killed, wounded, and missing was 5,764, distributed as follows : Gordon's other brigades soon followed. . . . Every effort was made to stop and rally Kershaw's and Ramseur's men, but the mass of them resisted all appeals and continued to go to the rear." He adds that Ramseur only succeeded in re- taining with him 200 or 300 men out of his whole division, and Major Goggm, of Kershaw's staff, about the same number of Conner's brigade ; and when these troops were overwhelmed, and Ramseur was mortally wounded, Pegram alone got " a portion of his command " across Cedar Creek in an organized condition ; " but this small force soon dissolved." A part of Evans's brigade had bee n ral- lied in the rear, and held a ford above the bridge for a short time, " but it followed the example of the rest." 240 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Cavalry Corps . . . Sixth Corps Nineteenth Corps Eighth Corps Killed. 25 255 243 40 5b9 Wounded. 139 1,666 1,352 268 3,425 Missing. 50 294 893 533 1,770 Aggregate. 214 2,215 2,488 847 5,764 In the morning Colonel Thoburn and General Bidwell were killed, and Colonel Kitching fatally wounded ; Generals Wright, Grover, and Ricketts were also wounded, and Col- onels Mackenzie and Penrose, commanding brigades. In Merritt's final charge at Middletown fell the accomplished and ckivalric Lowell, commanding the Reserve or Regular Brigade, whose commission as brigadier-general had been signed that day. His command had performed admirable service, having held, during the morning, an advanced posi- tion, dismounted, behind a stone wall, from which the enemy could not drive it. "I do not think there was a quality," said Sheridan, " which I could have added to Lowell. He was the perfection of a man and a soldier." When it became known throughout the North how glory had been plucked out of calamity in this memorable battle at Cedar Creek, the country rang with praises of Sheridan. Grant caused a salute of one hundred guns to be fired from each of his armies at City Point, in honor of the achieve- ment. " Turning what had bid fair to be a disaster into glorious victory," he wrote to Stanton, " stamped Sheridan what I have always thought him, one of the ablest of gen- erals." Meade, on receiving the news, wrote to Grant that "to achieve such results, after having met the reverse he describes, is one of the most brilliant feats of the war." Congress, a few months later, passed a resolution tendering THE BATTLE OP CEDAR CREEK. 241 its thanks to " Major-General Philip H. Sheridan, and to the officers and men under his command, for the gallantry, mili- tary skill, and courage displayed in the brilliant series of vic- tories achieved by them in the Valley of the Shenandoah, and especially for their services at Cedar Eun, on the 19th day of October, 1864, which retrieved the fortunes of the day, and thus averted a great disaster." State Legislatures passed reso- lutions of eulogy. President Lincoln, on receiving news of the battle, sent to General Sheridan the following message : " With great pleasure I tender to you and your brave army the thanks of the nation, and my own personal admiration and gratitude for the month's operations in the Shenandoah Valley, and especially for the splendid work of October 19, 1861." When, a few weeks later, the President appointed Sheri- dan a Major-General in the army, the appointment was ex- pressed to be " for the personal gallantry, military skill, and just confidence in the courage and patriotism of your troops, displayed by you on the 19fch day of October, at Cedar Run, whereby, under the blessing of Providence, your routed army was reorganized, a great national disaster averted, and a brilliant victory achieved over the rebels for the third time in pitched battle within thirty days." These words were dictated by Abraham Lincoln. Cedar Creek, the crown of Sheridan's campaign in the Valley, presents an illustration of the part which the unex- pected often plays in war. This engagement was the sequel of a retrograde from Harrisonburg which had been under- taken with no prevision that such a combat could occur. Grant and Sheridan, under the impression that the enemy's army in the Valley was hopelessly dispirited and nearly de- stroyed, were arranging new combinations of much import- ance. These included the transfer of an infantry corps and XI.— 11 242 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. a division of cavalry to Petersburg, and the beginning of operations east of the Blue Ridge by a portion of the forces. Only the chance discovery of an obscure and even fictitious warning, taken from a Confederate signal station, gave to the Union army the services of the two cavalry divisions that were just departing on an expedition to the Virginia Central Railroad. Only a needless display of a portion of Early's infan- try in a reconnoissance caused Wright's command to be hurried back from Ashby's Gap ; and no seer would have been needed to foretell the result of the battle at Cedar Creek, with the part played by the Sixth Corps left out. But Early also had his share of good fortune in the timely fog that screened his attack, and favored a surprise which alone could warrant a reasonable hope of success ; above all, he was, without suspect- ing it, greatly aided in his initial stroke by the temporary ab- sence of the leader of the Union forces. This latter piece of luck, again, was more than counterbalanced by the return of Sheridan at the very moment when his presence was most po- tent to turn the wavering scale ; for the Union army received an inestimable reinforcement in regaining its commander. Yet, strange as was the entrance of fortuitous elements into this battle, they cannot be said to have controlled its issue ; for the inspiration and strength which Sheridan's personality lent to his forces that day were the fruit of a thorough confidence in him, which had been steadily grow- ing ever since he had taken command, and which, at his sudden and unexpected appearance on this field, burst forth in an enthusiasm unexampled in the war. " The accident of the morning," declared Sheridan, in his despatch to Grant, "turned to our advantage as much as though the whole movement had been planned." Certainly no train of events could well have been framed to bring into a more vivid and dramatic light his qualities as a leader of men.

## appendix-b-strength

V. — Strength of Eakly's Infantry, August 31, 1864, as shown by Abstract from Monthly Returns. 1 Commanded by Wharton when a corps command of this division and Gor- don's was given t > Breckenridge. ? Present at this time with Early's army ; not present in battles of Opequon and Fisher's Hill, but present at Cedar Creek. XL— 12 266 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Ten days later than the foregoing, September 10, the figures of " present for duty " were ; Commands, etc. Officers. Men. Aggregate. 194 307 271 182 39 353 2,172 3,244 2,690 2,010 818 3,215 2,366 3 551 2,961 2,192 857 3.568 1,346 14,149 15,495 The Inspection Reports of June 30th gave Fitz Lee's division 130 officers and 1,553 men — aggregate, 1,683 ; those of July 10th, 1 15 officers and 1,591 men — aggregate, 1,706 ; those of November 30th, "total effective," 1,455. If 1,700, for Fitz Lee, should be added to the figures already given, the total, without Ker- shaw, would be 17,195; with Kershaw, about September 10th, the total would be, in round numbers, about 21,000. VI. — Sheridan's Strength, September 10, 1864. Headquarters Middle Military Division, September 13, 1864. General — I have the honor to forward as complete a field return as is possible at the present time. The most strenuous exertions are being made by me to obtain a full return, but the difficulty in obtaining such from the commanding officer Department of West Virginia, because of his command covering so great an extent of country, has so far prevented. The enclosed return does not include the cavalry under Averell, about 2,500, or the troops of the Departments of Washington, Susquehanna, or Middle. I simply forward it you as a statement showing the number of men for duty south of the Potomac. Hoping soon to furnish complete all reports required, Very respectfully, your obedient servant, P. H. SHERIDAN, Brigadier-General L. Thomas, Major- General. Adjutant General, United States Army. Field Return of Troo])s in the Field, belonging to the Middle Military Division, September 10, 1864. Sixth Army Corps, Infantry " " Artillery Nineteenth Army Corps, Infantry " Artillery Army of West Virginia, Infantry. " " Artillery . Cavalry (Torbert's) Artillery Military District, Harper's Ferry. . Present for Duty. Officers. Men. Aggreg'te. 668 22 660 7 306 12 339 7 204 2.2031 12,028 626 12,150 208 6,834 355 6,126 346 4.611 43,284 12,696 64S 12,810 215 7,140 367 6,465 353 4,815 45,487i 1 A clerical error in casting up the first column of the foregoing table, which is taken from Badeau's. Military History of Q. S. Grant, makes it read 2,203 instead of 2,225 ; and the aggregate, in like manner, should be 45,509.
