# Richard B. Irwin, History of the Nineteenth Army Corps: Port Hudson passages, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of an Allen County Public Library scan (Internet Archive historyofninetee00irwi); not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers, map-caption debris and footnotes interleaved with the text. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages only: the end of Chapter XV from Banks's departure from New Orleans through Plains Store (OCR pp.159-162); Chapter XVI, The Twenty-seventh of May (pp.163-184); the summons, second assault and losses of June 14 in Chapter XVII (pp.193-201); and from Chapter XVIII the besiegers' strength and conditions (pp.216-218) and the capitulation, captures and losses (pp.227-234).

## plains-store

First placing Emory in command of the defences of New Orleans, and ordering Sherman to take Dow and Nickcrson and join Augur before Port Hudson, Banks left the cit\' on the 20th of May, rejoined his headquarters on the 21st, and at once set his troops in motion toward Bayou Sara. At half-past eight o'clock on the morning of the 21st of May, Paine broke up his bivouac on the Atchafalaya and marched to M organza, after detaching the 131st New York and the 173d New York with a section of artillery to guard the ammunition train. Grover followed by wa,ter as fast as the steamboats could be provided. At two o'clock on the morning of the 2 2d of May, Banks and Grover, with the advance of Grover's division, landed at Bayou Sara without meeting any opposition from the enemy, who, up to this time, seems not to have suspected the movement. The other troops followed as rapidly as the means of i6o THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. transport permitted. Grover's division was sent ashore, followed by two brigades of Paine's division from Morganza. The wagon train went on down the road to the landing directly opposite Bayou Sara, under the escort of the iioth Nev/ York, and the i62d New York, with one section of Carruth's bat- tery, all under the command of Benedict. Soon after the landing at Bayou Sara, a party of cavalry rode in, bringing the news of Augur's battle of the 2 1st. Hearing that Augur was at that moment engaged with the enemy, Banks pressed forward his troops. In a violent storm of wind and rain Grover pushed on until he met Augur's outlying detachments. Then, finding all quiet, he went into bivouac near Thompson's Creek, north-west of Port Hudson. Paine followed, and rested on the Perkins plantation, a mile in the rear of Grover. Banks made his head- quarters with Grover. Augur covered the front of the position taken up by the enemy after the battle of Plains Store. On the same day, the 2 2d, Sherman came up the river, landed at Springfield, and went into position on the Bayou Sara road on Augur's left. Thus at night on the 2 2d the garrison of Port Hudson was practically hemmed in. On the iSth, Banks had ordered Augur to march with his whole disposable force to the rear of Port Hudson to prevent the escape of the garrison. As early as the 13th of May. while yet the plan of cam- paign was in suspense, Augur had sent Grierson with the cavalry and Dudley with his brigade to Merritt's plantation, near the junction of the Springfield Land- ing and Bayou Sara roads, to threaten the enemy and discover his movements. Dudley then took post near White's Bavou, a branch of the Comite, and remained BA CK TO POR T HUDSON. 1 6 1 in observation, covering the road to Clinton and the fork that leads to Jackson. On the 20th of May Augur moved the remainder of his force up to Dudley, in order to be ready to cover T. W. Sherman's land- ing at Springfield, as well as to meet the advance of the main column under Banks from Bayou Sara, now likely to occur at any moment. With Augur now were Dudley, Chapin, Grierson, Godfrey's squadron composed of troops C and E of the Louisiana cavalry, two sections of Rawles's battery, Holcomb's batter)% and one section of Mack's commanded by Sergeant A. W. McCollin. At six o'clock in the morning of the 2 I St of May Augur marched toward the crossing of the Plains Store and Bayou Sara roads to seize the enemy's line of retreat and to open the way for Banks. When Grierson came to the edge of the wood that forms the southern boundary of the plain, his advance fell in with a detachment of the garrison under Colo- nel S. P. Powers of the 14th Arkansas regiment, and a brisk skirmish followed. The same afternoon Gard- ner sent out Miles, with his battalion, about 400 strong, and Boone's battery, to feel Augur's advance and perhaps to drive it away. This brought on the action known as the battle of Plains Store. Unfor- tunately, no complete reports of the affair were made and the regimental narratives are meagre. In the heavy forest that then masked the cross- roads and formed the western border of the plain, Miles met Augur moving into position ; Dudley, on the right of the road that leads from Plains Store to Port Hudson, supporting Holcomb's guns, and Chapin on the left supporting Rawles's guns. For about an hour the artillery fire was brisk. The 4Sth Massachusetts, being badly posted in column on either side of the i62 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. Port Hudson road, gave way in some confusion under the sharp attack of Mlles's men coming on through the thicket, and thus exposed the guns of Beck's sec- tion of Rawles. As the 48th fell back through the advancing ranks of the 49th Massachusetts, the prog- ress of that regiment was momentarily hindered, but a brisk charge of the 11 6th New York restored the battle. On the right, a section of Boone's battery got an enfilade fire on Rawles and Chapin, and enabled Miles to draw off and retire behind the breastworks. Thus the affair was really ended before Augur, whose duty it was to act with prudence, had time to com- plete the proper development of his division as for a battle with the full force of the enemy, which he was bound to suppose was about to engage him. Then he completed the task of making good his position, and proceeded to open communication with Banks and with Sherman. The main loss fell upon Chapin, Dudley's casual- ties numbering but rS, Grierson's but 2. The total casualties were 15 men killed, 3 officers and 69 men wounded, and 25 men missing — in all, 102. Miles reports his loss as 8 killed, 23 wounded, and 58 missing — in all, 89. When Augur quitted Baton Rouge he placed Drew with the 4th Louisiana Native Guards in Fort Williams to hold the place, supported by the fleet, and ordered Nelson with the ist and 3d Louisiana Native Guards to be ready to follow the division to Port Hudson.

## twenty-seventh-of-may

CHAPTER XVI. THE TWENTY-SEVENTH OF MAY. Port Hudson was now held by Gardner with a force of about seven thousand of all arms. During the interval that had elapsed since its first occupation a formidable series of earthworks had been thrown w]), commanding not only the river but all the inland approaches that were deemed practicable. The first plan for land defence was mainly against the attack ex{)cctc-d to come from the direction of Baton Roucrc Accord ingl\', al30UL four miles below Port Hudson a syslcm of works was begun that, if completed, accord- ini; to the original trace, would have involved a defensive line eight miles in length, requiring thirty- five thousand men and seventy guns to hold it. As actually constructed, the lines were four and a half mi](-s long, and ran in a semicircular sweep from the river near Ross Landing, below Port Hudson, to the impassable swamp above. Following this line for thirteen hundred yards after leaving the river on the south, the bluff is broken into irregular ridges and deejj ravines, with narrow plateaus ; thence for two thousand \ards the lines crossed the broad cotton fields of Gibbons's and of Slaughter's plantations ; be- yond these for four hundred yards they were carried over difficult gullies ; beyond these again for fourteen hundred yards the course lay through fields and over 163 i64 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. hilly ground to the ravine at the bottom of which runs Sandy Creek. Here, on the day of the investment, the hne of Confederate earthworks stopped, the coun- try lying- toward the northeast being considered so difficult that no attack was looked for in that quarter. Sandy Creek finds its way into the marshy bottom of Foster's Creek, and from Sandy Creek, where the earthworks ended, to the river at the mouth of Fos- ter's Creek, is about twenty-five hundred yards. Save where the axe had been busy, nearly the whole country was covered with a heavy growth of magnolia trees of great size and beauty. This was a line that, for its complete defence against a regular siege, con- ducted according to the strict principles of military science, as laid down in the books, should have had a force of fifteen thousand men. At the end of March the garrison consisted of 1,366 officers, 14,921 men of all arms present for duty, making a total of 16,287. The main body was organized in 5 brigades, commanded by Bcall, Buford, Gregg, Maxcy, and Rust. The fortifications on the river front mounted 22 heavy guns, from lo-inch columbiads down to 24-poundcr siege guns, manned by 3 battalions of heavy artillerists, while 13 light batteries, probably numbering 78 pieces, were available for the defence of all the lines : of these batteries only 5 Avere now left, with 30 guns. When, early in Ma)-, Pemberton began to feel the weight of Grant's pressure, he called on Gardner for reinforcements ; thus Rust and Buford marched to the relief of Vicksburg on the 4th of May, Gregg followed on the 5th, and Maxey on the Sth. Miles was to have followed Maxey ; in fact the preparations and orders had been cfiven for the evacuation of Port I THE TWENTY. SEVENTH OF MAY. 165 ; ; Hudson ; but now the same uncertainty and vacillation . on the part of the Confederate chiefs that were to f seal the doom of Vicksburg began to be felt at Port !:, Hudson. Gardner, who had moved out with Maxey, had hardly arrived at Clinton when he was met by an order from Pemberton to return to Port Hudson with a few thousand men and to hold the place to the last. But ten days later, on the 19th of May, Johnston, who was then engaged in carrying out his own ideas, which differed radically from those of Davis and Pemberton, ordered Gardner to evacuate Port Hud- son and to march on Jackson, Mississippi. This order, sent by courier as well as by telegraph, Gard- ner received just as Augur was marching from Baton Rouge to cut him off. Then it was too late, and wlien on the 23d Johnston peremptorily renewed his I order for the evacuation, even the communication was * closed. i Tlu,- in\-cstment was made perfect by the presence I in llie ri\-er, above and below Port Hudson, of the r ships and gunb(3ats of the navy. Just above the ; ])lace and at anchor around the bend lay the Ha}^t- Jord, now Commodore Palmer's flagship, with the Albafross, SacJioii, Es/rc/la, and Arizona. Below, at anchor off Prophet's Island, were the MonongaJicla, bearing b'arragut's flag, the RicJimond, Gcncscc, Essex, and the mortar flotilla. Both the upper and the lower fleets watclied the river at night by means of picket- boats \\\ order to discover any movement and to in- terc(;[)t an)' communication with the garrison. At the Hermitage plantation, on the west bank of the riv(*r, IJcnedlct was stationed with his own regi- ment, the i62d New York, the i loth New York, and a section of artillery to prevent the escape of the Con- 1 66 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. federates by water. As soon as Weitzel joined, on the 25th of May, Banks began to close in his lines along the entire front. Weitzel moved up to the sugar-house on the telegraph road near the bridge over Foster's Creek ; Paine advanced into the woods on Weitzel's left ; Grover moved forward on the north of the Clinton Railway, crossed the ravine of Sandy Creek, and occupied the wooded crest of the steep hill in front. Augur prolonged the line across the Plains Store road under cover of the woods, yet in plain view of the Confederate entrenchments. Sher- man held the Baton Rouge road, occupying the skirt of woods that formed the eastern edge of Slaughter's and Gibbons's fields. The 1st and 3d Louisiana Native Guards, under Nelson, having come up from Baton Rouge, were posted at the sugar-house near Foster's Creek, form- ing the extreme right of the line of in\-estment. Banks now placed Weitzel in command of the right wing of the army, comprising his own brigade under Thomas. Dwight's brigade of Grover's division under Van Zandt, together forming a temporary division under Dwight, the six regiments tliat remained of Paine's division after the heavy detachments, and the two colored reo^iments under Nelson. During the day of the 25th Weitzel gained the wooded slope covering the Confederate left front. The Confederate advanced guard on this part of their line, composed in part of the 9th battalion of Louisiana partisan rangers, under Lieutenant-Colonel Wingficld, resisted Weitzel's advance stoutly, but was steadily and with- out difficulty pushed back into the entrenchments. When night fell on the 26th of May the division commanders met at headquarters at Riley's on the THE TWENTY-SEVENTH OF MAY. 167 Bayou Sara road to consider the question of an assault. No minutes of this council were kept, and to this day its conclusions are a matter of dispute. They may safely be regarded as sufficiently indicated bv the orders for the following day. By at least one of those present any immediate movement In the na- ture of an assault was objected to because of the o-reat distance that still separated the lines of invest- ment from the Confederate earthworks ; It was urged that the troops would have to move to the attack over ground the precise character of which was as yet un- known to them or to their commanders, although It was known to be broken and naturally difficult and to be obstructed by felled timber. The general opinion was, however, that prompt and decisive action was demanded in view of the unusual and precarious nature of the campaigns on which the two armies of Grant and Banks were now embarked, the uncertainty as to what Johnston might do, and the certainty that a disaster at X^Icksburo- would brine" I'uin In Louisiana. Moreover, officers and men alike were In high spirits and full of confidence In themselves, and they out- numbered the Confederates rather more than two to one. This was the view held by Banks himself. Upon his mind, moreover, the disapproval and the repeated urglngs of the government acted as a goad. Accordingly, as soon as the council broke up he gave orders for an assault on the following morning. All the artillery was to open upon the Confederate works at daybreak. For this purpose the reserve artillery was placed under the immediate orders of Arnold. He was to open fire at six. Weitzel was to take advantage of the attacks on the left and centre to force his way into the works on 1 68 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. his front, since it was natural to expect that, whether they should prove successful or not, these attacks would distract the attention of the enemy and serve to relieve the pressure in Weitzel's front. Grover was thus left with five regiments to support the left centre, to reinforce either the right or left, and to support the right flank of the reserve artillery, or to force his way into the works, as occasion might require. Augur, holding the centre, with Dudley's brigade forming his right and Chapin his left, and Sherman, at the extreme left, separated from Augur by a thick wood, were to begin the attack during the cannonade by advancing their skirmishers to kill the enemy's cannoneers and to cover the assauh. They were to place their troops in position to take Instant advan- tage of any favorable opportunity, and, if possible, to force the enemy's works at tlie earliest moment. Each division commander was to |)rovide his own means for passing the ditch. These, for the most part, consisted of cotton bags, fascines, and planks borne by detachments of men, furnished by detail or by volunteering. It will be observed that no time was fixed for the assault of either column nor any provision made to render the several attacks simultaneous. Moreover, although the order wound up with the emphatic decla- ration that " Port Hudson must be tak<_-n to-morrow," an impression prevailed in the minds of at least two of the division commanders that there were still to be reconnoissances by the engineers, and that upon the results of these would depend the selection of the points of attack. There were no roads alone the front or rear of the THE TWENTY. SEVENTH OF MAY. 169 investing army, and the only means by which com- munication was maintained between the left, the centre, and the right was either by wide detours or through dense and unknown woods and thickets. It was impossible to see the troops in front or rear or on either flank. On no part of the line was either divi- sion in sight of the other. The forest approached within 250 yards at the nearest point on Weitzel's front, within 450 yards on Grover's, within 500 yards on Augur's, and within 1,200 yards on Sherman's front. The field to be passed over was partly the cleared land of the plan- tations, crossed by fences and hedges, but in many places, especially on Augur's approach, the timber had been recently felled, and, lying thick upon the ground, made a truly formidable obstruction. The niorning of the 27th of May broke bright and bcautitul. As the early twilight began to open out along the entire front the artillery began a furious cannonade. At first the Confederate guns replied witli s])irit, but it soon became apparent that they were overweighted, and, moreover, the necessity of husljanding their scanty store of ammunition no doubt impressed itself upon the minds of the Confederate commanders. About six o'clock, when Weitzel judged that the movement on the left must be well advanced, he put liis cohimns in motion through tlie dense forest in his front, forming his command, as far as the nature of the ground admitted, in column of brigades, Dwight's brigade under Van Zandt leading, followed by Weitzel's brigade under Thomas. Paine formed his division in two lines in support, his own brigade under bY-aring in front, and Gooding's in reserv^e. 1 70 THE NINE TEE NTH A RM V CORPS. The Confederate skirmishers and outposts continued to occupy the forest and the ravines on this part of their front, and the first hour was spent in pressing them back behind their entrenchments. Then Thomas moved forward through Van Zandt's inter- vals, and deploying from right to left the i6oth New York, Lieutenant-Colonel Van Petten ; 8th Vermont, Lieutenant-Colonel Dillingham; 12th Connecticut, Lieutenant-Colonel Peck ; and 75th New York, Lieu- tenant-Colonel Babcock, advanced to the attack. Van Zandt, owing to the inequalities of the ground and the difficulty of finding the way, drifted somewhat toward the right. Thereupon Paine, finding his front uncovered, moved forward into the interval. Then began what has been aptly termed a " huo-e bushwack." Until within three days a part of the Confederate lines in front of Weitzel had not been fortified at all, the defence resting on the great natural ditficulties of the approaches no less than of the ground to be held ; but in the interval Gardner had taken notice of the indications that pointed to an advance in this quarter, and had caused light breastworks to l)e constructed in all haste. This the great trees that covered the hill rendered an easy task. On the morning of the 27th of May, therefore, the works that Weitzel was called upon to attack consisted mainly of big logs on the crest and following the contour of the hill, ren- dered almost unapproachable by the felled timber that choked the ravines. Thus, while Weitzel's men could not even see their enemy, they were them- selves unable to move beyond the cover of tlie hol- lows and the timber without offering an easy m.ark for a destructive fire of small-arms, as well as of THE TWENTY-SEVENTH OF MAY. lyi grape, shell, shrapnel, and canister. When finally, after climbing over hills, logs, and fallen trees, and forcing the ravines filled with tangled brush and branches, Weitzel had driven the Confederates into their works, he held the ridge about two hundred yards distant from the position to be attacked. Paine's position at this time was to the right and rear of battery No. 6, as shown on the map ; Weitzel and Dwight were on the same crest near batteries 3, 4, and 5. The pioneers worked like beavers to open the roads as fast as the infantry advanced, and with such skill and zeal that hardly had the infantry formed upon the crest than the guns of Duryea, Bainbridge, Nims, Haley, and Carruth unlimbered and opened tire by their side. At length Thomas succeeded in making his v/ay across the rivulet known as Little Sandy Creek, and, working gradually forward, began to fortify witli logs tlic hill on the right, afterward known as Fort Bab- cock, in honor of the Lieutenant-Colonel of the 75th New York. To support Weitzel's movement, Grover sent the 159th New York, Lieutenant-Colonel Burt, and the 25th Connecticut by a wide detour to the right to make their way in on Paine's left. Taking advan- tage of the protection afforded by the ravine, at the bottom of which ran or rather trickled Sandy Creek, these regiments, after the most difncult and exhausting scramble through the brush and over the fallen timber, came to the base of a steep bluff, near the position aftervv^ard occupied by siege battery No. 6. This, although the works directly opposite were as yet light, was naturally one of the ugliest approaches on the whole front. In spite of every exertion, it 172 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. took the 159th an hour to move half a mile. Just before reaching the foot of the hill over which they were to charge, they captured a Confederate captain and six skirmishers, who lay concealed in the ravine, cut off by the advance and unable to retire. So crooked and obscure was the path and so difficult was it to see any thing, even a few feet ahead, that the officers had to stand at every little turning to tell the men which way to go. At last the regiment formed, and, with a rush, began the assault of the bluff, but they could get no farther than the crest, where they were met by a destructive flank fire from the Confederate rifiemen. There, within thirty yards of the works, the men sought shelter. To try the effect of a diversion, Grover put in the 1 2th Maine, supported by the remaining fragment of his division, reduced to the 13th and 25th Connec- ticut, against the partly exposed west face of tlie bastion that formed tlie left of the hnisheJ portion of the Confederate earthworks. The point of attack is shown at X. and XL, and the position whence Grover moved at i and 7. After the first attack on the right had wcllnigh spent itself, and when its renewal in conjunction with an advance on the centre and tlie left, was momen- tarily expected, Dwight thought to create a di\^ersion and at the same time to develop the strength and position of the Confederates toward their extreme left, where their lines bent back to rest on the river, and to this end he ordered Nelson to put in his two colored regiments. This portion of the Confederate line occupied the nearly level crest of a steep bluff that completely dominates the low ground by the sugar-house, where the telegraph road crosses Foster's THE TWENTY- SEVENTH OF MA /. 173 Creek. Over this ground the colored troops had to advance unsupported to receive their first fire. The bridge had been burned when the Confederates retired into their works. Directly in front of the crest, and somewhat below it, a rugged bluff stands a little apart, projecting boldly from the main height with a sharp return to the right, so as to form a natural out- work of great strength, practically inaccessible save by the road that winds along the bottom of the little rivulet at the foot of the almost perpendicular flank. This detached ridge is about four hundred yards in length. It was held by six companies of the 39th Mississippi regiment, under Colonel W. B. Shelby, while behind, in the positions of land batteries III. and IV., were planted six field pieces, and still farther back on the water front the columbiads of Whitfield and Seawell, mounted on traversing carriages, stood ready to rake the road with their 8-inch and lo-inch shell and shrapnel. Shortl)- after seven o'clock. Nelson sent in the ist Louisiana Native Guards, under Lieutenant-Colonel I>:issctt, In column, to force the crossing of the creek. The 3(1 Louisiana Native Guards followed in close siippori. just before the head of the column came near the creek, the movement was perceived by the Confederates, who immediately opened on the negroes a shar[) fire of musketry from the rifle-pits on the detached bluff ; at the same moment the field guns opened with shell and shrapnel, from the ridge behind, and as the men struggled on through the creek and up the farther bank they became exposed to the entilade fire of the columbiads. When, in mounting the narrow gorge that led up the hill, the head of the column, necessarily shattered as it was 174 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. by this concentrated fire, had gained a point within about two hundred yards of the crest, suddenly every gun opened on them with canister. This was more than any men could stand. Bassett's men gave back in disorder on their supports, then in the act of cross- ing the creek, and the whole column retired in confu- sion to its position near the sugar-house on the north bank. Here both regiments were soon re-formed and again moved forward in good order, anticipatino- instructions to renew the attack ; yet none came, and, in fact, the attack was not renewed, although the con- temporary accounts, some of them even official, dis- tinctly speak of repeated charges. In this abortive attempt, Captain Andrew Cailloux and Second Lieu- tenant John H. Crowder, of the ist regiment, were instantly killed. Cailloux, who is said to have been a free man of color, although all the officers of his race were at that time supposed to have resigned, fell at the head of the leading company of his regiment, while gallantly cheering on his men. The ist regiment lost, in this brief engagement, 2 officers, and 24 men killed and 79 men wounded — in all, 105. The 3d, being far less exposed, as well as for a shorter time, lost i officer and 5 men killed, and i officer wounded — in all, 7. The morning was drawing out when these move- ments were well spent, and the advanced positions simply held without further effort to go forward. The hour may have been about ten o'clock. Grover, Paine, and Weitzel listened in vain for any sounds of musketry on their left to indicate that either Augur or Sherman was at work, yet no sound came from that quarter save the steady pounding of the Union artillery. Now Weitzel believed that, by pursuing THE TWENTY-SEVENTH OF MAY. 175 his advance in what might be called skirmishing order and working his way gradually forward from the vantage-ground of Fort Babcock, he might gain, without great addition to his losses, already heavy, a foothold on the high ground held by the Confederate left ; yet of the character of the defences of this part of the line Weitzel knew but little, and of the nature of the ground behind these defences and the direction of the roads, neither he nor any one in the Union army knew any thing. The topography of the ground in sight afforded the only indication of what might be expected farther on, and this was confusing and diffi- cult to the last degree. Weitzel had, therefore, strong reason for believing that his difficulties, instead of ending with the capture of the Confederate works, might be only beginning. There was, of course, the chance that the garrison along the whole front might throw down their arms or abandon their defences the moment they should hnd themselves taken in reverse at an)' point, for it was known that they had no reserves to be reckoned with after breakino" throuo^h the line. Grover had been ordered to support either the riL^lit or the left, or to attempt to make his way into tlic works, as circum.stances might suggest. This last he 'nad tried, and failed to accomplish. On his left tlierc was no attack to support. When riding toward tlie right lie met W'eitzel, who, although commanding the right wing, was his junior in rank as well as in experience, Grover gave Weitzel the counsel of prudence, and Weitzel fell in with these views. The two commanners decided to ask fresh orders or to wait for an assault on the centre or left before renew- ing the attack on the right. All this time Augur stood ready, his division formed 1/6 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. and all in perfect order, waiting for the word from Banks, who made his headquarters close at hand, and who, in his turn, waited for the sound of Sher- man's musketry as the signal to put in Augur. With Sherman, Augur was in connection along the front, although not in easy communication. The precise nature of the causes that held Sherman back it is, even now, impossible to state, nor would it be easy, in the absence of the facts, to form a conjecture that should seem to be altogether probable and at the same time reasonable. The most plausible surmise seems to be that Sherman supposed he was to wait for the engineers to indicate the point of attack, and that he himself did not choose to go beyond what he conceived to be his orders to precipitate a movement whose propriety he doubted. Sherman was an officer of the old army, of v/ide experience, favorably known and highly esteemed throughout the service for his intelligence, his character, and his courage. He was known as one of the most distinguished of tlie chosen commanders of the few light batteries that the gov- ernment of the United States had thought itself able to afford in tlie days before the war. Before coming to Louisiana he had commanded a department, and in that capacity had carried to a successful conclusion the brilliant operations that gave Hilton Head and Port Royal to the forces of the Union. Neither in liis previous history nor in his conduct in the present exigency was there any thing to his personal discredit as a man or as a soldier. The fact remains, however, account for it how we may, that when about noon, greatly disturbed by the check on the right, and still more by the silence on the left. Banks himself rode almost unattended to Sherman's headquarters, he THE TWENTY-SEVENTH OF MA Y. 177 found Sherman at luncheon in his tent, surrounded by his staff, while in front the division lay idly under arms, without orders. Hot words passed, the precise nature of which has not been recorded, and Banks returned to his headquarters determined to replace Sherman by the chief-of-staff of the department. The roads had not yet been opened, and it was half-past one before these orders could be given. Andrews rode directly to the left, accompanied by but a single aide-de-camp, Lieutenant Fiske. When he came on the ground he found Sherman's division deployed, and Sherman himself on horseback at the head of his HKMi. rrad)- to lead them forward. Then Andrews, with great. {)ropriety, deferred the delivery of the orders placing him in command, and, after a few words. .It a ({uartcr past two Sherman moved to the assault. Andrews remained to witness the operation. Xk i.'i- Mil move-d forward on the riglit in column of r'::i:ii.iiis. The 14th Maine, deployed as skir- mish'-! ., cox-ered his front, followed by the 24th Main.-. i;;ih Xew York, and 165th New York in bn( . .\\u-\- . Mi'.Tging from the woods, Nickerson's n.-lii il.nik T-,-..i(-a on the road that runs past Slaugh- ^'''■- h..u ,,-. n<-:ir the position of battery 16. Dow ''..i-ni.-d the left of the division and of the army lb- a.ivanccd at the same time as Nickerson. and iM !il.<- crder. his right resting near the position of bat!. IN 1 ; :uid his left near Gibbons's house, marked ''^^ tl"- p'-ltinn of battery i S. The 6th Michigan led ^^^'- '""'■^;-'<'<-. followed by the 15th New Hanipshire, 26ih C\,nn.-cticut, and i2Sth New York. In the interval between the two brigades rode Sherman, snrrounded by his whole stafT and followed by his escort. 178 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. No sooner had the line emerged from among the trees than the Confederates opened upon every part of it, as it came in sight, a galling fire of musketry and artillery. At first the troops moved forward steadily and at a good pace, but as they drew nearer to the enemy and the musketry fire grew hotter, their prog- ress was delayed and their formation somewhat broken by four successive and parallel lines of fence that had to be thrown down and crossed. Once clear of the young corn, they found themselves entangled with the abatis that covered and protected the imme- diate front of the Confederate works on this part of the line. This had been set on fire by the exploding shells, and the smoke and flame now added to the difficulty of the movement. Here the men suffered greatly, many being shot down in the act of climbing the great trunks of the fallen trees, and many more having their clothing reduced to tatters and almost torn from their bodies in the attempt to force their way through the entangled branches. The impetus was soon lost, the men lay down or sought cover ; numbers of Dow's men made their way to the grove in their rear and into the gulley on their left ; of Nickerson's, many drifted singly and in groups into the ravine on their right. Long before this, indeed within a few minutes after the line first marched out from the wood, Sherman had fallen from his horse, severely wounded in the leg ; imder the vigorous fire concentrated upon this large group of horsemen in plain sight of the Con- federates and in easy range both of the artillery and musketry, two of his staff officers had shared the same fate. This would have brought Dow to the command of tlic division ; but nearl)' at the same instant Dow THE TWENTY- SEVENTH OF MA V. 179 himself was wounded and went to the rear, and so the command fell to Nickerson, who was with his brigade, and, in the confusion of the moment, was not notified. Thus, for some interval, there was no one to give orders for fresh dispositions among the regiments. Many officers had fallen ; the 128th New York had lost its colonel, Cowles ; the 165th New York, at last holding the front of Nickerson's line, had lost two successive commanders, Abel Smith and Carr, both wounded, the former mortally, while stand- ing by the colors. To retire was now only less diffi- cult than to advance. Nickerson's men, lying down, held their ground until after dark; but Dow's, beino- nearer the cover of the woods, fell back to their first position. Andrews now took command of the division, in virtue of the written orders of the commanding gen- eral, and prepared to obey whatever fresh instructions he iniglit receive. None came ; there was, indeed, nothing to be done but to withdraw and to restore order. As soon as Banks heard the rattle of the musketry on the left, and saw from the smoke of the Confed- erate guns that Sherman was engaged, he ordered Augur forward. Augur, as has been said, had been ready and waiting all day. His arrangements were to make the attack with Chapin's brigade, deployed across the Plains Store road, and to support it with Dudley's, held in reserve under cover of one of tlie high and thick hedges of the Osage orange that crossed and divided the fields on the right of the road. Chapin's front was covered by the skirmishers of the 2 I St Maine ; immediately in their rear were to march the storming column of two hundred volunteers, i8o THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. under Lieutenant-Colonel O'Brien, of the 48th Mas- sachusetts. The stormers rested and waited for the word in the point of the wood on the left of the Plains Store road, nearly opposite the position of batter)' 13. Half their number carried cotton bags and fascines to fill the ditch. On the right of the road the 11 6th New York was deployed ; on its left the 49th Massachusetts, closely supported by the 48th Massachusetts, the 2d Louisiana, of Dudley's brigade, and the reserve of the 21st Maine. O'Brien shook hands with the officer who brought him the last order, and, turning to his men, who were lying or sitting near by, some on their cotton bags, others on the ground, said in the coolest and most business-like manner : " Pick up your bundles, and come on ! " The movement of the stormers was the signal for tlie whole line. A truly magnificent sight was the advance of these battalions, with their colors flying and borne sturdil)- toward the front ; yet not for long. Hard!)' had the movement begun when the whole force— officers, men. colors, stormers, and all, — found themselves inextricably entangled in the dense abatis under a fierce and continuous discharo-e o of musketry and a withering cross-fire of artillery. Besides the field-pieces bearing directly down the road, two 24-pounders poured upon their fiank a storm of missiles of all sorts, with fragments of rail- way bars and broken chains for grape, and rusty nails and the rakings of the scrap-heap for canister. No part of the column ever passed beyond the abatis, nor was it even possible to extricate the troops in any order without greatly adding to the list of casualties, already of a fearful length. Banks was all for putting Dudley over the open ground directly in his front. THE TWENTY- SEVENTH OF MAY. i8i but, before any thing could be done, came the bad news from the left, and at last it was clear to the most per- sistent that the day was miserably lost. When, after nightfall, the division commanders reported at head- quarters, among the wounded under the great trees, it was known that the result was even worse than the first accounts. The attempt had failed without inflicting serious loss upon the enemy, save in ammunition expended, yet at a fearful cost to the Union army. When the list came to be made up, it was found that 15 officers and 278 men had been killed, 90 of^cers and 1,455 niei^ wounded, 2 of^cers and 155 men missing, making the total killed 293, total wounded 1,545. total missing 157, and an aggregate of 1,995. Of the missing, many were unquestionably dead. Worse than all, if possible, the confidence that but a few hours before had run so high, was rudely shaken. It was long indeed before the men felt the same faith in themselves, and it is but the plain truth to say tliat their reliance on the department com- mander never quite returned. The heavy loss in killed and wounded taxed to the utmost the skill and untiring exertions of the sur- geons, who soon found their preparations and supplies exceeded by the unlooked-for demand upon them. All night long on that 27th of May the stretcher- bearers were engaged in removing the wounded to the field-hospitals in the rear. These were soon filled to overflowing, and many rested under the shelter of the trees. Hither, too, came large numbers of men not too badly hurt to be able to walk, and to all the tired troops the whole night was rendered dis- mal to the last degree by the groans of their suffering 1 82 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. comrades mingled everywhere, the wounded with the well, the dying with the dead. Among the killed were : Colonel Edward P. Chapin, of the 116th New York; Colonel David S. Cowles, of the 128th New York; Lieutenant-Colonel William L. Rodman, of the 38th Massachusetts; Lieutenant- Colonel James O'Brien, of the 48th Massachusetts; Captain John B. Hubbard, Assistant Adjutant-Gen- eral, of Weitzel's brigade; Lieutenant Ladislas A. Wrotnowski, Topographical Engineer on Weitzel's staff. Lieutenant-Colonels Oliver W. Lull, of the 8th New Hampshire, and Abel Smith, Jr., of the 165th New York, were mortally wounded. The long list of the wounded included Brigadier-General Thomas W. Sherman, Brigadier-General Neal Dow, Colonel Richard E. Holcomb, of the ist Louisiana; Colonel Thomas S. Clark, of the 6th Michigan ; Colonel Will- iam F. Bartlett, of the 49th Massachusetts ; Major Gouverneur Carr, of the 165th New York. Farragut's ships and mortar-boats, which had been harassing the garrison at intervals, day and night, for more than ten days, joined hotly in the bombard- ment, but ceased firing, by arrangement, as soon as the land batteries slackened. The fire of the fleet, especially that of the mortars, was very annoying to the garrison, especially at first, yet the actual casual- ties were not great. The Confederate losses during the assault are not known. In Beall's brigade all the losses up to the 1st of June numbered 68 killed, 194 wounded, and 96 missing; together, 35S ; most of these must have been incurred on the 27th of May. The Confederate artillery was soon so completely overpowered, that it became nearly useless, save when the Union guns were masked I^v the advance of assaultine columns. THE TWENTY. SEVENTH OF MA V. 183 Three 24-pounders were dismounted, and of these one was completely disabled. With the result of this day the last hope of a junc- tion between the armies of Banks and Grant van- ished. It may therefore be convenient to retrace our steps a little in order to note the closing incidents of this strange chapter of well-laid plans by fortune brought to naught. Dwight returned from his visit to Grant on the 22d of May, and reported to Banks in person at his headquarters with Grover on Thompson's Creek. In his account of what had taken place, Dwight con- firmed the idea Banks had already derived from the despatch that Dwight had sent from Grand Gulf on the 1 6th, before he had seen Grant. Grant would send 5,000 men, Dwight reported, but Banks was not to wait for them. Practically this had no effect whatever upon the campaign, and how little impression it made upon the mind of Grant himself may be seen from his description, written in 1884, of his interview with Dwight. It was the morning of the 17th of May, and Grant's troops were standing on the eastern bank of the Big Black ready to force the passage of the river : "While the troops were standing as here described, an officer from I5anks's staff came up and presented me with a letter from General Hallcck, dated the nth of May. It had been sent by way of Xcw Orleans to Banks to forward to me. He ordered me to return to Grand Gulf and to co-operate from there with Banks against Port Hudson, and then to return with our com- bined forces to besiege Vicksburg. I told the officer that the order came too late and that Halleck would not give it then if he knew our position. The bearer of the despatch insisted that I ought to obey the order, and was giving arguments to support his position when I heard great cheering to the right of our line, and looking in that direction, saw Lawler, in his shirt-sleeves, loading a charge upon the enemy. I immediately mounted my 1 84 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. horse and rode in the direction of the charge, and saw no more of the officer who delivered the despatch, I think not even to this day." ' Here two mistakes are perhaps worth noting as curious rather than important : Dwight was not a member of Banks's staff, and the letter from Halleck, dated the i ith of May, which General Grant strangely supposed to have come by way of Nev/ Orleans, was, in fact, Halleck's telegram of that date, sent by way of Memphis, which Dwight had picked up as he passed through Grand Gulf, after Grant had cut his communications. Dwight's account may have taken color from his hopes, yet the course of events gives some reason to think he may have had warrant for his belief. On the 19th of May Grant's first assault of Vicks- burg was repulsed with a loss of 942. Three days later he delivered his second assault, which likewise failed, at a cost of 3,199 killed, wounded, and missing. This drove him to the siege and put him in need of more troops ; yet when, on the 25th of May, he sat down to write to liinks, it was with the purpose of offering to send down a force of 8,000 or 10,000 men if Banks could now provide the means of trans- port. But even while Grant wrote, word came that Johnston was gathering in liis rear ; and so the whole thing was once more given up, and instead, once again he called on Banks for help ; and this time he sent down two large steamers, the Foj-csf Oiicoi and .^fod- o-ator, to fetch the men. But Banks had nov/ no men to spare ; he too was cast for a siege ; he could only echo the entreaty and send back the steamboats empty as they came. So the affair ended.

## fourteenth-of-june

When the hour was up the cannonade ended as suddenly as it began, and profound silence followed close on the intolerable din. Then Banks sent a flag of truce summoning the garrison to surrender in these words : " Respect for the usages of war and a desire to avoid unnecessary sacrifice of life, impose on me the necessity of formally demanding the surrender of the garrison at Port Hudson. I am not unconscious, in making this demand, that the garrison is capable of continuing a vigorous and gallant defence. The events that have transpired during the pending in- vestment exhibit in the commander and garrison a spirit of constancy and courage that, in a different cause, would be universally regarded as heroism. But I know the extremities to which they are reduced. . . . I desire to avoid unnecessary slaughter, and I therefore demand the immediate surrender of the 194 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. garrison, subject to such conditions only as are im- posed by the usages of civiHzed warfare." To this Gardner repHed : " My duty requires me to defend this position, and therefore I decHne to surrender." In the evening the generals of division met in council at headquarters. In anticipation of what was to come, Dudley had already been ordered to send the 50th Massachusetts, and Charles J. Paine the 48th Massachusetts, to Dwight ; and Dudley himself, with the i6ist and 174th New York, was to report to Grover. This left under Augur's immediate com- mand only five regiments of his division, namely, one, the 30th Massachusetts, of Dudley's brigade, and four of C. J. Paine's. Shortly before midnight a general assault was ordered for the following morning At a quarter before three Augur was to open a heavy fire of artillery on his front, following it up lialf an hour later by a feigned attack of skirmishers. Dwight was to take two regiments, and, with a pair of suborned deserters for guides, was to try to find an entrance on tlic extreme left of the works near the river. lUit the main attack was to be made by Grover on the priest- ca[x Its position is shown on the map at X\'\ and XIW, and the approach was to be from the cover of the winding ravine, near the second position of Duryea's battery, at No. 12. The artillery cross-tire at this point was to begin at three o'clock, and was to cease at a signal from Grover. At half-past three the skir- mishers were to attack. The general formation of each of the two columns of attack had been settled in orders issued from headquarters on the morning of the i ith. Each column, assumed to consist of about 2,000 men, was to be preceded and covered by 300 skirmishers: immediately behind the skirmishers were to be sevent\' THE FOURTEENTH OF JUNE. 195 pioneers, carrying thirty-five axes, eighteen shovels, ten pickaxes, two handsaws, and two hatchets ; next was to come the forlorn hope, or storming party, of 300 men, each carrying a bag stuffed with cotton ; fol- lowing the stormers, thirty-four men were to carry the balks and chesses to form a bridge over the ditch, in order to facilitate the passage of the artillery, as well as of the men. The main assaulting column was to follow, marching in lines-of-battle, as far as the nature of the ground wouldx permit, which, as it happened, was not far. The field-artillery was to go with the assaulting column, each battery having its own pio- neers. To the cavalry, meanwhile, was assigned the task of picketing and protecting the rear, as well as of holding the telegraph road leading out of Port Hud- son toward Bayou Sara, by which it was thought the garrison might attempt to escape, on finding their lines broken through, or even to avoid the blow. As was the uniform custom during the siege, all watches at division and brigade headquarters were set at nine o'clock, by a telegraphic signal, to agree with the adjutant-general's watch. These final orders for the assault bear the hour of 11.30 P.M. This was in fact the moment at which the earliest copies were sent out by the aides-de-camp, held in readiness to carry them. There were seven hundred and fifty words to be written, and eleven o'clock had already passed when the council listened to the reading of the drafts and broke up. From the lateness of the hour, as well as from the distance and the darkness of the night, it resulted that one o'clock came before the last orders were in the hands of the troops that were to execute tliem. Many arrangements had still to be carried out and many of 196 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. the detachments had still to be moved over long dis- tances and by obscure ways to the positions assigned to them. In some instances all that was left of the night was thus occupied, and it was broad daylight before every thing was ready. A dense fog prevailed in the early morning of Sunday, the 14th of June, strangely veiling, while it lasted, even the sound of the big guns, so that in places it was unheard a hundred yards in the rear. Punctually at the hour fixed the cannonade opened. It was an hour later, that is to say, about four o'clock, when the first attack was launched. For the chief assault Grover had selected Paine's division and had placed the main body of his own division with Weitzel's brigade, in close support. Paine determined to lead the attack himself. Across his front as skirmishers he deployed the 4th Wiscon- sin, now again dismounted, and the 8th New Hamp- shire. The 4th Massachusetts was told off to follow the skirmishers with improvised hand-grenades made of 6-pounder shells. Ne.xt the 38th Massachusetts and the 53d Massachusetts were formed in line of battle. At the head of the infantry column the 31st Massa- chusetts, likewise deployed, carried cotton bags, to fill the ditch. The rest of Gooding's brigade fol- lowed, next came Fearing's, then Ingraham's under Ferris. In rear of the column was posted the artil- lery under Nims. At a point on the crest of the ridge, ninety yards distant from the left face of the priest- cap, Paine's advance was checked. Then Paine, who had previously gone along the front of every regiment, addressing to each a few words of en- couragement and of preparation for the work, passed afoot from the head of the column to the front of the THE FOURTEENTH OF JUNE. 197 skirmish line, and exerting to the full his sonorous voice, gave the order to the column to go on. At the word the men sprang forward, but almost as they did so, the Confederates behind the parapet in their front, with fairly level aim and at point-blank range, poured upon the head of the column a deadly volley. Many fell at this first discharge ; among them, unfortunately, the gallant Paine himself, hi^ thigh crushed by a rifle-ball. Some of the men of the 4th Wisconsin, of the 8th New Hampshire, and of the 38th Massachusetts gained the ditch, and a few even climbed the parapet, but of these nearly all were made prisoners. The rear of the column fell back to the cover of the hill, while all those who had -ain<:cl the crest were forced to lie there, exposed to a pitiless fire of sharp-shooters and the scarcely more enchirable rays of the burnincr sun of Louisiani, until ni,-ht came and brought relief. In this unfortunate situation the sufferings of the wounded became so unbearable, and appealed so powerfully to the sym- pathy of their comrades, that many lives were risked and some lost in the attempt to alleviate the thirst, at least, of these unfortunates. Two men, quite of tlieir own accord, took a stretcher and tried to reach the point where Paine lay, but the attempt was un- successful, and cost both of them their lives. These heroes were E. P. Woods, of Company E of the 8th New Hampshire, and John Williams, of Company D, 31st Massachusetts. Not lessnobly, Patrick H. Cohen' a private soldier of the 133d New York, himself Ivini^r wounded on the crest, cut a canteen from the body o^f a dead comrade and by lengthening the strap suc- ceeded in tossing it within reach of his commander • this probably preserved Paine's life, for unquestion- 198 . THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. ably many of the more seriously hurt perished from the heat and from thirst on that fatal day. It was about seven o'clock, and the fog had lifted, when Weitzel advanced to the attack on the right face of the priest-cap. The 12th Connecticut and the 75th New York of his own brigade were deployed to the left and right as skirmishers to cover the head of the column. Two regiments of Morgan's brigade, loosely deployed, followed the skirmishers ; in front the 91st New York, with hand-grenades, and next the 24th Connecticut, every man carrying two cotton bags weighing thirty pounds each. In immediate support came the remainder of Weitzel's brigade in column of regiments, in the order of the 8th Vermont, 114th New York, and i6oth New York, followed by the main body of Morgan's brigade. Birge was in close support and Kimball in reserv^e. Finally, in the rear, as in Paine's formation, was massed the artillery of the division. Toward the north face of the priest-cap the only approach was by the irregular, but for some distance nearly parallel, gorges cut out from the soft clay of the bluffs by Sandy Creek and one of its many arms. The course of these streams being toward the Con- federate works, the hollows grew deeper and the banks steeper at every step. At most the creeks were but two hundred yards apart, and the ridge that separated them gave barely standing room. Within a few feet of the breastworks the smaller stream and its ravine turned sharpl\- toward the north and served as a formidable ditch until they united with the main stream and ravine below the bastion. This larger ravine near its outlet and the natural ditch throughout its length were mercilessly sw^ept by the hre of the THE FOURTEENTH OF JUNE. 199 bastion on the right, the breastworks in front, and the priest-cap on the left. The smaller ravine led toward the south to the crest from which Palne's men had recoiled, where their wounded and their dead lay thick, and behind which the survivors were striving to restore the broken formations. Weitzel therefore chose the main ravine. Bearing to the right from the Jackson road, the men moved by the flank and cautiously, availing themselves of every advantage afforded by the timber or the irregu- larities of the ground, until they gained the crest of the ridge at points varying from twenty to fifty yards from tlie works near the north face of the priest-cap. In advancing to this position the column came under fire immediately on filing out of the ravine and the wood in front of the position of battery No. 9. Then, in sucli order as they happened to be, they went for- ward with a rush and a cheer, but beyond the crest inelicatcd few men ever got. From this position It was impossible either to advance or to retire until night came. At the appointed hour Dwight sent the 6th Michi- gan, under Lieutenant-Colonel Bacon, and the 14th -Maine, to the extreme left to make an attempt In that quarter, the arrangements for which have been already described ; but either DwIght gave his orders too late, or the column mistook the path, or else the difficul- ties were really greater than they had been thought beforehand or than they afterward seemed, for noth- ing came of it. Then recahing this detachment to the Mount Pleasant road, Dwight tried to advance in that direction. The 14th Maine was sent back to Its brigade and Clark deployed his own regiment, the 6th Michigan, as skirmishers, supported by the 128th 200 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. New York, now commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel James Smith. The 15th New Hampshire followed and the 26th Connecticut, under Lieutenant-Colonel Joseph Selden, brought up the rear. These two regiments went forward in column of companies on the main road, but as the Confederates immediately opened a heavy artillery fire upon the head of the column, they had to be deployed. However, the ground, becoming rapidly narrower, did not long permit of an advance in this order, so that it soon became necessary to ploy once more into column. About 350 yards from the outer works the Mount Pleasant road enters and crosses a deep ravine by a bridge, then destroyed. The hollow was completely choked with felled timber, through which, under the heavy fire of musketry and artillery, it was impossible to pass ; so here the brigade stayed till night enabled it to retire. Nickcrson's brigade supported the move- ment of Clark's, but without becoming seriously en- gaged. Thus ended Dwight's movement. It can hardly be described as an assault, as an attack, or even as a serious attempt to accomplish any valuable result ; vet indirectly it was the means of eainin^'- and at a small cost, the greatest, if not the only real, advantage achieved that day, for it gave Dwight possession of the rough hill, the true value of which was then for the first time perceived, and on the commanding position of its northern slope was pres- ently mounted the powerful array of siege artillery that overlooked and controlled the land and water batteries on the lower fiank of the Confederate defences. Of Augur's operations in the centre, it is enough to say that the feigned attack assigned to this portion THE FOURTEENTH OF JUNE. 201 of the line was made briskly and in good order at the appointed time, without great loss. The result of the day may be summed up as a bloody repulse ; beholding the death and maiming of so many of the bravest and best of the officers and men, the repulse may be even termed a disaster. In the whole service of the Nineteenth Army Corps darkness never shut in upon a gloomier field. Men went about their work in a silence stronger than words. On this day 21 officers and 182 men were killed, 72 officers and 1,245 men were wounded, 6 officers and 180 men missing ; besides these, 13 were reported as killed, 84 as wounded, and 2 as missing without dis- tinguishing between officers and men, thus making a total of 216 killed, 1,401 wounded, 188 missing — in all, 1 ,805.

## siege-strength-and-conditions

The end of June was now drawing near, and already the losses of the besiegers in the month of constant fighting exceeded 4,000. At least as many more were sick in the hospitals, while the reinforcements from every quarter barely numbered 3,000. There were no longer any reserves to draw from ; the last man was up. The effective strength of all arms had at no time exceeded 17,000.^ Of these less than 12,000 can be regarded as available for any duty directly connected ' The figures here given do not agree with those of the monthly and tri- monthly returns for May and June. These returns are, however, simply the returns for March carried forward, owing to the impossibility of collecting and collating the reports of regiments, brigades, and divisions during active opera- tions. UNVEXED TO THE SEA. ' 217 with the siege, and now every day saw the command growing smaller in numbers, as the men fell under the fire of the sharp-shooter, or succumbed to the deadly climate, or gave out exhausted by incessant labor and privation. The heat became almost insupportable, even to those who from time to time found themselves so fortunate as to be able to snatch a few hours' rest in the dense shade of the splendid forest, until their tour of duty should come again in the trenches, where, under the June sun beating upon and baking all three surfaces, the parched clay became like a reverberating furnace. The still air was stifling, but the steam from the almost tropical showers was far worse. Merely in attempting to traverse a few yards of this burning zone many of the strongest men were sunstruck daily. The labor of the siege, extending over so wide a front, pressed so severely upon the numbers of the besieging army, always far too weak for such an undertaking in any climate at any season, above all in Louisiana in June, that the men were almost incessantly on duty, either in digging, as guards of the trenches, as sharp- shooters, or on outpost service ; and as the numbers available for duty grew smaller, and the physical strength of all that remained in the ranks daily wasted, the work fell the more heavily. When the end came at last the effective force, outside of the cavalry, hardly exceeded 8,000, while even of this small num- ber nearly every officer and man might well have gone on the sick-report had not pride and duty held him to his post. This will seem the less remarkable when it is re- membered that the garrison during the same period suffered in the same proportion, while from like causes less than a year before Breckenridge had, in a much 2i8 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. shorter time, lost the use of half his division. Butler's experience had been nearly as severe. To the suffering and labors that are inseparable from any operation in the nature of a siege were added insupportable torments, the least of which were vermin. As the summer days drew out and the heat grew more intense, the brooks dried up ; the creek lost itself in the pestilential swamp ; the wells and springs gave out ; the river fell, exposing to the almost tropical sun a wide margin of festering ooze. The mortality and the sickness were enormous. The animals suffered in their turn, the battery horses from want of exercise, the train horses and mules from over-work, and all from the excessive heat and insufficiency of proper forage. There was never enough hay ; the deficiency was partly eked out by making fodder of the standing corn, but this resource was quickly exhausted, and after the 3d of July, when Taylor sealed the river by planting his guns below Donaldsonville, all the animals went upon half or quarter rations of grain, with little hay or none.

## surrender

That evening; Gardner summoned his commanders to meet liim in council. Among them all there was but one thought — the end had come. Shortly after half-past twelve the notes of a bugle were heard on the Plains Store road sounding the sig- nal, " Cease firing." A few seconds later an ofificer with a small escort approached, bearing a lantern swung upon a long pole, with a white handkerchief tied be- neath it, to serve as a flag of truce. At the outpost of Charles J. Paine's brigade the fiag was halted and its purpose ascertained. This was announced to be the deliver)' of an important despatch from Gardner to Banks. Thus it was that a few minutes after one o'clock the hoofs of two horses were heard at the same instant at headquarters, yet each with a sound of its own that seemed in keeping with its story. One, a slow and measured trot, told of duty done and 228 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. stables near ; the other, quick and nervous, spoke of pressing news. Two officers dismounted ; the clang of their sabres was heard together ; together they made their way to the tent where the writer of these lines lay awake and listening. One was Captain Walker, with the fuse, the other was Lieutenant Or- ton S. Clark, of the ii6th New York, then attached to the staff of Charles J. Paine. The long envelope he handed in felt rough to the touch ; the light of a match showed its color a dull gray; every inch of it said, "Surrender," When opened it was found to contain a request for an official assurance as to the truth of the report that Vicksburg had surrendered. If true, Gardner asked for a cessation of hostilities with a view to consider terms. At a quarter-past one Banks replied, convey- ing an exact copy of so much of Grant's despatch as related the capitulation of Vicksburg. He told when and how the despatch had come, and wound up by regretting that he could not consent to a truce for the purpose indicated. In order to avoid all chance of needless excitement or disturbance, as well as of the premature publication of the news, the Adjutant- General carried this despatch himself, and, accom- panied by Lieutenant Clark, as well as, at his own request, by General Stone, rode first to Augur's head- quarters to acquaint him with the news and to borrow a bugler, and then to the outposts to meet the Con- federate flag of truce. A blast upon the bugle brought back the little party of horsemen, with the lantern swaying from the pole ; but it was nearly daylight before they again returned with Gardner's reply. Meanwhile, right and left word had been quietly passed to the pickets to cease firing. UN VEX ED TO THE SEA. In his second letter Gardner said : 229 " Having defended this position as long as I deem my duty- requires, I am willing to surrender to you, and will appoint a commission of three officers to meet a similar commission, ap- pointed by yourself, at nine o'clock this morning, for the purpose of agreeing upon and drawing up the terms of surrender, and for that purpose I ask a cessation of hostilities. Will you please designate a point outside of my breastworks where a meeting shall be held for this purpose ? " To this Banks answered at 4:30 a.m. : " I have designated Brigadier-General Charles P. Stone, Colo- nel Henry W. Birge, and Lieutenant-Colonel Richard b! Irwin as the ofllccrs to meet the commission appointed by you. They will meet your officers at the hour designated at a point near wJu-re the Hag of truce was received this morning. I will direct ih.U all active hostilities shall entirely cease on my part until further notice for the purpose stated." The division commanders, as well as the command- ers of the upper and lower fleets, were at once notified, and ;it six o'clock Captain Walker was sent to find Adnnral Farrag-ut, wherever he might be, and to de- liver to him despatches conveying the news of the surrender, outlining Banks's plans for moving against Taylor in La Fourche, and urging the Admiral to send all the light-draught gunboats at once to Berwick Bay. Banks meant to march Weitzel directly to the near- est landing, which was within the lines of Port Hud- son, as soon as the formal capitulation should be accomplished, and to send Grover after him as fast as steamboats could be found. This called for many arrangements ; the occupying force had also to be seen to ; and finally, it was necessary that the starving garrison should be fed. Colonel Irwin was therefore relieved, at his own request, from duty as one of the 230 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. commissioners, and Brigadier-General D wight was named in his stead. This drew an objection from Weitzel, who naturally felt that there were claims of service as well as of rank that might have been con- sidered before those of the temporary commander of the second division ; however, it was too late to make any further change, and when Banks offered to name Weitzel, whose protest had been not for himself but for his brigades, as the officer to receive Gardner's sword, the offer was declined. Among the officers of the navy, too, especially those of the higher grades, great cause of offense was felt that, after all their services in the siege, they were left unrepresented in the honors of the surrender. This feeling was natural enough ; yet before determining how far the com- plaints based on it were just, it is necessary to consider how important was ever}' hour, almost every moment, with reference to the operations against Taylor, while three and a half hours were required to make the journey between headquarters and the upper fleet, and four and a half hours to reach the lower fleet. Moreover, the Admiral had gone to New Orleans the evening before. At nine the commissioners met under the shade of the beautiful trees, nearly on the spot where O'Brien had rested among his men while waiting for the word on the 27th of May. On the Confederate side the commissioners were Colonel William R. Miles, com- manding the right wing of the garrison. Colonel I. G. W. Steedman, of the ist Alabama, commanding the left wing, and Lieutenant-Colonel Marshall J. Smith, Chief of Heavy Artillery. Among those thus brought together there was J more than one orentleman of marked conversational I UNVEXED TO THE SEA. 231 talent ; the day was pleasant, the shade grateful, and, to one side at least, the refreshment not less so ; and thus the time passed pleasantly until two o'clock, when the commissioners signed, with but a single change, the articles that had been drawn up for them and in readiness since six in the morning. The alteration was occasioned by the great and unexpected length to which the conference had been protracted. Five o'clock in the afternoon had been named as the time when the besiegers were to occupy the works ; this had to be changed to seven o'clock on the morn- of the 9th. The terms, which will be found in full in th<* Appendix, were those of an unconditional surren- der. G.-irdncr, who was in waiting conveniently near, at once ai)proveil the articles, and at half-past two they wrvv completed by the signature of Banks. A few inimit<-s later the; h^ng wagon-train, loaded with pros'isioiis. thai had been standing for hours in the IMairv-; Store road, was signalled to go forward. The cheers that welcomed the train, as it wound its \vay uj) til'- lon-'-untravelled road and through the disused sally-jxHt, were perhaps not so loud as those with which the besiegers had greeted the news from Vicks- burg, yet ihey were not less enthusiastic. From this moment the men of the two armies, and to some extent the officers, mingled freely. Andrews was designated to receive the surrender, and from each division two of the best regiments, with one from Weitzel's brigade, were told off to occupy the place. Punctually at seven o'clock on the morning of the 9th of July the column of occupation entered the sally-port on the Jackson road. At its head rode Andrews with his staff. Next, in the post of honor, 232 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. came the stormers with Birge at their head, then the 75th New York of Weitzel's brigade, followed by the 1 1 6th New York and the 2d Louisiana of Augur's division, the 12th Maine, and the 13th Connecticut of Grover's division, the 6th Michigan and the 14th Maine of Dwight's division, the 4th Wisconsin and the 8th New Hampshire of Paine's.^ With the col- umn was Duryea's battery. The 38th Massachusetts was at first designated for this coveted honor, but lost it through some necessary changes due to the in- tended movement down the river. Weitzel, with his own brigade under Thomas, on the way to the place of embarkation, closely followed the column and wit- nessed the ceremonies. These were simple and short. The Confederate troops were drawn up in line, Gardner at their head, every officer in his place. The right of the line rested on the edge of the open plain south of the railway . station ; the left extended toward the village. At the word " Ground arms " from their tried commander, followed by the command of execution from the bugles, every Confederate soldier bowed his head and laid his musket on the ground in token of submission, while Gardner himself tendered his sword to Andrews, who, in a few complimentary words, waived its acceptance. At the same instant the Stars and Bars, the colors of the Confederacy, were hauled down from the flagstaff, where they had so long waved defiance ; a detachment of sailors from the naval batteries sprang to the hal- yards and rapidly ran up the flag of the United States ; the guns of Duryea's batter}'^ saluted the colors ; the garrison filed ofT as prisoners of w^ar, and all was over. ' No record exists of these details, but the list here given is believed to be nearly correct. UN VEXED TO THE SEA. '2>Z The last echo of the salute to the colors had hardly- died away when Weitzel, at the head of the First Division, now for the first time united, marched off to the left, and began embarking on board the trans- ports to go against Taylor. With the place were taken 6,340 prisoners of war, of whom 405 were officers and 5,935 enlisted men. The men were paroled with the exact observance of all the forms prescribed by the cartel then in force ; yet the paroles were immediately declared void by the Confederate government, and the men were required to return to duty in the ranks. The officers, in accordance with the retaliatory orders of the period, had to be kept in captivity ; they were, however, given the choice of their place of confinement. About 211 elected to go to Memphis, and were ac- cordingly sent up the river a few days after the sur- render, the remainder were sent to New Orleans with instructions to Emory to keep them safely under guard in some commodious house or houses, to be selected by him, and to make them as comfortable as practicable.^ There were also captured 20 pieces of light artillery and 31 pieces of field artillery ; of these 12 heavy guns and 30 light guns were in compara- tively good order. The total losses of the Corps during the siege were 45 officers and 663 men killed, 191 officers and 3,145 men wounded, 12 officers and 307 men captured or missing ; in all, 4,363. Very few prisoners were taken by the Confederates, and little doubt remains ■ As evidence of the considerate manner in which these gentlemen were treated see the interesting article, " Plain Living on Johnson's Island," by Lieutenant Horace Carpenter, 4th Louisiana, printed in the Ceniu?y for March, 1891, page 706. 234 THE NINETEENTH ARMY CORPS. that a large proportion of those set down as captured or missing in reality perished. Of the Confederate losses no complete return was ever made. A partial return, without date, signed by the chief surgeon, shows 176 killed, 447 wounded, total 623. In this report the number of those that had died in the hospital is included among the wounded. Nor does this total include the losses at Plains Store, which, according to the surgeon's return, were 12 killed and 36 wounded, or, according to Colo- nel Miles's report, 8 killed, 23 wounded, 58 missing ; in all, 89. Major C. M. Jackson, who acted as assist- ant inspector-general under Gardner, and, according to his own account, came out through the lines of investment about an hour after the surrender, reported to Johnston that the total casualties during the siege were 200 killed, between 300 and 400 wounded, and 2CX:) died from sickness.
