# Official Records VI: Johnson K. Duncan report on Forts Jackson and Saint Philip, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a University of Illinois scan; not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, misprinted page numbers and footnote markers. Local headings are editorial. Bounded report passages only; inclosures printed within a selected range are part of that report. No maps or compiled returns selected unless named.

## title

THE WAR OF THE REBELLION; A COMPILATION OF THE OFFIOIA^L, feoorfs OF THE UNION AND CONFEDERATE ARMIES. PREPARED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE SECRETARY OF WAR, BY BYT. LIEUT. COL. ROBERT N. SCOTT, THIRD U. S. ARTILLERY, AND PUBLISHED PURSUANT TO ACT OF CONGRESS APPROVED JUNE 16, 1880. SERIES I— VOLUME VI. WASHINGTON: GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE, 1882.

## duncan-1862-04-30

No. 4. Report of Brig. Gen. Johnson K. Duncan^ C. 8. Army^ of the bombard- ment and surrender of Forts JacJcson and Saint Philip. New Orleans, La., April 30, 18G2. Major: I have the honor to submit the following report of the bom- bardment of Forts Jackson and Saint Philip, La., from Ai)ril 10 to 24 : About March 27 I was informed by Lieut. Col. E. Higgins, command- ing Forts Jackson and Saint Philip, composing a part of the coast defenses under my command, that the enemy’s fleet was crossing the bars and entering the Mississippi Eiver in force. In consequence I repaired at once to that post, to assume the general command of the threatened attack upon New Orleans, which I had always anticipated would be made from that quarter. Upon my arrival I found that Fort Jackson was suftering severely from transpiration and backwater, occasioned by the excessive rise in the river and the continued prevalence of strong easterly winds. Not- withstanding every effort which could be made the water kept daily increasing upon us, partly owing to the sinking of the entire site and to the natural lowness of the countrj^ around it, until the iiarade plain and casemates were very generally submerged to a depth of from 3 to 18 inches. It was with the utmost difiiculty, and only then by isolating the magazines and by pumiflng day and night, that the water could be kept out of them. As the officers and men were all obliged to live in these open and sub- merged casemates, they were greatly exposed to discomfort and sickness, as their clothing and feet were always wet. The most of their clothing and blankets, besides, were lost by the fire hereinafter mentioned. Fort Saint Philip, from the same causes, was in a similar condition, but to a lesser extent. No attention having been previously paid to the repeated requisitions for guns of heavy caliber for these forts, it became necessary, in their present condition, to bring in and mount and to build the platforms for the three 10-inch and three 8-inch columbiads, the rifled 42-pounder, and the five 10-inch sea-coast mortars recently obtained from Pensacola on the evacuation of that place, together with the two rifled 7-inch guns temporarily borrowed from the naval authorities in New Orleans. It was also tbund necessary to prepare the old water battery to the rear of and below Fort Jackson, which had never been comifleted, for the reception of a portion of these guns, as well as to construct mortar- Iiroof magazines an,d shell rooms within the same. In consequence also of the character of the expected attack by heavy mortars, it was deemed advisable to cover all the main magazines at both forts with sand bags to a considerable depth, to protect them against a vertical fire. 522 OPERATIONS IN W. FLA., S. ALA., S. MISS., AND LA. [Chap. XVL After great exertions, cheerfully made by both officers and men, and by working the garrisons by reliefs night and day, this work was all accomplished by April 13. INo sooner had the two rifled 7-iiich navy guns been placed in position, however, than orders arrived to dismount one of them immediately, and to send the same to the city at once, to be placed on board of the iron-clad steamer Louisiana. I strongly remon- strated against this removal by telegraph, but was informed, in reply, that the orders were imperative, and that the gun must be sent without fail. It was accordingly sent, but with great difficulty, owing to the overflow and the other causes stated. The garrisons of boffi forts were greatly fatigued and worn-out by these labors, performed as they were under x^ressure and within sight of the enemy and owing to the many discomforts and disadvantages we were laboring under in consequence of high water. In the mean time I had called upon the general commanding the depart- ment for two regiments, to be stationed at the quarantine buildings, (y miles above the forts, to act as a reserve force and to co-oiierate with the forts in case of a combined land and water attack. I also asked for Capt. W. G. Mullen’s company of scouts and sharpshooters, to be stationed in the woods below Fort Jackson, on the right bank of the river, for the purpose of i)icking off the officers and men from the enemy’s vessels when assuming their several xmsitious of attack. Cax)tain Mullen’s comx)any, of about 125 men, was sent down as requested, and stationed in part in the point of woods below Fort Jack- son, and the remainder on the Fort Saint Philixi side, oxiposite the raft obstructing the river. The Chalmette Regiment, consisting of about 500 men. Colonel Szy- manski commanding, was sent to the quarantine. A part of it was stationed there, and comx)any detachments were xilaced at the heads of the several canals leading from the river into the bays back of the same, to guard against a land force being thrown in launches above us. Four steamers of the river fleet x^iotected, and to a certain extent made shot-xiroof, with cotton bulkheads, and xirepared with iron prows, to act as rams, viz, the Warrior, Stonewall Jackson, Defiance, and Reso- lute, commanded by Cax)tains Stex^henson, Philips, McCoy, and Hooper, respectively, were sent down to report to and co operate with me. The steamers Governor Moore and General Quitman, as those before mentioned, and commanded by Capt. B. Kennon and A. Grant, were sent down in a like manner, to co-operate with the forts and ram such vessels of the enemy as might succeed iu xiassing. The naval authorities also sent down the (vonfederate States steam ram Manassas, Cjftitain [A. F.J Warley, C. S. Kavy, commanding. She was stationed a short distance above Fort Jackson, with her steam up . constantly, to act against the enemy as the occasion might offer. Subsequently, also, Cax^t. F. B. Renshaw, C. S. Navy, arrived, in com- mand of the Confederate States steamer Jackson. The raft of logs and chains which had formerly been placed across the river having proven a failure upon the rise iu the stream and con- sequent increase of the velocity of the drift-bearing current, a new ob- struction had been x)laced across the river, ox)X>osite Fort Jackson, by Lieut. Col. E. Higgins x>iior to his assumption of the command of the forts. This consisted ot a line of schooners anchored at intervals, with bows ux^ stream, and thoroughly chained together amidships, as well as stem and stern. The rigging, ratlins, and cables were left to trail astern of these schooners, as an additional imx^ediment, to tangle in the X)ropeLer wheels of the enemy. CnAr. XVI. 1 CAPTURE OF NEW ORLEANS. The schooner raft was seriously damaged by the wind-storin on April 10 and 11, which parted the cliains, scattered the schooners, and mate- rially affected its character and effectiveness as an obstruction. In addi- tion to the wind, the raft was also much damaged by allowing some of the fire barges to get loose and drift against it, through the carelessness of those having them in charge. A large number of these tire barges were tied to the banks above both forts, ready at all times to be towed into the current and against the enemy, for the double i)uri)ose of firing his ships and to light up the river by night to insure the accuracy of our fire. My instructions to the river fleet, under Captain Stephenson (see attached document A), were to lie in stream above the raft, Avith such boats as had stern guns, in order to assist the forts with their fire in case the enemy should attempt the passage, as well as to turn in and ram at all hazards all such vessels as might succeed in getting above the raft. He was also required to take entire control of the fire barges (see attached document B), to reconnoiter the enemy above the Head of the Passes, and to keep a watch boat below every night, near the point of woods, to signal the approach of the enemy. The accompanying diagram will illustrate all the points referred to in this report. The same instructions were given to Captains Kennon aiul Grant, and upon his arriA^al Captain lienshaw was duly informed of the ar- rangements made, in whicli he promised heartily to co-operate. While the enemy remained at the Head of the Passes, 22 J miles below the forts, and subsequently, when he came ui) to the Jump, or AVilder’s Bayou, the boats of the river fleet took turns in running dowm and watching his movements. Por a few nights, also, at this time one of them was kept below as a guard boat. We had telegraphic communi- cation, besides, down to within half a mile of the Jump, 9 miles below the forts, Avhich, together with scouts operating in the bays to the east and west of the riAW in skiffs and pirogues, kept- us duly posted meanwhile of the enemy’s movements below as far down as the South- Avest Pass. The enemj" was not idle in the interim. His larger vessels were worked OA^er the Southwest Bar after failing to make an entrance at Pass a rOutre, and the mortar fleet was brought up as far as the South- west Pilot Station, where the mortars Avere scaled and after Avard tested. Prom seven to thirteen steam sloops of war and gunboats Avere con- stantly kept at the Head of the Passes or at the Jumt), to coAmr his operations below and to prevent our observing his moA^ements by Avay OT the river. By gradual and regular approaches he carefully closed upon the forts day by day, and opened the attack as hereinafter de- tailed. April 9. — One of our reconn offering steamers was chased and fol- loAved up by two of the enemy’s gunboats as far as the point of woods below Port Jackson, but was soon forced to retire by a few shots from our batteries. This was his first reconnaissance, and our fire was not returned. Aj)ril 13. — Several of the hostile gunboats again came up to make observations. They would occasionally shoAV themselves singly or in pairs above the point of woods and exchange a few shots with the forts and then retire again behind the point. Our sharpshooters obtained a few shots on this occasion, but with very partial success, owing to the lowness of the country and the extreme rise in the riA^er. Many of the men were up to their waists in water, and in consequence sickness pre Availed among them and unfitted them for duty. The enemy spent 524 OPERATIOXS m W. FLA., S. ala., S. miss., and la. [Chap. XVI. tlie principal part of the day in firing grape and canister and in shelling the woods to drive them out. This was repeated the following day, the enemy not coming within range or sight ©f the forts, but confining him- self to shelling the woods below. The sharpshooters were all driven out by this second day’s firing. Our telegraphic communication below was also broken up, as the wires were removed and many of the posts ’ cut and torn down by the enemy. There being no other point above or below where the sharpshooters could profitably act in that capacity, and as many of them were unfit for duty from exposure, 1 deemed it advisable to dispense with their services and send them to the city, which was accordingly done. It being of the highest imx)ortance, however, to keep up (he tele- graphic connection below, Lieut. T. J. Eoyster, company of sappers and miners Twenty-second Eegiment Louisiana Volunteers, volunteered his services, with lo men of his company, to act as sharpshooters in liirogues, and cover the operator in repairing the line and re-establish- ing the connection with the forts above as well as to annoy the enemy. This also failed from the great difficulty of managing the pirogues effectively in the dense undergrowth of the swampy woods below, and the telegraph and the sharx)shooters had to be abandoned in conse- quence. April 15. — The enemy brought up his whole fleet, extending the same from the Head of the Passes to the i)Oint of woods below the forts. Orders were repeatedly given to Captain Stephenson, of the river fleet, to cause the fire barges to be sent down nightly upon the enemy* but every attempt seemed to prove a perfect abortion, the barges being cut adrift too soon, so that they drifted against the banks directly under the forts, firing our wharves and lighting us up, but obscuring the posi- tion of the enemy. In consequence, I turned the control of them, as well as the boats employed to tow them into the stream, over to Cap- tain Eenshaw, the senior naval officer present. I also directed Captains Kennon and Grant to report to him tor orders, as I found great diffi- culty in communicating with or controlling the vessels afloat, and directed Captain Stephenson, with his four boats, t(F co-operate with Captain Eenshaw in every possible way. These boats of the river fleet, it seemed, could not be turned over directly to the immediate command of naval officers, owing to certain conditions imijosed by the Eavy Department. April 10. — From 7.30 a. m. the enemy’s gunboats came around the lioint repeatedly for observation, but were invariably forced to retire by our fire. In the mean time he was locating the position of the mor- tar flotilla, composed of twenty-one schooners, each mounting one 13- inch mortar and other guns, close against the bank on the Fort Jackson side and behind the point of woods. At 1.15 II. m. the enemy ran out a gunboat and fired upon the fort, under the cover of which two of the mortar-boats were brought out into, the stream. These boats opened fire upon Fort Jackson at 5 p. m., which was continued for an hour and a half, the enemy under our fire retiring behind the point of woods. April 17. — One fire barge sent down successfully against the enemy at 4 a. m., which drifted in among his vessels and was fired upon by them, creating considerable movement and perturbation. During the day Captains Eenshaw, Beverly Kennon, Grant, Ste- phenson, and Hooper iiassed in turns with their boats below the raft, Chap. XVI.] CAPTURE OF NEW ORLEANS. 525 now very inucb disconnected and scattered^ and exchanged a few shots with the hostile gunboats aud mortar boats. Two more abortive attempts were made to send down fire barges against the enemy during the night. A][)ril 18. — At 9 a. m. the enemy opened upon Fort Jackson with Ids entire mortar fleet of twenty-one vessels and with rifled guns from Ids gunboats. Fifteen of them were concealed behind the point of woods and the other six hauled out in the stream at an angle with them (see diagram), just at the extreme range of our heaviest guns. Our fire disabled one gunboat and one mortar boat, causing those in the stream to retire behind the cover of the woods. Generally our shots fell short for lack of elevation and in consequence of the inferiority of our powder compared to that of the enemy. Even our nearest gun, a 10-inch sea-coast mortar, would not reach his boats with the heaviest charges. The enemy ceased firing at 7 p. m., having fired this day 2,997 mortar shells. The quarters in the bastions were fired and burned down early in the day, as well as all the quarters immediately without the fort. TTie cit- adel was set on fire and extinguished several times during the first part of the day, but later it became impossible to put out the flames, so that when the enemy ceased firing it was one burning mas's, greatly endan- gering the magazines, w^hich at one time were reported to be on fire. Many of the men and most of the officers lost their bedding and cloth- ing by these fires, which greatly added to the discomforts of the over- flow. The mortar fire was accurate and terrible, many of the shells fall- ing everywhere within the fort and disabling some of our best guns. I endeavored to get the naval forces to carry down fire barges against the enemy so as to disperse them, but they were all let go above the raft, and with such a lack of judgment that they only lodged under the forts and did not reach the enemy. (See attached document C.) None of the boats acted as a guard boat below the raft at night, so that, in consequence, the enemy sent up two launches to examine the character of the raft obstructing the river. April 19. — The mortar fleet again opened at G a. m. and the fire was constantly kept up throughout the day. Gunboats constantly came above the point during the day to engage the forts, but were as con- stantly driven back by our fire. One of them we crippled, which was towed behind the point of woods. The enemy’s fire was excellent, a large proportion of his shells falling within Fort Jackson. The terre- plein, parade plain, parapets, and iflatforras were very much cut u]), as well as much damage done to the casemates. The magazines were con- siderably threatened, and one shell passed through into the casemate containing fixed ammunition. One 10-inch and one 8-inch colurabiad, one 82 and one 24 i)ounder, and one 10-inch siege-mortar were disabled in the main work, also two rifled 32-pounders in the water battery. Bombardment continued very regularly and accurately all night. Fail- ures again were made in sending down fire barges. April 20 — Some rain in the morning. Bombardment constant throughout the day, with occasional shots from the gunboats around the point. Wind very high. No fire barges sent down to light up the river or distract the attention of the enemy at night. In consequence, between 11 and 12 p. m., under cover of "the heaviest shelling during the bombardment thus far, one of the enemy’s gunboats came up in the darkness aud attempted to cut the chains of the raft and drag ofl* the schooners. A heavy fire was opened ujion her, which caused her to 526 OPERATIONS IN ^y. FLA., S. ALA., S. MISS., AND LA. [Chap. XVT. retire, but not until sbe bad partially accomplisbed ber purpose. The raft after this could not be regarded as an obstruction. Tbe tire con- tinued uninterruptedly all nigbt. April 21. — Firing continued all day and nigbt without interruption. Several guns were disabled. Disabled guns were repaired as far as practicable as often as accidents happened to them or tbeir platforms. Fort Jackson by this time was in need of extensive repairs almost every- where, and it was with extreme pleasure that we learned of the arrivml during the night of the iron-clad steamer Louisiana, under the cover of whose heavy guns we expected to make the necessary repairs. April 22. — By the direction of the major-general commanding the de- partment everything afloat, including the tow-boats and the entire con- trol of the fire barges, was turned over to Capt. John K. Mitchell, 0. S. Navy, commanding the Confederate States naval forces Lower Missis- sippi River. I also gave Captain Mitchell 150 of our best men from Forts Jackson and Saint Philip, under Lieutenants Dixon and Gandy and Captain Ryan, to serve a portion of the guns of the Louisiana and to act as sharpshooters on the same vessel. In an interview with Captain Mitchell, on the morning of this date, I learned that the motive power of the Louisiana was not likely to be com- pleted within any reasonable time, and that in consequence it was not within the range of probabilities that she could be regarded as an aggressiv^e steamer or that sbe could be brought into the pending action in that character. As an iron-clad invulnerable floating battery, with sixteen guns of the heaviest caliber, however, she was then as complete as she would ever be. Fort Jackson had already undergone and was still subjected to a ter- rible fire of 13-iuch mortar shells, which it was necessary to relieve at once to prevent the disabling of all the best guns at that fort, and, although Fort Saint Philip partially opened out the point of woods con- cealing tbe enemy and gallantly attempted to dislodge bim or draw his fire, be nevertheless doggedly persisted in his one main object of bat- tering Fort Jackson. Under these circumstances I considered that the Louisiana could only be regarded as a battery, and that her best possi- ble i)osition would be below the raft, close in on the Fort Saint Phili]) shore, where ber fire could dislodge the mortar boats from behind tbe point of woods and give sufficient respite to Fort Jackson to repair i)i exienso. This position (X on the accompanying diagram) would give us three direct cross-fires upon the enemy’s approaches and at the same time insure the Louisiana from a direct assault, as she would be imme- diately under the guns of both forts. Accordingly, I earnestly and strongly urged these views upon Captain Mitchell in a letter of this date (copy lost), but without avail, as will be seen by bis reply, attached as document D. Being so deeply impressed myself with tbe importance of this position for tbe Louisiana and of tbe necessity of prompt action in order to in- sure the success of tbe impending struggle, I again urged this subject upon Captain Mitchell, during tbe latter part of tbe same day, as abso- lutely indispensable and imperative to tbe safety of New Orleans and to tbe control of tbe Lower Alississippi. iMy efforts were inefiectual to get bim to move tbe boat from ber original position above the forts. His reply is attached as document E, in which he is sustained by all tbe naval officers present having tbe command of vessels. I also addressed him two other notes through the day — one in regard to sending fire barges against the enemy and the other relative to keep- ing a A'igiiaut lookout from all bis vessels, and asking for co-operation Chap. XYI.] CAPTURE OF NEW ORLEANS. sboiilfl the enemy attempt to pass during the night. (See attached doc- ument F.) Bombardment continued tlironghout theday and night, being at times very heavy. Baring the day our tire was principally contined to shell- ing the point of woods from both forts, and apparently with good results, as the mortar tire was slackened towards evening. The casemates were very much cut up by the enemy’s tire, which was increased at night. There was little or no success in sending down tire barges as usual, owing in part to the condition of the tow-boats Mosher, Music, and Belle Algerine, in charge of the same, exi)lained by attached document G. This does not excuse the neglect, however, as there were six boats of the river fleet available for this service, independent of those alluded to, and tire barges were i)lentiful. April 23 — The day broke warm, clear, and cloudless, hlo immediate relief being looked for from our fleet, the entire command was turned out to repair damages under a very heavy tire of the enemy. The bombardmentcoutinued without intermission throughout the day, but slackened oft* about 12 m., at which hour there was every indication of an exhaustion on the part of the moriar flotilla 5 hence it became evident that the tactics of the enemy would necessarily be changed into an attack with broadsides by his larger vessels. In consequence, these views were laid before Captain Mitchell, and he was again urged to ])lace the Louisiana at the point before mentioned, below the raft and ]iear the Fort ^Saiut Philip bank of the river, to meet the emergency. (See attached document H.) Captain Mitchell’s reply is attached, in documents E, I, J, andK, wherein he positively declines again to assume the only position which oft‘ered ns every possible chance of success, and Captains [Chas. F.] McIntosh, [Thomas B.] Huger, and Warley sustain Captain Mitchell in his views of the case. Just before sundown, under a very heavy mortar fire, the enemy sent up a small boat, and a series of white flags were planted on the Fort Saint Philip bank of the river, commencing about 350 yards above the lone tree ui)on that shore. (See diagram.) This confirmed my previous views of an early and different attack from the usual mortar bombardment, especially as I presumed that these flags indicated the positions to be taken up by the several vessels in their new line of operations. As nothing was to be expected from the Louisiana after the correspond- ence during the day, I could only inform Captain Mitchell of this new movement of the enemy (see attached document L), and i)articularly impress upon him the necessity of keeping the river well lit up with tire barges, to act as an impediment to the enemy and assist the accu- racy of our fire in a night attack. Lieutenant [Geo. S.] Shryock, C. S. Havy (Captain Mitchell’s aide), c^me on shore about h p. m. to inform me that the Louisiana would be ready for service by the next evening — the evening of the 24th. I in- formed him that time was everything to us and that to-morrow would in all probability prove too late. Lieutenant-Colonel Higgins warmly seconded my opinion, and warned Lieutenant Shryock that the final battle was imminent within a few hours. In regard to lighting the river. Lieutenant Shryock stated that fire barges would be regularly sent down throughout the night every two hours, and as none had been sent nj) to that hour (9.30 p. m.), he left, informing me that this matter would be attended to as soon as he arrived on board. To my utter surprise not one siugle fire barge was sent down the river, notwithstanding, at any hour of this night. It was 528 OPEKATIONS IN W. FLA., S. ALA., S. MISS., AND LA. [Cii.u>. XVI. imi)ossible for us to seud them down, as everything afloat liad been turned over to Captain Mitchell, by order of the major-general com- manding, and the fire barges and the boats to tow them into the stream were exclusively under his control. In consequence of this criminal neglect the river remained in complete darkness throughout the entire night. The bombardment continued all night and grew furious towards morning. April 21. — At 3.30 a. m. the larger vessels of the enemy were observed in motion, and, as we presumed, to take up the positions indicated by the small flags planted by them on the previous evening. I then made my last and final appeal to Captain Mitchell, a copy of which is attached as document M. The J Louisiana was still in her old position above Fort Saint Philip, surrounded by her tenders, on board of which was the majority of her cannoneers and crew, and the other boats of the fleet were generally at anchor above her, excepting the Jackson, Captain Eenshaw, C. S. i^avy, commanding, which had been sent the day before at my suggestion to l)revent the landing of forces through the canals above. Tlie McRae lay near and above the Louisiana, and the steam ram Maimssas, Avith her tender, remained in her constant position above Port Jackson, both with steam up and ready for immediate action. The enemy evidently anticipated a strong demonstration to be made against him with fire barges. Finding, upon his approach, however, that no such demonstration was made, and that the only resistance otfered to his passage was the expected fire of the forts (the broken and scat- tered raft being then no obstacle), I am satisfied that he was suddenly inspired for the first time to run the gauntlet at all hazards, although not a part of his original design. Be this as it may, a rapid rush was made by him in column of twos en echelon^ so as not to interfere with each other’s broadsides. The mortar fire upon Fort Jackson was furiously increased, and in dashing by each vessel delivered broadside after broadside of shot, shell, grape, canister, and spherical case to driA e the men from our guns. Both the officers and men stood up manfully under this galling and fearful hail, and the batteries of both forts were promptly opened at their longest range with shot, shell, hot shot, and a little grape, and most gallantly and rapidly fought until the enemy succeeded in getting aboA^e and beyond our range. The absence of light on the river, together with the smoke of the guns, made the obscurity so intense, that scarcely a vessel was Ausible, and in consequence the gunners were obliged to goA^ern their firing entirely by the flashes of the enemy’s guns. I am fully satisfied that the enemy’s dash was successful mainly owing to the cover of darkness, as a frigate and several gunboats were forced to retire as day was breaking. Similar results had attended every pre- vious attemi)t made by the enemy to pass or to reconnoiter when we had sufficient light to fire Avith accuracy and efiect. The passage by was of short duration, having been accomplished between 3.30 a. m. and daylight, under a A^ery rapid and heavy pressure of steam. Of the ])art taken in this action by the Louisiana, Manassas, and other A^essels comprising the co-operative naval forces, I cannnot speak with any degree of certainty, excepting that the Louisiana is reported to have fired but tweh^e shots during the engagement j but to the heroic and gallant manner in which Captain Huger handled and fought the McRae Ave can all bear evidence. Chap. X7I.1 CAPTURE OF NEW ORLEANS. 529 Tbe Defiance, Captain McCoy commanding, was the only vessel saved out of the river fleet. Shortly after daylight the Manassas was observed drifting down by the forts. She had been abandoned and fired, and was evidently in a sinking condition. The McEae was considerably cut up in this action by shot and grape. The Eesolute was run on shore about a mile above the forts, where she hoisted aVhite flag, but by the i)rompt action of the McEae she was prevented from falling into the hands of the enem3\ She was subse- quently wrecked and burned. The W arrior was run ashore and fired on the point just above Fort Saint Philip. ^^^otuing was known by us of the movements of the Stonewall Jack- sou, the Governor Moore, or the General Quitman. The steamers Mosher, Music, and Belle Algerine, in charge of the fire barges, were all destroyed. So also was the Star. The heroic courage displayed by the officers and men at both forts was deserving of a better success, especially after the fortitude which they constantly exhibited through the long tedium of a protracted bom- * bardment, unsuri^assed for its terrible accuracy, constancy, and fury. Thirteen of the enemy’s vessels out of twenty-three succeeded in get- ting by, viz ; The Hartford, Pensacola, Eichmond, Brooklyn, Mississippi, Oneida, Iroquois, Cayuga, Wissahickon, Sciota, Kiueo, Katahdin, and Pinola. In addition to the foregoing and to the Yaruna and such other ves- sels as were sunk, there were 6 gunboats and 1 frigate engaged in this action besides the mortar flotilla. Heavy chains were flaked along the sides of the most of these vessels as an iron-proof protection. The extent of the damage which was done to the enemy we had no means of ascertaining. The vessels which passed all came to an anchor at or below the quar- antine, 6 miles above the forts, where they remained until about 10 a. m., when they all passed slowly up the river, with the exception of two gun- boats, left at the quarantine as a guard. Shortly alter the fleet above got under way a gunboat from below made her appearance with a flag of truce, and verbally demanded the surrender of the forts in the name of Commander D. D. Porter, U. S. Eavy, commanding the mortar flotilla, under the penalty of reo])ening the bombardment (which had ceased shortly after the passage) in case of refusal. The demand was rejected, and the bombardment was reopened about 12 m. It continued until near sundown, when it ceased altogether. The entire mortar fleet and all the other vessels except six gunboats then got under way, and passed down the river and out of sight under full steam and sail. A vigilant lookout was kept up above and below during the night, but aU remained quiet. So long as the mortar fleet remained below, the position wherein the Louisiana could render the greatest assistance to the forts was the one below Fort Saint Philip, hereinbefore mentioned, where the fire of her batteries could dislodge the enemy from behind the point of woods. After the mortar fleet had left, however, and when the enemy had got in force above the forts, the question was materially changed, in con- sequence of the fact that all of our heavy guns at both forts had been mounted to beai upon the lower approaches and not on those above. The most effective position which the Louisiana could then take as a battery was in the fight above Fort Jackson, where her guns could pro- 34 R R VOL VI 530 OPERATIONS IN W. FLA., S. ALA., S. MISS., AND LA. [Chap. XVI. tect our rear and sweep the long reach of river above towards the quar- antine. This would still insure her safety, as she would be under the guns of both forts. This is evident by a reference to the point (XX) on the diagram.* In several personal interviews and by correspondence with Captain Mitchell, on this date (see attached documents X, O, P, Q, and E), I requested him daring the morning of the 24th, while th^ mortar fleet was below, to place the Louisiana below the raft and dislodge it 5 and later in the day, when the mortar fire was nearly exhausted, to place her in the position (XX) above Port Jackson, to assist in repelling an attack from the vessels above. Daring the day she was in an unfit condition to assume either posi- tion, for the reasons given by Captain Mitchell in his letters to me. The intoxicated volunteers referred to were none of my men, nor did they get their liquor at the forts, as there was none on hand there dur- ing the bombardment excepting the small supplies of hospital stores in the medical department. April 25. — Xo attack attempted daring the day by the enemy either from above or below. The gunboats from the quarantine above and. from the point of woods below occasionally showed themselves for ob- servation, but without firing. During the day all the principal guns that would admit of it at both forts were prepared at once so as to traverse in a fall circle^ and bear above or below, as necessity might require. Some of the 24-pounder barbette guns at Fort Jackson were also replaced by guns of heavier caliber to bear on the river above. Permission was granted by the enemy to the Confederate States steamer McEae to proceed to Xew Orleans under a flag of truce with the wounded. Availing ourselves of the offer of Captain Mitchell, the seriously wounded of both forts were sent on board 01 her. As it was late when the wounded were all gotten onboard, the McEae did not get ofi* until the next morning. Still failed during the day in getting Captain Mitchell to place the Louisiana in the bight above Fort Jackson, where she could act against the enemy from above. One of the raft schooners was burned during the night to light the river, and all remained quiet. April 26. — A gunboat, with a white flag, dropped down from the quarantine to escort the McEae on her mission. The McEae did not return again to the forts. F5ur of the enemy^s steamers were in sight at the quarantine at dawn. A gunboat occasionall.y showed herself below to reconnoiter. In the direction of Bird Island, and back of the salt-works, a large steam frigate and an ordinary river steamer appeared in sight, the lat- ter working her way up the bay behind Fort Saint Philip, apparently towards the quarantine. During the day Captain Mitchell communicated with the enemy above under a flag of truce, and learned that the city had surrendered, and that the Confederate States steam ram Mississippi had been barned by our authorities. The wreck of the floating dock or battery drifted by the forts about 4 p. m. The Louisiana was not placed in the position required of her during the day. Captain Mitchell promising to put her there the next day, the 27th. Another raft schooner burned for light, and all quiet during the night. Xo shots exchanged during the. day. April 27. — At daylight the steamer which had been observed the day See p. 546. CiJ.vr. XVI.j CAPTURE OF NEW ORLEANS. 531 before working her way up in the back bays was in view, iininediately in the rear of Fort Saint Philip, and near the mouth of Fort Bayou. A frigate and five other vessels were also in sight towards Bird Island, one of which was seen working her way up the bay. From ten to thirteen launches were visible near the boat back of Fort Saint Philip, by means of which troops were being landed at the quarantine above us. About 12 m. one of the enemy^s gunboats from below made her appear- ance under a flag of truce, bearing a written demand for the surrender of the forts, signed by Commander David D. Porter, U. S. Navy, com- manding mortar flotilla. (See attached document S.) The forts refused to surrender. (See attached document T.) About 4 p. m. the French man-of-war Milan, Captain Clouet, command- ing, passed up to the city, after asking and obtaining permission of the forts to do so. The position of the Louisiana still remained unchanged. So far, throughout t he entire bombardment and final action, the spirit of the troops was cheerful, confident, and courageous. They were mostly foreign enlistments, without any great interests at stake in the ultimate success of the revolution. A reaction set in among them during the lull of the 25th, 26th, and 27 th, when there was no other excitement to arouse them than the fatigue duty of repairing our damages and when the rumor was current that the city had surrendered and was then in the hands of the enemy. No reply had been received from the city to my dispatches sent by couriers on the 24th and 25th, by means of which I could reassure them. They were still obedient, but not buoyant and cheerful. In consequence, 1 endeavored to revive their courage and patriotism by publishing an order to both garrisons, attached hereto as document U. I regret to state that it did not produce the desired effect. Every- thing remained quiet, however, until midnight, when the garrison of Fort J ackson revolted in mass ; seized upon the guard and posterns j reversed the field pieces commanding the gates, and commenced to spike the guns, while many of the men were leaving the fort in the mean time under arms. All this occurred as suddenly as it was unexpected. The men were mostly drawn up under arms and positively refused to fight any longer, besides endeavoring by force to bring over the Saint Mary^s Cannoneers and such other few men as remained true to their cause and country. The mutineers stated that the officers intended to hold out as long as possible, or while the provisions lasted, and then blow uj) the forts and everything in them ; that the city had surrendered, and that there was no further use in fighting j that the enemy were about to attack by land and water on three sides at once, and that a longer defense would only prove a butchery. Every endeavor was made by the officers to repress the revolt and to bring the men to reason and order, but without avail. Officers upon the ramparts were fired upon by the mutineers in attempt- iug to put a stop to the spiking of the guns. 1 am greatly indebted to the Eev. Father Nachon for his efforts to quell the mutineers, through some of whom he learned that the revolt had been discussed among them for two days, and yet there was no one man among them true enough to communicate the fact to his officers. Signals also were said to have been passed between the forts during the night and while the mutiny was at its height. Being so general among the men, the officers were helpless and powerless to act. Under these circumstances there was but one course left, viz, to let those men go who wished to leave the fort, in order to see the number left and to ascertain what reliance could be placed upon them. About one-half of the garrison left immediately, including men from every company excex)t- 532 OPERATIONS IN W. FLA., S. ALA., S. MISS., AND LA. [Chap. XVl iDg the Saint Mary’s Cannoneers, volunteers and regulars, non com- missioned officers and privates, and among them many of the very men who had stood last and best to their guns throughout the protracted bombardment and the final action when the enemy passed. It was soon evident that there was no further fight in the men remaining behind; that they were completely demoralized, and that no faith or reliance could be placed in the broken detachments of companies left in the forts. In the mean time we were totally ignorant of the condition of afiairs at Fort Saint Philip, and as all our small boats had been carried away by the mutineers, we could not communicate with that fort until the next morning. As the next attack upon the forts was likely to be a combined operation by land and water, and as Fort Saint Philip was the point most threatened, from the nature of the country around it and from the character of the work itself, with narrow and shallow ditches, and but little relief to the main work, it was self-evident that no reduction could be made in its garrison to strengthen that of Fort Jackson, even if all the men there remained true. In fact, two additional regiments had been asked for at the quarantine in anticipation of such an attack, to act as a reserve to strengthen the garrisons of both forts. With the enemy above and below us, it will be apparent at once to any one at all familiar with the surrounding country that there was no chance of destroying the public property, blowing np the forts, and escaping with the remaining troops. Under all these humiliating cir- cumstances there seemed to be but one course open to us, viz, to await the approach of daylight, communicate then with the gunboats of the mortar flotilla below under a flag of truce, and negotiate for a surrender under the terms offered us by Commander Porter on the 26th instant, and which had previously been declined. April 28. — A small boat was procured and Lieutenant Morse, post adjutant, sent over to convey the condition of affairs at Fort Saint Philip, as well as to Captain Mitchell, on the Louisiana. Captain Mitchell and Lieutenant Sbryock, C. S. Navy, came on shore and dis- cussed the whole question, after which they left, remarking that they would go on board and endeavor to attack the enemy above, at the quarantine, notwithstanding that reasons had been given from time to time for not moving this vessel into her proper position, only a few hundred yards distant. Captains Squires and Bond, Louisiana Artillery, and Lieutenant Dixon, commanding the company of Confederate States regular recruits, came on share shortly afterwards from Fort Saint Philip, and concurred with us that, under the circumstances, we could do nothing else than sur- render, as they were not at all confident of the garrison there after the unlooked-for revolt at Fort Jackson, although none of their men had left* or openly revolted. For these reasons a flag of truce was sent down to communicate with the enemy below and to carry a written offer of surrender under the terms offered on the 26th instant. (See attached document V.) This communication brought up the Harriet Lane and three other gunboats opposite the forts, with white flags at the fore, white flags being displayed from the yards of the flag masts at both forts, while tiie Confederate flags waved at the mast-heads. While negotiations were pending on the Harriet Lane, it was reported that the steamer Louisiana, with her guns protruding, and on fire, was drifting down the river towards the fleet. As the wreck in descending kept close into the Fort Saint Philip shore, the chances were taken by the enemy without changing the position of his boats. The guns of the C’HAl*. XVI.] CAPTURE OF NEW ORLEANS. 533 Louisiana were discharged at random as she floated down, and the boat Anally blew up near Fort Saint Philip, scattering its fragments every- where within and around the fort, killing 1 of our men and wounding 3 or 4 others. Oaptain McIntosh, G. S. Navy, who had been severely wounded in the discharge of his duty on the night of the enemy^s passage, and Avho was then lying in a tent at that fort, was nearly killed also. As far as I could learn, however, the Louisiana was fired prior to the time that the enemy’s boats with white flags came to an anchor abreast of the forts to negotiate. She was fired in her first and original position without a change of any kind since her arrival at the forts. The terms of the capitulation are attached hereto as document W j in addition to which Commander Porter verbally agreed not to haul down the Confederate flag or hoist the Federal until the officers should get away from the forts. The officers of Fort Jackson and the Saint Mary’s Cannoneers left about 4 p. m. for the city, on board of the United States gunboat Ken- nebec, and arrived on the morning of the 29th in New Orleans. The officers of Fort Saint Philip, were sent up the next day’, and all the men subsequently within a few days, as transportation could be furnished, excepting the men who revolted on the night of the 27th, many of whom enlisted with the enemy. Upon my arrival in the city I found that the enemy’s vessels were lying oft* the town, and that no flag, excepting that of the State of Lou- isiana, on the city hall, was visilJe upon the shore. I also learned that Flag-Officer Farragut had directed it to be hauled down and the United States flag hoisted in its stead, upon the penalty of shelling the city within forty-eight hours if the demand was not complied with, and that he had warned the city authorities to remove the women and children within the time specified. I therefore deemed it my duty’ to call at once upon the mayor at the city hall and inform him of the fate of the forts below, which 1 did accordingly’. Learning there from one of his aides that the major-general command- ing the department was still in the city, I called upon him in person and verbally reported the main incidents of the bombardment, the passage of the enemy, and the capitulation of the forts. I have the honor to inclose herewith the report of Lieut. Col. E. Hig- gins, Twenty-second Regiment Louisiana Volunteers, commanding Forts Jackson and Saint Philip, as well as the several reports of Capt. M. T. Squires, Louisiana Artillery, senior officer in charge of Fort Saint Philip, and those of the different company and battery commanders, together with the surgeons’ reports of the killed and wounded. The report of Colonel Szymanski, commanding the Chalmette Regi- ment at the quarantine, has not been received by me, so that I am un- able to report upon his operations. I fully indorse the just praise bestowed in the inclosed reports upon all the officers at both forts, and warmly return them my thanks. They all distinguished themselves by cool courage, skill, and patriotism throughout the entire bombardment, and by the patient fortitude with which they^ bore the several trying ordeals of water, fire, and the ener- getic fury of the enemy ’s protracted and continuous fire. I must also bear testimony to the cheerful courage and prompt and willing obedience with which the men performed their duties through- out the bombardment and up to the sad night when they took the rash and disgraceful step of rising against their officers, breaking through all discipline, and leading to such disastrous and fatal consequences. I 534 OPERATIONS IN .W. FLA., S. ALA., S. MISS., AND LA. [Chap. XVL can charitably account for it only on the grounds of great reaction after the intense physical strain of many weary days and nights of terrible fire, through which they were necessaril}^ subjected to every privation from circumstances beyond our control, but which they had not the moral courage to share and sustain with their officers, all of whom were subjected to the same hardships in every particular. To Lieut. Col. E. Higgins, commanding the forts, my thanks are esi)ecially due for his indefatigable labors in preparing his heavy bat- teries preparatory to the attack, almost in the face of the enemy, and for the quiet, skillful, and judicious manner in which he caused them to be I'ought. He was present everywhere, and did his whole duty well and thoroughly. Copt. M. T. Squires, Louisiana Eegiment of Artillery, as senior officer in charge of Fort Saint Philip, under the orders of Lieutenant-Colonel Higgins, commanding, fully sustained every anticipation entertained of his gallantry, skill, and efficiency. During the first day’s bombardment, when Captain Anderson was wounded, my aide-de-camp (Lieut. William M. Bridges, Louisiana Artil- lery) volunteered to command the two 10 inch columbiads on the main work, and I return him my thanks for the gallant and efficient manner in which he fought them during the rest of the action. I take great jdeasure in making personal mention of my volunteer aides, Capts. William J. Seymour and J. R. Smith, for the valuable assist- ance which they rendered me at all times. My thanks are also due to Drs. Bradbury and Foster, who volunteered their services to assist Assist. Surgs. p. Burke and C. D. Lewis at Forts Jackson and Saint Philip, respectively, and most efiSciently did they aid in this departlment. Dr. Bradbury remained at Fort Jackson until its fall, and was paroled. Dr. Foster, at my request, accompanied the wounded soldiers to the city on the Confederate States steamer McRae. Messrs. Fulda and Stickney and Sergt. J. R. Poindexter, Fourth Mis- sissippi Volunteers, telegraph operators, rendered the most valuable services in keeping open our communication above and below under the most dangerous and difficult circumstances. Although we have failed in our mission of keeping the enemy’s fleet from passing the forts, and have been subjected to the deep humiliation of surrendering the charge intrusted to our keeping to the enemies of our country, I must nevertheless state, in common justice to myself and those under my command, that to the very best of our ability, with the means at our disposal, our whole duty was performed faithfully, honestly, and fearlessly. If all had to be gone through with again, under similar events ,and circumstances, I know that we should be forced to the same results and consequences. Great as the disaster is, it is but the sheer result of that lack of cheer- ful and hearty co operation from the defenses afloat which we had every right to expect and to the criminal negligence of not lighting up the river at night when the danger was imminent and the movements of the enemy absolutely known almost to the hour of the final attack. Except for the cover afforded by the obscurity of the darkness I shall always remain satisfied that the enemy would never have succeeded in passing Forts Jackson and Saint Philip. I am, very resiiectfullv, your obedient servant, J. K. DUNCAN, Brigadier- General^ late Commanding Coast Defenses, Mqj. J. G. Pickett, Asst. Adjt. Gen.., Department No. 1, Camp Moore, La.
