# Wiley Britton, The Civil War on the Border, volume II: Price's 1864 expedition passages, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a University of California Libraries scan (Internet Archive civilwarborder02britrich); not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers (several misread, for example '3QO', '4IO', '5IO'), footnotes interleaved with the text and map captions. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages: the title page and the seven chapters on the engagements of Price's 1864 expedition (Chapter XXVII on the defence of Saint Louis and Jefferson City and the casualty list closing Chapter XXXII are not selected).

## title-page

THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER A NARRATIVE OF MILITARY OPERATIONS IN MISSOURI, KANSAS, ARKANSAS, AND THE INDIAN TERRITORY, DURING THE YEARS 1863-65, BASED UPON OFFICIAL REPORTS AND OBSERVATIONS OF THE AUTHOR i-.Y WILEY BRITTON LATE OF THE WAR DEPARTMENT MEMBER AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE VOLUME II G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS NEW YORK LONDON 37 WFST TWKNTY-THIKU STREET 24 BEDFORD STRHTVr. STRAND "Cbe Tkntcfccrbochcr press 1899 COPYRIGHT, 1898 BY WILEY BRITTON

## pilot-knob

CHAPTER XXVI. THE PRICE RAID IN MISSOURI — BATTLE OF PILOT KNOB, MISSOURI. AFTER the several divisions of his army returned from the Camden Expedition to Little Rock and Fort Smith, General Steele was unable to resume offensive operations against the Confederate forces in Arkansas that spring or summer. Indeed, it was as much as he could do to hold on to the positions he occupied before he started for Cam- den. In a short time after the battle of Jenkins' Ferry, Price detached Shelby with about two thousand mounted men to cross to the north side of the Arkansas River for the purpose of blockading White River and interrupting communication by railroad between Little Rock and De Vall's Bluff. About the same time General Marmaduke was detached with part of his division and artillery to the west bank of the Mississippi River to blockade that river below the mouth of the Arkansas, if practicable. An attack on Little Rock or Pine Bluff was threatened by Kirby Smith's other disposable forces in Arkansas under Price; the forces of Maxey and Cooper in Western Ar kansas and the Indian Territory were besieging General Thayer at Fort Smith, and by the latter part of July the Arkansas River between Fort Smith and Little Rock was closed to navigation. The ill-conceived and disastrous Red River campaign had thus turned Steele's victorious and aggressive army into a defensive one shut up in two 387 388 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. or three fortified positions. Though this army had suf fered heavily in men and transportation by having de tachments from it overwhelmed at Poison Spring and Marks' Mills, it had in the only decisive battle of the campaign beaten the Confederate forces under the eyes of General Kirby Smith at Jenkins' Ferry and driven them from the field. Its retreat from Camden to the line of the Arkansas River and defensive attitude were not due to defeat, but to the withdrawal from the campaign of the other cooperating columns for service in other Depart ments. Until the results of the campaigns in Departments east of the Mississippi River were determined, General Steele could not hope to receive sufficient reinforcements to commence aggressive operations again. Of course the troops of his Department were actively and constantly employed against Shelby on White River in Northeastern Arkansas and against the forces of Maxey and Cooper in Western Arkansas and the Indian Territory; but as the Confederate troops were nearly all cavalry and mounted infantry, a fact already noticed, he did not have sufficient cavalry to make the movements of his columns as effective as desirable. In sending Shelby north of the Arkansas River there was foreshadowed a determination of the Confederate leaders from Missouri to make a raid into that State in the early autumn. General Price, commanding the Dis trict of Arkansas, and who was a Missourian, knew that such a movement would be popular among his Missouri troops and could be counted upon to urge its importance upon General Kirby Smith. Such a movement was also foreshadowed by information obtained from Confederate prisoners and recruiting officers who had returned from the South to different parts of Missouri in the early part of the summer. There was little attention paid to the reports thus obtained, for the reason that the Southern sympathizers were frequently predicting the return of the THE PRICE RAID IN MISSOURI. 389 Southern forces to the State. In his frequent reports to General Price from the White River country, General Shelby represented his command as capturing gunboats, riding down brigades of Federal infantry, killing and cap turing Federal troops by hundreds, of neither giving nor asking quarter if they had the audacity to show too much resistance and hurt some of his men, and that a raid into Missouri would be simply a picnic excursion. All these wonderful achievements in overthrowing and punishing his pygmean foes cost him insignificant losses. It is true that he surprised and captured a few Federal detachments that were employed in cutting, baling, and putting up hay on the prairie near De Vall's Bluff for the army, and that he tore up a few miles of railroad, and with his artillery blockaded White River at one or two points for a few days; but he was invariably driven by the Federal troops sent against him. No doubt other Confederate general officers on hearing of such great achievements were anxious to make a cam paign into a section where military laurels were to be won with so much ease, and where their enemies, always su perior in numbers and equipment, were so easily killed, captured, or put to flight. How far General Price was influenced by these exaggerated reports is not positively known. But it was known that after he had an interview and conference with General Kirby Smith at Shreveport, the Commander of the Trans-Mississippi Department on the 4th of August directed him to make immediate ar rangements for a campaign into Missouri, St. Louis to be the objective, and placed under his command the entire cavalry force of the District of Arkansas. There was some delay in receiving from Shreveport the necessary ordnance stores for the expedition, and he did not arrive at Prince ton, where the divisions of Generals Fagan and Marma- duke were concentrated, until the 2Qth of August. On his arrival he assumed command, and the next day 3QO THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. left that place at the head of twelve thousand veteran cavalry and mounted infantry and fourteen pieces of artillery for the invasion of Missouri. He had intended to cross the Arkansas River between Little Rock and Pine Bluff; but thinking that General Steele had become advised of his intended movement, and taking into con sideration the question of obtaining subsistence and forage for his troops and animals, he determined to cross the river above Little Rock at Dardanelle, and at once directed his march to that point. He arrived at that place on the 6th of September, and, finding the river fordable, on the /th crossed his trains and entire force to the north side. From this point he marched in a north east direction by way of Dover, Clinton, Batesville, Pow- hatan, and Pocahontas, where he arrived on the i6th of September, having in the meantime been joined by Shelby, who had been operating on White River during the past summer, with ten thousand men and four pieces of artillery. At Pocahontas he reorganized his army in three grand divisions for the purpose of invading Mis souri in three columns. The three columns were to form a junction at Fredericktown, Missouri, about the 24th of September. In this movement the central division, under Fagan, marched as direct as practicable to Fredericktown, while the divisions of Marmaduke on the right and Shelby on the left marched for the vicinity of the same place on roads varying from ten to twenty miles from the cen tral column. In the march of the Confederate columns from the Arkansas River to the northern line of the State, Federal detachments of recently organized Union regiments were now and then encountered, who, on find ing themselves confronted with superior numbers, retired to the mountains and hills or thickly wooded regions of the country with little loss. On entering Missouri the Confederate column under Shelby came upon and surrounded at Ponder's Mill, on THE PRICE RAID IN MISSOURI. 391 Little Black River, between Doniphan and Patterson, a detachment of eighty men under Lieutenant Erich Pape, Third Missouri State Militia Cavalry, which had been sent out by Major James Wilson of that regiment to make a reconnoissance, in view of the excited rumors of the advance of a great army of invasion. Lieutenant Pape gallantly cut his way through the Confederate line, with the loss of Lieutenant W. M. Brawner mortally wounded and five or six enlisted men killed and wounded, and inflicting a loss on the enemy of two men killed and five wounded. This skirmish on the i8th developed the fact that the Confederates under Price were advancing in large numbers, and Major Wilson, commanding that sub- district, rapidly drew into Pilot Knob his detachments from different points under instructions from General Thomas Ewing, Jr., commanding the District of St. Louis, with trifling loss of men and material. In the early part of September, General W. S. Rose- crans, commanding the Department of the Missouri, re ceived information that General Shelby, who had been operating in Northeastern Arkansas during the summer, would soon be joined by a large Confederate force under Price at Batesville, on the Upper White River in Arkan sas, for the invasion of Missouri. The objective of Price's campaign was not yet known to Rosecrans. He thought it would be developed directly after the concentration of the Confederate forces at Batesville. From that point Price could push forward his columns by way of Pilot Knob towards St. Louis, or to Jefferson City and Cen tral Missouri by way of Springfield or Rolla, with about equal facility. The two last-named places were large de pots for furnishing the Federal troops in Southern and Southwest Missouri and in Northern and Northwest Ar kansas with supplies, and would doubtless be regarded as a valuable prize by the Confederates, who, after their long march, would likely be in great need of such supplies. 3Q2 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. Until he could ascertain what important point Price intended to strike, General Rosecrans ordered the con centration of the troops of the different districts of his Department, to be held in readiness for movement at a moment's notice to the threatened point. All the troops that could be spared from stations in Southwest Missouri were concentrated at Springfield under Brigadier-General John B. Sanborn, with instructions to throw out scouting detachments in a southeast direction as far as West Plains and Gainesville, and beyond if practicable. The troops of the District of Rolla were concentrated at that place under General John McNeil; and the troops of the Districts of Central and North Missouri were concen trated at Jefferson City for the defence of the capital of the State under Generals E. B. Brown and Clinton B. Fisk, and work at once commenced to strengthen the defences by throwing up earthworks. Reports of the impending invasion were so persistent that when, on the 6th of September, General A. J. Smith was passing Cairo with a division of infantry for General Sherman, General Rosecrans telegraphed Gen eral Halleck the situation, and requested orders for the division to be halted at that point until the intentions of the Confederate commander could be ascertained. The request was granted, and General Smith received orders to operate against Price, and at once moved his division up to within a few miles of St. Louis, so that he could move by rail or river against the enemy as soon as his designs were developed. On the 2Oth of September Major Wilson reported to General Ewing the result of the scout sent out under Lieutenant Pape in the direction of Doniphan — that the Lieutenant reported 4000 or 5000 men in the Confed erate force that engaged him ; and that information was obtained from a wounded Confederate soldier left on the field when Lieutenant Pape drove the Confederate THE PRICE RAID IN MISSOURI. 393 advance out of Doniphan on the I7th, that Price was at Pocahontas, but that the Lieutenant had no confi dence in the report. Later Lieutenant-Colonel H. M. Hiller, Second Missouri State Militia Cavalry, reported to General Ewing from Cape Girardeau, September 22d, that Captain Lewis Sells of his regiment, who had been sent with his company to reinforce two com panies at Bloomfield, was attacked two or three times that morning near Sikeston by a Confederate force of 1500 men under Colonel W. L. Jeffers, sustaining a loss of 3 men killed and 7 wounded, and that Captain Sells reported that the enemy, 6000 strong, were marching north from the direction of Chalk Bluff. Though Gen eral Rosecrans had been informed that there was a large Confederate force of 5000 or 6000 men in Southeast Mis souri on the 2Oth, he did not receive positive information that Price had crossed the Arkansas River with two divisions of mounted troops, with artillery and trains, and was on White River at or in the vicinity of Batesville, until the 23d of September. The next day he received despatches that Shelby was south of Pilot Knob with 5000 men and 4 pieces of artillery, moving in the direc tion of Farmington. He did not yet feel certain that this force under Shelby was not thrown forward for the purpose of attracting the attention of the troops in the vicinity of St. Louis, while the main Southern army under Price passed into Central Missouri by way of West Plains and Springfield, or \Vest Plains and Rolla. He was therefore still unable to determine at what point he should concentrate the troops of his Department. The presence of this large force under Shelby near Farmington required the immediate attention of General Rosecrans, and on the night of the 24th he directed Gen eral Ewing to take a brigade of General Smith's division of the Sixteenth Army Corps, then at Jefferson Barracks, near St. Louis, to garrison and patrol the Iron Mountain 394 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. Railroad, and to concentrate all the troops of the southern part of his district at Pilot Knob and Cape Girardeau. Leaving at De Soto for the further orders of General Smith all the brigade except the Fourteenth Iowa Infan try, he took this regiment and went on, strengthening the garrisons at all the bridges as far south as Mineral Point, where he established temporary headquarters. He sent out mounted scouting parties from several stations to the south and east, and they returned on the morning of the 26th and reported no Confederate force north of Fred- ericktown. They obtained information, however, which they considered reliable, that Price had arrived at Fred- ericktown with all his army. On receipt of these reports General Ewing took a battalion of five companies of the Fourteenth Iowa Infantry under Captain W. J. Campbell and boarded a train for Pilot Knob, arriving there at twelve o'clock. Major Wilson, commanding that sub- district, had collected at that post all his available troops except bridge guards, and had sent out mounted scouting detachments on all the roads leading into that place. General Ewing was instructed to hold Pilot Knob if practicable until he could find out whether more than Shelby's division was in that section. He had for the defence of the place six companies of the Forty-seventh Missouri Infantry, under Colonel Thomas C. Fletcher, and one company of the Fiftieth Missouri Infantry, under Captain Robert L. Lindsay, an effective force of 489 officers and men, recently organized and that had seen little service. In addition to this force he had of troops who had seen service six companies Third Missouri State Militia Cavalry, under Major James Wilson ; one company Second Missouri State Militia Cavalry, under Captain A. P. Wright; one company Missouri State Militia In fantry, under Lieutenant John Fessler; Captain William C. F. Montgomery's battery Second Missouri Light Artil lery, and the detachment of the Fourteenth Iowa Infan- BATTLE OF PILOT KNOB. 395 try — in all, 562 men. He had of raw troops and troops who had been in service for some time a total of 1051 men and officers. A company of about 100 citizens of Ironton and Pilot Knob, including some of the leading Union men of that section, hastily organized, and were commanded by Captain P. F. Lonergan, First Missouri State Militia Infantry, for the defence. To assist in the defence a company of negroes was also organized and commanded by a colored man named Charles Thurston. Pilot Knob during the war was the terminus of the St. Louis and Iron Mountain Railroad, eighty-six miles south of St. Louis. A mile south of the village was the town of Ironton, the county seat, and a mile south of that the village of Arcadia, well known before and during the war in all that section for its flourishing academy for young ladies. The region around the villages was noted for its pic- turesqueness. The road from Pilot Knob to Ironton passed through a gap between Shepherd's Mountain on the west and Pilot Knob Mountain on the east. Ironton was on a high plateau about half a mile south of the en trance to the gap, and at the foot of the hill just south of town the road to Arcadia crossed a small creek that flowed off in a southeast direction into the beautiful val ley of Arcadia. A small run from the north entered this creek just east of town, and others from the south west and the north entered it a short distance west of town. A hundred yards or so north of Arcadia, and just east of the road from Ironton to Arcadia, and north of the Arcadia and Fredericktown road, on an elevated position, there was an old, unfinished earthwork called Fort Curtis. This position had an elevation of about fifty feet above the road, and commanded the Arcadia and Fredericktown road. But the principal work for the defence of the position at Pilot Knob was Fort Davidson, which was located three hundred yards northwest of the 396 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. base of Pilot Knob, about the same distance north of the base of Shepherd's Mountain, and one thousand yards nearly north of the gap between the mountains. The village of Pilot Knob was about four hundred yards east and northeast of the fort, and near the south ern entrance to the gap between Rock and Cedar moun tains. The fort was an irregular hexagonal work, each of the six faces being somewhat over one hundred feet, with bomb-proof magazine. The ditch around it was ten feet wide and six feet four inches deep. Its arma ment consisted of four 32-pounder siege-guns, three 24- pounder howitzers mounted en barbette, four 6-inch Coehorn mortars, and four steel 2-pounder skirmish-guns, with a sufficient supply of ammunition. Competent en gineers who had examined the fort regarded it as indefen sible against a large force having a few good batteries of artillery. But General Ewing had it put in a good state of defence, and added two rifle-pits, each 175 yards in length, one extending from the north side and the other from the south side, commanding the approaches from those quarters. He had also ordered the nearest hillsides cleared of timber and obstructed the roads leading up the hills. After the report of Lieutenant Pape's skirmish at and near Doniphan on the iSth, and of a large Confederate force advancing north, General Ewing ordered Captain Montgomery, Second Missouri Light Artillery, to report to Major Wilson at Pilot Knob with his battery of six guns. Captain Montgomery left St. Louis on the evening of the 2 ist and arrived at Pilot Knob the next morning. That day all reports from the southern part of the State indicated the approaching storm — the advance of the Confederate army under Price — and on the evening of the 23d he was ordered by Major Wilson to have his battery ready for action at a moment's warning. As the reports of Union citizens fleeing before the invading wave, which BATTLE OF PILOT KNOB. 397 had spread out upwards of forty miles wide, continued to come in, and as the situation hourly became more threat ening, he kept the horses of his battery harnessed and hitched and the drivers and cannoneers at their posts the two following nights. In the excited state of the public mind there were some false alarms; but Major Wilson had kept out scouting detachments on all the roads south and east leading into Arcadia and Ironton, and on Mon day morning, the 26th, the detachment on the Frederick- town road met a small force of the enemy, which had been thrown forward by General Pagan, advancing on that road near Shut-in Gap, about two miles east of Arcadia. General Ewing having arrived and assumed command of the Federal forces at Pilot Knob, at once sent out two companies of cavalry to make a thorough reconnoissance in the direction of Fredericktown. This cavalry soon met the Confederate advance in Arcadia Valley near Shut-in Gap, and retired skirmishing to Ironton, where, with Captain Franz Dinger's company, Forty-seventh Missouri Infantry, a stand was made until reinforcements arrived under Major Wilson. This gallant officer, with all General Ewing' s available cavalry and a section of Captain Montgomery's battery under Lieutenant Morgan Simonton, attacked the enemy fiercely and drove them back to Shut-in Gap; but as Fagan's and Marmaduke's divisions were rapidly coming up from Fredericktown, he was gradually forced back. He made a stand at Fort Curtis, near Arcadia, and held that position until night, and then a rain-storm suspended operations. At ten o'clock that night he sent the section of the battery back to the fort, but held Arcadia until the next morning, when he was forced from it by the enemy, whose en campment had filled Arcadia Valley during the night. The sounds of the rumbling trains and of the thousands of mounted troops descending into the plain were heard 398 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. by the Federal outposts, and General Ewing was satisfied that a fierce struggle was at hand — that the enemy would make a desperate effort to capture his position the next day. He at once commenced to strip for the fight. That night he sent up the railroad within General Smith's line all the commissary and quartermaster stores not required in the fort, and all the rolling-stock of the road. He de tailed for duty on his staff as aide-de-camp, Captain David Murphy, Forty-seventh Missouri Infantry, an experi enced artillery officer, and gave him control of the artil lery. The Captain at once set details to work constructing platforms for the guns of the field battery so that they could fire over the parapet, and two sections were brought into the fort and mounted ready for action that night. At three o'clock in the morning of the 2/th, Lieutenant Simonton was sent to the front with his section of the battery and reported to Major Wilson, who was holding Arcadia with his cavalry posted at Fort Curtis. Before it was fairly daylight, General Fagan, commanding the advance division of Price's army, threw forward a strong skirmish-line, supported by the brigades of his division, dismounted, and attacked Major Wilson and soon forced him from his position. The Major retired slowly to Ironton, contesting every inch of ground, and with the assistance of the section of the battery under Lieutenant Simonton, and the skill with which he handled his small force, delayed the Confeder ate advance for several hours, making every step of it a costly one. He was here joined by Captain Campbell with four companies of the Fourteenth Iowa Infantry, but was soon forced back in the direction of Pilot Knob. He was then directed by General Ewing to form his in fantry under Campbell on the east end of Shepherd's Mountain, and his cavalry on the west side of Pilot Knob, so as to command the gap from both sides, and so as to leave a clear range for his artillery in the fort to sweep 4 Reproduced from U. S. War Kecori 400 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. the pass. These dispositions were scarcely completed when General Pagan's division moved forward to force the passage of the gap, but were met by such a destruc tive fire from the troops under Major Wilson and the artillery from the fort under the immediate direction of Captain Murphy that they were soon driven back with heavy loss. Shortly after this attack Major Wilson sent word to General Ewing that the enemy were displaying a flag of truce ; but being satisfied that the display of the flag was simply a trick for the purpose of gaining time and allowing the Confederate troops to safely effect the " passage of the gap while parleying about a surrender," he ordered the Major to renew the fight immediately. A determined effort was now made by the Confederates to force the pass, precipitating a fierce conflict in which they lost heavily without gaining any advantage. The volleys from the small-arms of the troops under Major Wilson on the sides of Shepherd's Mountain and Pilot Knob, the storms of shot and shell from the seven heavy guns of the fort, from the two sections of the field bat tery, mounted, and from the section under Lieutenant Simonton just north of the fort, swept the pass like de vouring flames, causing the Confederate line to waver and then to retire to shelter behind a projecting spur of the mountain. While these operations were taking place in Pilot Knob Gap, Marmaduke's division was moving into position on Shepherd's Mountain, except one brigade that was sent around to the west side of that mountain to attack the fort from that quarter. When these movements were discovered, General Ewing ordered Captain Campbell with his companies of the Fourteenth Iowa Infantry to the summit of Shepherd's Mountain, which was five or six hundred feet above the valley around the fort, the north side of the mountain being very steep. The Cap tain soon became engaged in a sharp skirmish with Gen- BATTLE OF PILOT KNOB. 40 1 eral Clark's brigade, and as the Confederate commander with superior numbers attempted to flank his position, he was obliged to fall back to the rifle-pits of the fort. Only a few moments after he had retired from his posi tion, it was reoccupied by Captain T. J. Mackey, Chief Engineer on the staff of General Price, who made a re- connoissance with a party of officers to the crest of the mountain to make observations of the character of the fort, its armament, and its command above the plain, with the view of formulating a definite plan for its attack, reduction, and capture. The fort was enveloped in a thick smoke from the recent heavy firing, obscuring some of the details ; but he came to the conclusion that it could be reduced and the garrison shelled out by bombardment in a short time, by placing eight guns in battery on the crest of the mountain. After the unsuccessful attempts of Pagan's division to force Pilot Knob pass, and the failure of the ruse to gain advantage by displaying the flag of truce, the firing along the fronts of the opposing lines ceased for nearly an hour, General Price having called a council of war to consider the situation. At the council of war Captain Mackey stated the result of his reconnoissance, and advised that the fort be reduced by bombardment from the crest of Shepherd's Mountain. His views were concurred in by General Price, who had previously consulted a map of the situation made by the engineers of General Hardee while he was serving in Southeast Missouri in the early part of the war. But as it was currently reported among the Confederate officers that a large part of the Federal gar rison was colored soldiers under Colonel Fletcher, who was then the Republican candidate for Governor of Mis souri, and as there was a disposition on the part of some of the Confederate officers to avenge the alleged wrongs by General Ewing in removing Southern families from his district under his famous General Order Number Eleven VOL. II. — 26 402 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. after the Lawrence massacre, in the latter part of the sum mer of 1863, it was decided by the council of war that an immediate assault should be made on the fort. Before forming the lines for the assault, it was considered desir able by Price and his generals to drive the Federal troops from their positions commanding Pilot Knob pass, and for this purpose Pagan's division advanced again and made a vigorous attack. In a short time the troops under Major Wilson were driven from their positions and followed by the Confederates in strong force along the sides of the mountains. The movement was watched by General Ewing with intense interest, and as soon as the enemy advanced far enough into the gap to come within easy range of his artillery, he directed Captain Murphy to open fire upon them with all the guns of the fort. Again the storm of shot and shell burst forth from the guns of the fort, sweeping the pass and sides of the moun tains and driving the Confederates back out of range, so that the troops under Major Wilson retook the gap. In a few moments the Confederates rallied and drove him from the position, and in turn were driven back by the artillery fire from the fort. In one of the last actions on the side of Pilot Knob, while bravely and skilfully defending the pass, Major Wilson was wounded in the shoulder and fell into the hands of the enemy. About this time the Confederates brought up and placed in position two field-pieces on the east end of Shepherd's Mountain, and for the first time opened fire on the fort with artillery. Captain Murphy turned part of the guns of the fort upon the hostile pieces and endeavored to silence them and prevent the Confederates from forming line just behind them on the eastern slope of the moun tain. In the meantime Captain Campbell had, under orders of General Ewing, occupied the north side of Shepherd's Mountain with his companies of Iowa infan try, while the troops of Major Wilson still held that part of BATTLE OF PILOT KNOB. 403 the west side of Pilot Knob not raked by the Confederate artillery. The telegraph line to St. Louis had been cut by Shel by's force at eleven o'clock that day, interrupting com munication with General Smith, and as there were no prospects of receiving reinforcements, General Ewing had no alternative but to fight or surrender. He resolved to defend his position as long as possible and thus delay the advance northward of the invading army. After the Confederates were driven from Pilot Knob the last time by the artillery fire from the fort, they made no further active demonstration for nearly an hour, except the firing from their battery on the east side of Shepherd's Moun tain. Generals Fagan and Marmaduke were arranging their lines and getting their troops in position for the as sault which General Price had ordered. This silence was considered ominous by General Ewing, and he ordered everything about the fort put in complete readiness to meet the impending struggle. To prevent the escape of the Federal garrison on the Potosi road, General Price sent a mounted brigade of fifteen hundred men under Colonel Dobbin to take up a position about a mile to the north and rear of the fort. This force was in its assigned position nearly an hour before the assaulting columns were ready to move. At two o'clock two field-pieces were hauled up by hand to the summit of Shepherd's Moun tain, and when placed in position three shots were fired by them at the fort as signals for the advance of the as saulting columns. The guns of the fort were then turned on the hostile pieces and played on them with shot and shell to silence them. In a few moments after the signal shots were fired, the lines of the assaulting columns were seen by General Ewing and his troops emerging from the timber into the open spaces near the summits of Shep herd's Mountain and Pilot Knob, moving down. At the moment the guns of the fort were about to open 404 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. fire on the advancing lines, one of a group of Southern officers displayed another white flag from a projecting rock near the summit of Shepherd's Mountain. This trick did not deceive General Ewing and cause him to suspend the firing so that the Confederate troops could move up near the fort undisturbed, but he directed Cap tain Murphy to turn his guns on the group of officers, and only a few shots were fired when the flag quickly came down. Finding it impossible to gain the desired advan tage by the trick of displaying the white flag, the Confed erate commander ordered that the two guns on the top of Shepherd's Mountain and the two guns on the east end of that mountain open fire on the fort, both batteries soon getting the range very accurately, being posted not more than seven or eight hundred yards distant. The moment the Confederate guns opened fire on the fort, Marma- duke's division on the left moved rapidly down the north side of Shepherd's Mountain, and -Pagan's division on his right moved rapidly over and down the west side of Pilot Knob and through Pilot Knob Gap to the assault, sweeping before them the detachments of Major Wilson and Captain Campbell which had been holding the pass and the sides of the mountain. In descending the steep side of Shepherd's Mountain, the troops of Marmaduke's division were confronted at every step with fallen trees, huge projecting rocks, and deep narrow ravines, difficult to pass, while the heavy guns of the fort were all the time playing upon their broken ranks with shell with great accuracy. The assaulting lines of General Pagan's division were also considerably broken at the base of Pilot Knob by the houses and fences of the village that intersected the line of movement, but were quickly re-formed by the brigade commanders, and, yelling wildly, the troops dashed for ward upon the plain at a double-quick in the direction of the fort. Captain Murphy not only turned his artillery BATTLE OF PILOT KNOB. 405 upon the advancing lines, but he also played with shot and shell upon the two hostile guns on the summit and on the east end of Shepherd's Mountain, and while he was un able to silence them — they were so well covered — he neutralized the effect of their fire. When the charging lines descended half-way down the mountain sides, the troops of the fort opened fire upon them with small-arms from the ramparts and rifle-pits, and with artillery, using canister double charge. A sheet of flame burst from the south and east sides of the fort, and at every step from about six hundred yards up to within a few yards of the ditch the advancing lines were met with a constant steady stream of iron and leaden hail, breaking and shattering their ranks. Of the five thousand six hundred men in that desperate charge, scarcely one third arrived within fifty yards of the ditch, the others having fallen upon the plain or mountain sides, or having taken refuge in the dry bed of the creek on the south and southeast sides of the fort. Only a small part of the two divisions reached the ditch, at which, it appearing to them impassable, they hesitated, recoiled, and then fled in confusion, many of them being swept down by the artillery and small-arms of the fort before they could find shelter in the bed of the creek or get out of range by retreating through the pass. Their casualties were so great that General Ewing reported that those who escaped appeared to have left nearly one half their comrades dead or wounded on the plain. Lieutenant Simonton, who was posted on rising ground just north of the fort with his section of artillery, held his position, keeping up a hot fire on the advancing lines until they came up within sixty yards of the fort, when he was ordered inside. He quickly limbered up and started into the fort, when the two horses of the lead team of the right piece were shot down just as they were entering the gate and blocked up the way so that the section could not then be brought inside. As they 406 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. would be cut off in another moment the men were ordered to take care of themselves, and all came in except one, who fell into the hands of the enemy. In the midst of the excitement of the fierce conflict and of the roar of artillery and small-arms, the other horses to the pieces and gun-carriages began to stampede, when Captain Montgomery ordered his men to shoot them to prevent them from getting away with any of the carriages. The two pieces, however, were under the fire of the fort, and were brought inside after the fight was over, together with all the horses that were not disabled. A short time after the Federal forces had repulsed the last assault in front, Colonel Dobbin's brigade, which had been posted on the Potosi road in the rear of the fort, moved along the base of Cedar Mountain in a threatening attitude. General Ewing, observing the movement, ordered a sortie from the north ditch, and routed them with some loss. After some further firing with small-arms and ar tillery between the troops of the fort and the assaulting troops of Marmaduke's division, who had taken shelter behind the banks of the creek, the approach of night put an end to further operations. After dark all the Confed erate troops who had sought shelter lying down in the bed of the creek were quietly withdrawn to their encampment near Ironton. The repulse was so complete and the demoralization of the Confederate troops so great that General Price in person was unable to rally them. If he accepted the defeat and made no further effort to take the Federal position, he knew that the loss of prestige to his army would be so great that the thirty thousand men of the Order of American Knights, an organization of Southern sympathizers throughout the State which had been promised him, would not so zealously flock to his standard. He determined therefore to renew the assault the next morning and at once commenced preparations BATTLE OF PILOT KNOB. 407 for it. When at Fredericktown he had directed General Shelby to march from that place by way of Farmington and strike the St. Louis and Iron Mountain Railroad near Mineral Point and destroy several railroad bridges in that vicinity to prevent General A. J. Smith from reinforcing the garrison at Pilot Knob, and then to rejoin the invad ing army before Pilot Knob. In the evening he de spatched a second courier to Shelby, informing him of the repulse and of his intention of renewing the attack the next morning, and directing him to rejoin the army as early as practicable, to participate in the proposed opera tions. That evening after the action had ended, General Ewing ascertained from prisoners taken that day that Price was there with the two divisions of Fagan and Mar- maduke and ten pieces of artillery, and that Shelby with his division and four pieces of artillery had been sent north of Pilot Knob to tear up the railroad track and de stroy bridges. The Federal troops had lost fully two hundred men in killed, wounded, and missing during the last two days' operations, and with the most careful handling of his men General Ewing had found himself unable to hold the mountain sides and prevent the enemy from planting their batteries on the mountain command ing his position. As the Confederates were in possession of the summits of the mountains, he was convinced that they would bring up all the guns of their batteries during the night and place them in position so as to completely command the fort and make it untenable when they re newed the attack next morning. In view of the situation as thus presented, he deemed it a useless sacrifice of life to attempt further defence of the position against such over whelming forces, supported by superior field artillery advantageously posted. He determined therefore to evacuate the fort that night and blow up the magazine so as to destroy all the ammunition and public property 408 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. he could not take along. The valley around the fort was lighted up nearly all night by burning buildings of the village and by the flames from a large quantity of char coal which had been set on fire at the base of Pilot Knob, so that the movements of the Federal garrison could be easily observed by the enemy from the nearest mountain sides. There was danger that the preparations for evac uation would be observed and communicated to some of the Confederate commanders, who would throw a strong force across the Federal line of retreat and cut the troops to pieces in their attempt to escape. During the night General Ewing had sent out a sufficient force to take possession of the village of Pilot Knob and the valley around the fort to the base of the hills and to observe any hostile movement. He ascertained that a strong Confederate force was stationed just north of Pilot Knob on the Mineral Point road, and that the Potosi road was the only one not guarded and by which he could hope to get out with his command unobserved by the enemy. At midnight preparations for the evacuation were com menced. With as little stir as possible the troops were aroused, knapsacks packed, haversacks and cartridge- boxes well supplied, artillery horses harnessed and hitched to the pieces, and the limber chests filled with ammunition. When everything was in readiness, at three o'clock, Colonel Fletcher moved out noiselessly with the infantry and formed them in column near the end of the rifle-pits extending from the north face of the fort. He was soon followed by the cavalry and battery, which passed out over the drawbridge, that had tents spread upon it to muffle the sound. The whole force then moved forward in column with instructions to make as little noise as possible, and soon struck the Potosi road, passing very near a Confederate force on the right and another on the left without attracting the attention of either. A good many Union refugees of that section, BATTLE OF PILOT KNOB. 409 men, women, and children, white and black, who had flocked into Pilot Knob when the Confederates arrived in Arcadia Valley, went along with the Federal troops and were destined to embarrass their movements. The main part of the Confederate army which had en camped around Ironton that night, and the brigades which had been assigned to the duty of watching the Federal garrison, did not know anything of the evacua tion until they heard the explosion of the magazine that shook the surrounding hills an hour or so after General Ewing left. The retreating column met with no opposi tion until nearing Caledonia, when at sunrise the advance- guard attacked and routed at that place twenty-five mounted men of Shelby's command, killing one man. At that point General Ewing ascertained that Shelby had taken Potosi the evening before, that the men just routed were his advance, and that his division was only two miles in the Federal front. This skirmish and the in formation obtained induced General Ewing to change his line of march by taking the road to Webster, nearly due west in the direction of Rolla, thus avoiding Shelby, who held his division in line of battle several hours and until he received orders from General Price to join with Mar- maduke in the pursuit. Having made disposition of the troops and artillery for another attack on the fort on the morning of the evacuation, some time was lost in making new disposition for the pursuit, so that Marmaduke did not leave Pilot Knob until about eight o'clock that morn ing with his division. This delay of about five hours gave General Ewing a good start, and he marched all that day undisturbed, arriving at Webster, a distance of thirty- one miles, at sundown, where he rested until midnight. He then resumed the march, taking the road to Leas- burg, a station on the Southwest Branch of the Pacific Railroad ; but the night was so dark and stormy that he made little progress until daylight. His decision to take 4IO THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. the Leasburg instead of the Rolla road was a wise one, for nearly all the way it ran along a narrow ridge sepa rating the waters of the Courtois and Huzza and on each side of it there were frequent precipitous bluffs. A pursuing cavalry force would have little opportunity of making detours to operate on his flanks, and if they advanced directly upon his rear, he could use the guns of his battery in sweeping them down with grape and canister. Marmaduke and Shelby did not leave Caledonia with their divisions until late in the afternoon, but march ing all night, overtook and vigorously charged Ewing's rear-guard the next morning at eight o'clock just as he reached the ridge which he hoped would protect him from flank movements. Dispositions were at once made for defending his rear by placing three companies of the Third Missouri State Militia Cavalry, the detachment of the Fourteenth Iowa Infantry, one company of the Forty- seventh Missouri Infantry, and Lieutenant Smiley's sec tion of Captain Montgomery's battery, under Major H. H. Williams, Tenth Kansas Infantry, Aide-de-Camp on the staff of the General. Marmaduke's division led the ad vance in the pursuit until late in the afternoon, making frequent charges on the Federal rear-guard. As the Con federate officers could not deploy their troops so as to present a very extended line on the narrow ridge, their attacks were easily repulsed by a volley or so from the Federal rear-guard, or a few rounds of grape and canister from the section of the battery. If they came up in strong force and dismounted and attempted to deploy and advance on foot, the section of artillery limbered up and the rear-guard faced about and moved on to overtake the column. At a distance of three or four miles of Leas- burg the narrow ridge terminated and the road passed over a section less broken and more favorable for the movement of mounted troops. At this point Shelby's division was given the advance BATTLE OF PILOT KNOB. 411 and pushed forward and attacked General Ewing's force on the flanks and in front and rear with a good deal of energy. It required the liberal use of grape and canister from the sections of artillery and frequent volleys from different detachments of the Federal troops to hold the enemy off until the little command, worn out from march ing and fighting, could reach the station. It was after dark when General Ewing arrived at the station, and his artillery had barely time to unlimber and his troops to form line, when the Confederates under Shelby made a charge. A detachment of Colonel J. S. Warmouth's regiment of Enrolled Militia, which had recently evacu ated the place, had made breastworks of railroad ties. Hastily occupying these rude defences, the Federal troops opened fire on the enemy and soon repulsed their attack. When Shelby made his first attack a few miles out from the station, the Union refugees who had accompanied General Ewing from Pilot Knob became excited, and by their panics came near seriously embarrassing the opera tions of the troops. About nine o'clock that night a train arrived from St. Louis with supplies for the troops at Rolla, thirty-five miles distant. If he remained at Leasburg during the night, General Ewing was convinced that the enemy would be up in force the next morning to renew the at tack, and as there was no hope of receiving reinforce ments, he determined to put his command aboard the train and start for St. Louis. When everything was in readiness and the train was about to start, the lights of burning buildings were noticed at the nearest stations north and south of Leasburg. As the enemy evidently had possession of the railroad at those points, the troops were taken off the cars and spent the night in fortifying, remounting the guns of the battery which had been taken off the carriages, and otherwise preparing for an attack the next morning. The next morning the Confederates ap- 412 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. peared in force and drove in the Federal outposts, and there was some sharp skirmishing during the day in which E wing's artillery fired several rounds; but after thor oughly reconnoitring1 the position, Marmaduke and Shelby decided that it would cost too great a sacrifice of life to make an assault, and withdrew their forces and marched off to Sullivan station in the direction of St. Louis. After the enemy withdrew, General Ewing marched for Rolla with his command, except one hun dred men left to hold the station, and on arriving at St. James, twelve miles from Rolla, sent forward his infantry by railroad. On Monday, October 3d, he turned over the command which he had brought out from Pilot Knob, to General John McNeil at Rolla, and with a small escort and his staff returned to St. Louis. The battle of Pilot Knob was an important event in Price's expedition. The punishment Ewing inflicted on Marmaduke's and Pagan's divisions in that battle was so severe that the officers and men of those divisions did not recover their martial spirit — elan — during the rest of the campaign. General Ewing reported his loss in the battle of Pilot Knob in defending the passes and in his retreat to Leasburg at 200 men killed, wounded, and missing. He estimated that at least 50 men of this number were of the missing, some of whom were cut off and afterwards re turned to their commands, and the others men who were captured and paroled. He reported the Confederate losses at Pilot Knob and in forcing the passes at 1500 men killed and wounded. General Price never made any report of his casualties in the series of actions during the two days' operations around Pilot Knob, including the assaults on Fort Davidson, but Captain T. J. Mackey, Chief Engineer on his staff, states that " in twenty minutes we lost 1164 officers and men killed and wounded, which, added to those who fell in forcing the passes on the previous day, made our casualties aggregate not less than 1500 of our BATTLE OF PILOT KNOB. 413 best troops placed hors de combat since we entered the valley of Arcadia." * It would be difficult to persuade the impartial ob server of the events of that period that General Price was not responsible for the desperate and bloody acts of the Southern partisan bandits whom he commissioned. And it may surprise some to know that he permitted and sanctioned acts scarcely less atrocious by the officers and soldiers under his immediate control. Of the numerous bloody acts charged against him and that must forever detract from his name as an officer and man of noble in stincts, none perhaps stands out more conspicuously than the murder, by his order or permission, of Major James Wilson, Third Missouri State Militia Cavalry, and six of his men, who were captured on Pilot Knob, September 27th, while defending the pass. This gallant officer, who had skilfully and resolutely defended the passes for nearly two days and with his small force contested every step of the advance of the Southern army, was held with six of his men a week after capture, and then brutally murdered by a detachment led by a field officer of Mar- maduke's division. The Major was hung and his men were shot down and their bodies left by the roadside. When General Rosecrans was informed of the fate of Major Wilson and his men, he at once retaliated by directing his provost-marshal to order out from among the Confederate prisoners a major and six enlisted men for execution, in reprisal for the prisoners who had been wantonly murdered. *See article of Captain T. J. Mackey, Engineer C. S. A., in Monthly Illustrator, New York, 1896.

## lexington-little-blue

CHAPTER XXVIII. ORGANIZATION OF THE KANSAS FORCES— MOBILIZING THE MILITIA — SKIRMISHES AT LEXINGTON, LITTLE BLUE, AND INDEPENDENCE. THE latter part of the summer of 1864, General Curtis, commanding the Department of Kansas, had a large part of his troops under Major-General Blunt employed against hostile Indians on the Upper Arkansas in the western part of the State. Major-General George Sykes commanded the District of South Kansas, which included the eastern Border counties of the State. Brigadier-General E. B. Brown commanded the District of Central Missouri, and Brigadier-General John B. Sanborn commanded the Dis trict of Southwest Missouri, and the western limits of their districts included the western Border counties of Missouri. There was a hearty cooperation between the district commanders on both sides of the line, and active operations were conducted against the Southern partisan bandits, frequently striking them hard and allowing them little rest. On returning to his headquarters at Fort Leavenworth on the i/th of September, General Curtis found despatches awaiting him from General Thayer, commanding the District of the Frontier, Fort Smith, Ar kansas, stating that Price had crossed the Arkansas River at Dardanelle with two divisions of mounted troops and a complement of artillery and was advancing north to invade Missouri. He at once telegraphed this informa tion to General Halleck, Washington, to General Rose- VOL. II.— 28 433 434 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. crans, commanding the Department of Missouri, and to Governor Carney, of Kansas, and suggested to the Gov ernor that the situation might become so menacing as to require the calling out of the militia of the State to aid in checking the movements of the enemy. Closely fol lowing the reports of the advance of Price north of the Arkansas River, came information that a force of two or three thousand men under Generals Gano and Stand Watie had crossed the Arkansas River above Fort Gibson and was moving up through the Indian Territory to make a raid into Southern Kansas to destroy if possible the large supply depot at Fort Scott. Each day brought additional information of the ap proaching storm, and on the 2Oth of September General Curtis received a despatch from Colonel Blair, command ing at Fort Scott, that the Confederate force under Gen eral Gano, advancing north through the Indian Territory, had captured a large Federal supply train of upwards of two hundred wagons at Cabin Creek and had retired to the south side of the Arkansas River. For nearly two weeks after Price crossed to the north side of the Ar kansas River no certain information could be obtained whether his invading columns would enter Southwest or Southeast Missouri, so that General Curtis, like General Rosecrans, was at first unable to determine at what point he should concentrate his troops. He was satisfied that if the Southern forces entered Southwest Missouri they would swing around through the eastern Border counties of Kansas, and that if they entered Southeastern Mis souri, they would be driven west into Kansas by the troops in the Department of Missouri, if they did not meet with determined resistance. To prepare for the coming struggle he ordered General Blunt, commanding the District of the Upper Arkansas, to stop his pursuit of the hostile Indians and to move with such troops as could be spared from that district to Council Grove, thence to ORGANIZATION OF THE KANSAS FORCES. 435 Olathe, near the eastern line of the State. In view of the fact that large Confederate raiding forces had twice within the last two years advanced through the western counties of Missouri to the Missouri River, the Department com mander of Kansas deemed it advisable to construct forti fications of considerable strength at Fort Scott, Paola, and Lawrence and to mount siege-guns, with a sufficient force to man them, for the protection of those places. In addition to the rifle-pits, there were three detached bastions for the four 24-pounder siege-guns mounted at Fort Scott. On account of the large quantities of army supplies kept at that post, there were nearly always from five hundred to one thousand troops stationed there, to gether with some field artillery. When it was satisfactorily ascertained that the large Confederate force in Southeast Missouri was Price's army, General Curtis was kept constantly advised of its progress north to the vicinity of St. Louis and to the Missouri River by General Rosecrans. As soon as it was known that Price had given up his intention of attacking or investing St. Louis, and after striking the Missouri River at Washington had turned west in the direction of Jefferson City, General Curtis was satisfied that the next objective of the Southern forces was the invasion of Kansas for plunder and revenge, and on the 5th of Octo ber wrote Governor Carney urging him to call out the Kansas militia immediately, equipped for service for thirty days. The Governor did not at once issue his proclamation calling out the militia, for he argued that the forces of General Rosecrans would probably overtake and strike Price such a blow that he would be unable to reach Kansas. An election for State officers and Presi dential electors would take place next month, and as the people were in the midst of a heated political canvass, the Governor was anxious that the expense and necessity of calling out the citizens for military service, even for a 436 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. short period, might be averted. When the newspapers first discussed the probability or possibility of the Gover nor's calling out the militia, those who were opposed to the friends of the National Administration charged that the scheme for the call was for political effect, and denounc ing it aroused some opposition. There were few telegraph lines in the State, and outside of three or four cities the great mass of the people were not advised of the position or of any given movement of the enemy until a week or more had elapsed. After Price struck the Pacific Railroad, interrupting communication between St. Louis and Jefferson City, Generals Brown and Fisk at the latter place kept General Curtis advised by telegraph of the movements west of the hostile forces until they appeared before the State capital on the /th. But as Price concluded not to attack Jefferson City and passed it on his flank with some skir mishing, General Curtis saw that no time should be lost in organizing and concentrating his forces in the neighbor hood of Kansas City and Olathe, Kansas, at the earliest practicable moment, and on the 8th wrote Governor Car ney again urging him to issue his proclamation calling out the militia. In response to the General's request the Governor issued his proclamation on the 8th, calling out the people for the defence of the State against the threat ened invasion, and directed the suspension of all business until the crisis had passed. Major-General George W. Deitzler, who as colonel had gallantly led the First Kansas Infantry at the battle of Wilson Creek until he was severely wounded, was by the Governor placed in command of the Kansas militia and charged with their immediate organization for service on the Border. He at once issued orders to his brigade com manders to concentrate their regiments and detachments at designated places, prepared for active service for thirty days, unless sooner discharged, and to see that each man ORGANIZATION OF THE KANSAS FORCES. 437 was supplied with two blankets, haversack, and some of the conveniences for preparing, cooking, and eating his food. The men were also to bring such small-arms as they had, with supply of ammunition. On receipt of these orders the brigadier-generals of districts forthwith notified their regimental commanders to order into the field every man liable to duty and then to march with their respective regiments to the places designated for concentration. To secure prompt and efficient military organization and action, General Curtis issued an order declaring martial law throughout the State of Kansas, and requiring all men subject to military duty to attach themselves to some of the organizations of troops which were being raised in every locality to oppose the ap proaching hostile forces. On assuming command of the militia, General Deitzler designated Olathe as the head quarters of the State forces and the point of general con centration of the different organizations at the earliest practicable moment. That the people might understand and appreciate the imminent danger, General Curtis gave out to the press for publication the latest despatches an nouncing the movements and rapid approach of the enemy, so that intense interest and excitement were aroused, which rapidly spread to the remotest districts, causing a suspension of business on the farms, in the shops, and by all classes throughout the State. In less than four days after General Deitzler issued his orders mobilizing the militia, organizations were marching from all parts of the State in the direction of the point of concentration at Olathe. Several regiments arrived at that place on the evening of October I2th, but as General Curtis had already arrived and found wood and water scarce, he determined to take a more advanced position, at Shawneetown, about half-way between Olathe and Kansas City, and so advised General Deitzler. The regi ments which had arrived and all other militia organizations 438 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. as they came up were directed to proceed to the new rendezvous at Shawneetown, where they were immedi ately armed and equipped for the field. Of the twenty- four regiments of Kansas militia mobilized under the Governor's proclamation, all had arrived at the encamp ment at Shawneetown by the i6th except those ordered to rendezvous at Atchison and Leavenworth and some detachments left to hold the posts at Paola and Mound City. As soon as General Blunt arrived from the District of the Upper Arkansas, he was directed to proceed to Paola and relieve Major-General George Sykes of the command of the District of South Kansas. On assuming com- mand of his new district on the loth, General Blunt at once commenced to put his troops in condition for active service against the approaching foe. The militia and troops thus collected and organized formed two divisions, which General Curtis called " The Army of the Border." The First Division, Major-General Blunt commanding, consisted of four brigades and seventeen pieces of artillery, mostly 12-pounder mountain howitzers. The Second Division, Major-General Deitzler commanding, consisted of about eight thousand Kansas militia and some artillery, and at first formed the left wing of the Army of the Border, the First Division forming the right wing. On the 1 3th General Blunt was directed to move to Hickman's Mills, in the southern part of Jackson County, Missouri, with his mounted force and artillery, and to send a scout far enough east to ascertain whether Price had moved south. Most of the Kansas militia were op posed to crossing the State line into Missouri, and were posted along Turkey Creek from Shawneetown to the vicinity of Kansas City. The slow advance of the Con federate forces and the conflicting reports as to their position caused the militia to become impatient, and ORGANIZATION OF THE KANSAS FORCES. 439 murmurs of discontent were heard in their camps, border ing almost on insubordination. This mutinous spirit was encouraged by some of the Kansas newspapers denounc ing the mobilization of the militia as a fraud and asserting that Price was not marching in the direction of Kansas, but had moved south from Central Missouri. A few of the militia actually started home ; but they were brought back, and by the tact and firmness displayed by General Curtis, and by giving publicity to the latest movements of the advancing foe, the gravity of the situation received more serious and thoughtful consideration. As soon as his Regular and militia forces were organized and equipped, General Curtis was desirous of advancing the Army of the Border as far east into Missouri as Lone Jack and Pleasant Hill, in accordance with his own views and with suggestions from General Rosecrans, but was obliged to content himself with establishing his main line on the Big Blue, where he proposed to endeavor to check the Confederate advance, in consequence of the aversion of many of the Kansas militia to crossing the State line. The Second Colorado Cavalry, Colonel J. H. Ford com manding, which was serving in the western part of the Central District of Missouri, was ordered by General Rosecrans to report to General Curtis on the 2gth of September. Colonel Ford was ordered to concentrate his regiment at Pleasant Hill, but on the I4th of October he was instructed to change his headquarters to Independ ence and to scout to the front in the direction of Lexing ton. General Blunt, who had arrived at Hickman's Mills with the First Division, was ordered to move with all his mounted force to Pleasant Hill and reconnoitre in the direction of Warrensburg. When General Brown was ordered to concentrate his forces at Jefferson City for the defence of the capital, the Second Colorado Cavalry and a few companies of Enrolled Militia were the only troops left to occupy some of the 440 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. important towns and to scout the country and operate against the bandits in the western part of his district. He was obliged to evacuate the important post of War- rensburg, which was then the terminus of the Pacific Railroad and the headquarters of the Central District of Missouri, and remove the public property as far as prac ticable to Jefferson City. Before leaving, however, he had a conference with Major Emory S. Foster, who had recently resigned from the Seventh Missouri State Militia Cavalry, on account of wounds received in action, and with Captain George S. Grover, who had been in active service in Central and Western Missouri from the begin ning of the war up to a short time prior to that date, and asked them whether they would undertake the task of raising several companies to hold the post, with such stores as could not be taken away, against any irregular force of Southern partisan bands which might make an attack upon it. These gentlemen agreed to re-enter the service and to do all in their power to recruit as many men as pos sible to meet the emergency. Nearly all the men of that section who were subject to military duty, and even some who were not, had seen military service in some of the militia or volunteer organizations of the State since the beginning of the war, so that in four days Major Foster and Captain Grover had raised four full companies of mounted men. The organization was at first known as "Johnson County Citizen Guards," but subsequently, when the companies were mustered into service and received their arms and equipments, the designation was changed to " Foster's Cavalry Battalion, Missouri Volun teers." With this force Major Foster held the post up wards of two weeks, keeping part of his men scouting in all directions to guard against a surprise and to keep him advised of any movement of the enemy threatening his position. He was informed of the movements of the in vading army until Price passed Jefferson City, when the ORGANIZATION OF THE KANSAS FORCES. 44! railroad and telegraph line were cut, interrupting com munication with that point. A small detachment of his command, under Lieutenant A. L. Reavis, which had been sent to Sedalia in connection with establishing com munication with headquarters, was captured at that place in the afternoon of the I5th by Brigadier-General Jeff. Thompson, who made a dash on the Federal detachment there with a brigade and a section of artillery of Shelby's division. The defences of the place consisted of two redoubts with a continuous line of rifle-pits extending around them, and were held by about six hundred Home Guards and citizens under Colonel J. D. Crawford of the Enrolled Militia. But having observed the movement of the Confederates as they advanced over the wide expanse of prairie north of town, and knowing that his own men were poorly armed and disciplined and unprepared to stand a bombardment, Colonel Crawford decided to evac uate the place without making a fight. General Thompson remained in Sedalia only a few hours, and then marched northwest to rejoin Price in the vicinity of Marshall, passing only a few miles from General Sanborn's right flank, which had that evening arrived at Dunksburg. General Rosecrans now considered it desirable to es tablish communication between his forces and those of General Curtis, and Major Foster was directed to move west with his command from Warrensburg until he met General Blunt with part of his division of Kansas troops moving east from Pleasant Hill. There was very little time lost in getting his command in motion, and after an all-night's march the Major met General Blunt the next morning, October i/th, at Big Creek, east of Pleasant Hill, and reported to him the positions of General Rosecrans' troops as far as he had been advised. General Blunt con tinued to advance east that day to H olden, where he halted and directed Major Foster to return with a detach- 442 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. ment of his command and a telegraph operator to War- rensburg to make a reconnoissance. That evening the Major telegraphed General Blunt the movements and positions of General Rosecrans' forces as far as could be ascertained, which determined Blunt to move at once for Lexington. In this movement the main part of Foster's battalion, which remained with the Kansas troops, fell under command of Captain Grover, the senior captain, and was assigned to Colonel Jennison's First Brigade, Army of the Border, and being armed with Martini- Henry breech-loading rifles, a very superior arm that dis charged sixteen shots without reloading, was constantly kept to the front and on the skirmish-line. All General Blunt's command, consisting of the First and Second Brigades of his division under Colonels Jen- nison and Moonlight, respectively, arrived at Lexington in the afternoon of the i8th, and finding no force of the enemy there except a few guerillas, of whom several were killed and captured, went into camp near the Fair Grounds and College for the night. Having obtained reliable in formation of the positions of General Rosecrans' forces, General Blunt before leaving Holden sent couriers with despatches stating his position and movements to General Sanborn and urging upon him the propriety of at once uniting their forces for an offensive movement against the Southern army. He also sent a despatch by telegraph to General Curtis to order forward on the Independence and Lexington road to reinforce him part of the Third Bri gade of his division under Colonel Blair, consisting of the Sixteenth Kansas Cavalry and Second Colorado Cavalry. On the arrival of these reinforcements he proposed to make such disposition of his force as to hold the Confed erate army if possible until Sanborn could come up and strike it in the flank. But he was obliged to abandon his plans, for General Curtis was embarrassed by most of the Kansas militia refusing to go out of the State, and he did ORGANIZATION OF THE KANSAS FORCES. 443 not send him the reinforcements asked for, nor did the couriers from General Sanborn reach him. General Blunt received reliable information directly after entering Lex ington that the advance of Price's army, under Shelby, was at Waverly, twenty miles below on the Missouri River, and would probably come up the next day. The next morning, the iQth, he ordered scouting detachments from his two brigades sent out on all the roads leading into Lexington from the east and southeast, with in structions to report the moment the Confederate advance came in sight. On leaving Waverly at daylight on the morning of the igth, Shelby's division led the advance of Price's army on Lexington. After crossing Tebo Creek, Price made a flank movement to the left, part of his force going as far south as the Sedalia and Lexington road, to prevent the uniting of the forces of Sanborn and A. J. Smith, which were then on Blackwater, with those of General Blunt, which he had heard was contemplated. He had called in his detachments ; he had received a great many recruits, and some arms at the capture of Glasgow; and most of his army having rested several days he was prepared to enter upon the struggle which would determine the suc cess or failure of his campaign. In his movement from Waverly he approached Lexington in three columns, his advance on the Dover road driving in the Federal pickets and scouts about one o'clock. General Blunt promptly reinforced his outposts, with instructions to commanding officers to resist the advance of the enemy. He then ordered his command to a position in line of battle south east of the city, where the open and undulating nature of the ground enabled him to observe the movements of the enemy a mile or so in his front. His outposts, which were deployed as skirmishers, soon became warmly engaged with the enemy three or four miles from the main line, but were gradually forced back upon it, as the Confeder- 444 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. ates continued to increase in numbers and soon brought into use their artillery. As he had no field artillery with his division, his short-range howitzers could not reply effectively to the long-range rifled guns which Shelby brought into action. But he held his position until nearly sundown — until he was convinced that Price's army was in his immediate front, and until the Confeder ates commenced to flank him on the right and left in large numbers, when he gave the order to retire on the road to Independence. On seeing the Federal troops retiring from the field, the Confederates under General Jeff. Thompson at once pressed forward with a good deal of energy to overwhelm General Blunt's rear. Colonel Moonlight, commanding the Second Brigade, with the Eleventh Kansas Cavalry and four howitzers, covered the retreat, and he was so hotly pressed for two or three miles that he was several times obliged to make a stand and put his men and how itzers into action to check the enemy. Darkness then suspended further operations, and the Federal troops marched all night in a chilly rain, arriving at the Little Blue River the next morning at daylight, where General Blunt determined to make a stand. The Confederate troops under General Thompson who were thrown for ward several miles in the pursuit marched back to Lex ington that night and went into camp. In this skirmish at Lexington, if General Blunt had been supplied with a field battery of rifled guns he could have made a more effective showing in resisting and punishing the enemy than he did. On arriving at the Little Blue and crossing to the west side of that stream, General Blunt took up a good defensive position along the bluffs, and sent to Independence, eight miles distant, for rations for his troops, and a despatch to General Curtis, whose headquarters were then at that place, requesting him to send forward the Sixteenth Kan- ORGANIZATION OF THE KANSAS FORCES. 445 sas Cavalry, the Second Colorado Cavalry, and Captain McLain's Colorado battery of five 3-inch rifled guns. But as the Kansas militia were unwilling to move forward, and as General Curtis had decided to make the Big Blue his line of defence, he directed General Blunt to leave a strong outpost on the Little Blue and to bring the bal ance of his troops on to Independence. Leaving Colonel Moonlight with the Second Brigade as an outpost to guard the bridge over the Little Blue and the fords of the stream above and below, with instructions to burn the bridge if the enemy advanced on that road, General Blunt, with Jennison's brigade and Captain Grover's battalion, Missouri Volunteers, marched to Independence and went into camp there that night, giving his men and animals needed rest and food. As the advance of the enemy was expected at any moment, Colonel Moonlight directed Major Martin Anderson, of the Eleventh Kansas Cavalry, to take two companies of his regiment and guard the bridge until the enemy were reported advancing in force and then to burn it. A picket was posted a mile or so east of the bridge on the Lexington road, to give notice of the approach of the enemy. While General Blunt was retreating to the Little Blue during the night of the iQth, General Price's army had gone into camp at Lexington and three miles south of the city. The next day the Confederate army resumed the march west on the Independence road, encamping that night at Fire Prairie, some six miles east of the Little Blue, having met with no opposition. But in his further movements Price suddenly found that he must encounter very determined opposition at every step, and that the Federal troops had been collected in such numbers in his front and on his flank as to give him blow for blow in the impending struggle. On the morning of the 2ist, the Federal picket posted east of the Little Blue galloped in and reported to Major Anderson the advance of the 446 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. enemy in sight, at which the Major immediately fired the bridge over the stream. When the flames had made such progress as to make the destruction of the bridge certain, the Major fell back with his companies to the hill, and with other troops under Colonel Moonlight opened fire upon the enemy as soon as they came up within range. General Clark's brigade of Marmaduke's division was in advance. On coming up and finding the bridge burned, the General sent a regiment under Colonel Preston to secure the ford about a mile above the bridge, and another regiment under Colonel Lawther to secure a ford half a mile below the bridge. Colonel Moonlight had not disposed his command so as to defend either of these fords with much tenacity, and they were soon forced and Clark's brigade crossed over to the west side of the stream. Colonel Lawther crossing the stream first, pressed forward and attacked Moonlight, who had taken up a good position behind a stone fence running at right angles to the road, and not only repulsed the assault, but in turn assailed the Confederates and drove them back in confusion almost to the river, until the latter were reinforced by the other regiments of Clark's brigade and the other brigades of Marmaduke's division. In deed, he so much demoralized Lawther's regiment and some supporting detachments, that Shelby's division was hurried to the front, and his men, except one regiment, dismounting on the east bank of the Little Blue, waded the stream and formed on the west side, on the left of Marmaduke's division. This temporary check enabled General Price to close up with his trains and to bring forward Fagan's division to the support of Marmaduke and Shelby. After some discussion of the situation with his principal officers and with Senator J. H. Lane, of Kansas, who was a volunteer aide-de-camp on his staff, General Curtis decided to order General Blunt with the brigades of Colonels Jennison and ORGANIZATION OF THE KANSAS FORCES. 447 Ford, and McLain's Colorado battery, to the support of Colonel Moonlight, holding the position on the Little Blue. This force, including Captain Grover's Missouri battalion, had just moved out when General Blunt re ceived a despatch from Colonel Moonlight stating that the enemy were advancing in force and that he was then engaging their advance. General Curtis, with members of his staff and escort, quickly followed General Blunt's column, and on arriv ing upon the field directed the movements of troops and the placing of batteries in position in person. He did not desire to bring on a general engagement, but he wished to delay by this demonstration of his small force the movements of the invading army, knowing that every moment it was held would bring Rosecrans' forces nearer to his support. When General Blunt met Colonel Moon light and saw that he had lost the strong position along the bluffs west of the Little Blue, he felt that a mistake had been made in not promptly sending to his support the day before all the troops and field artillery that could have been spared from Kansas City and Independence. Although Marmaduke's and Shelby's divisions had crossed to the west side of the stream and deployed in line of battle, General Blunt determined to make an effort to drive them back and retake the position from which Colonel Moonlight had been forced by superior numbers. On arriving upon the field and making a hasty exami nation of the situation, he dismounted his troops, except some detachments to operate on his flanks, and com menced making his dispositions for battle. He placed Colonel Ford's Fourth Brigade in his centre, Colonel Jennison's First Brigade on his right, and Colonel Moon light's Second Brigade on his left, with the Colorado battery near the centre of his line, supported by part of Captain Grover's Missouri battalion, dismounted and lying down just in front of it with a full supply of ammu- 448 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. nition for their Martini-Henry breech-loading rifles. It was now eleven o'clock and in a short time his entire line became engaged in a fierce conflict with the enemy in the timber along the bluffs west of Little Blue, and succeeded in driving them back some distance, perhaps half a mile. While his troops were thus engaged, his Colorado battery under the direction of Major R. H. Hunt, Chief of Artil lery on the staff of General Curtis, played upon the Confederate lines and position with good effect. The mountain howitzers of the First and Second Brigades also did good service, frequently using canister and spherical case when the enemy came up within range. As soon as Marmaduke and Shelby got their artillery over the river, they, too, opened fire from their batteries on the Federal lines; but the shot and shell from their guns flew high over the heads of the Federal troops, doing very little damage. For hours the fight went on without decided advantage to either side, when Price pushed forward Fagan's division to the support of Shelby and Marmaduke, thus enabling them to extend their lines and with their mounted troops to flank the Federal posi tion on the right and left. Having no reserves to support his troops thus engaged, and finding both of his flanks threatened by a superior force, General Curtis, who was present on the field directing the general movements of his forces, ordered General Blunt to retire his command on the road to Independence. In the retreat of the Federal troops from the field, Colonel Ford, Second Colorado Cavalry, commanded the rear-guard, and was obliged to form part of his force at nearly every elevated position on the road and bring into use artillery and engage the enemy while the other half of his command formed at another favorable position. Thus the enemy were held in check until the command arrived near Independence, when General Blunt formed a new line of battle on the east side of that place. At ORGANIZATION OF THE KANSAS FORCES. 449 this point there was some skirmishing, but as the Confed erates did not immediately appear in force, General Blunt retreated through Independence to the main camp of the Kansas militia on the west side of the Big Blue, where General Curtis' engineer officers had been employed for several days in constructing defensive works. While General Blunt's skirmish-line was engaging the enemy east of town, the Twelfth Kansas State Militia, Colonel L. S. Treat commanding, and some Missouri Enrolled Militia, who had been left at Independence to hold the place and guard public property, fell back on the Kansas City road to the west side of Big Blue. The moment General Blunt commenced to withdraw his troops from his position east of town, the Confederates of Shelby's division renewed the attack, the opposing forces fighting through the streets of Independence just at dark. It was in this last struggle of the day that the notorious Captain George Todd of Quantrill's bandit command was killed by the Federal rear-guard ; and it was here, too, that Captain Grover's Missouri battalion with their re peating rifles did good service in checking the advance of the enemy. In the early part of the fight on the Little Blue in the morning, Major J. N. Smith, commanding the Second Colorado Cavalry, was shot through the head and in stantly killed while gallantly leading his regiment against the foe. In his service on the Border, extending back up wards of a year, he had on all occasions shown himself to be a prudent and efficient officer, and only a fe\v days before this fight had made a scout to Lexington to obtain information of the movements and position of the Con federate forces, then reported to be advancing westward. The latest despatches General Curtis had from General Rosecrans showed that his cavalry under Pleasonton and his infantry under A. J. Smith should be close upon the rear of Price's army, and the sound of Federal VOL. II. — 29 450 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. artillery in that direction was eagerly expected all day long by the troops of the Army of the Border. After driving the forces of General Curtis from the Little Blue back upon their main line of defence on the Big Blue, Price's army with its large trains moved forward and encamped that night in and about Independence, with heavy outposts thrown forward in the direction of the Federal position on Big Blue, and with a strong rear guard left on the west side of the Little Blue to watch for the approach of Rosecrans' forces.

## glasgow

CHAPTER XXIX. CAPTURE OF GLASGOW, PARIS, AND CARROLLTON, MISSOURI. IN the spring and summer of 1864 the Federal arms met with several serious reverses west of the Mississippi River — not in the loss of battles, but in the loss of trans portation, crippling the operations of the army by inter rupting its communication with its base of supplies. The latter part of September, General W. S. Rosecrans, com manding the Department of the Missouri, received defi nite information that General Price was marching north through Arkansas with an army of twelve to fifteen thousand men, and a few days later that he had entered Southeast Missouri and was marching upon Pilot Knob en route to St. Louis and Jefferson City. To oppose the invading army and to strengthen the points which it was thought Price would make the most determined efforts to capture, General Rosecrans was obliged to concentrate as rapidly as practicable at St. Louis and Jefferson City all his available troops in the State, leaving the Missouri Enrolled Militia to hold the stations from which his other troops were withdrawn. Among the troops thus ordered to the defence of the capital of the State was the Forty- third Missouri Infantry under Colonel Chester Harding, Jr., which had completed its organization at St. Joseph in September. Most of the officers and men of the regi ment had seen service in the militia organizations of the State since the beginning of the war. In compliance 451 452 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. with instructions six companies of the regiment embarked on the steamer West Wind, October Qth, for Jefferson City. The Missouri River was very low at the time, and the progress down-stream was frequently interrupted by the boat running on to sand bars, generally requiring hours to get it off. About fifteen miles above Brunswick a man on the south side signalled the boat and she steamed to shore and took him on board. He was a Union man, and reported that Bill Anderson's guerillas, two hundred strong, were in the bend of the river at a point where the channel approached near the south bank, waiting to attack the boat. On nearing the point where the guerillas were supposed to be concealed, Colonel Harding ordered that a few shots be thrown into the brush from the 6-pounder field- piece which he had on board. The soldiers on the boat were lying down and could not be seen from shore, and in passing the threatened point fired some shots into the woods to draw the fire of the bandits, but without suc cess. It was also ascertained from the man taken on board that the guerillas had a little stockade on the hill north of Brunswick about a mile from the channel of the river. On approaching town the soldiers on the boat again lay down and concealed themselves so that they could not be seen from shore, and soon saw some thirty to forty of the guerillas, mounted, coming down in the direction of the landing to see what the boat had on board. Before they had come up within rifle-range they suddenly turned and galloped back to town as if they had received a signal of danger from the boat. The pilot had been in the Southern army and was known to be a Southern sympathizer and some of the officers accused him of having signalled the bandits of danger. Captain Oscar Kirkham, who was officer of the day, and who had watched the movements of the guerillas, was strongly of the opinion that the pilot of the boat had given a signal CAPTURE OF GLASGOW, PARIS, AND CARROLLTON. 453 which they understood. He protested his innocence, but claimed that if the guerillas caught him in that service they would kill him. Colonel Harding landed his command at Brunswick, sent forward his skirmishers under Lieutenant Simmonds to attack the enemy, and encamped there and picketed the town that night. He pressed horses into the service to mount about fifty of his men, and then sent a scout into the country four or five miles, but it was unable to come up with the bandits who were in town on his ap proach. He boarded the boat with his troops again the next day and arrived at Glasgow about three o'clock in the afternoon, and landed and went into camp, having heard that Price had passed Jefferson City and was ad vancing west up the river. He also soon heard of the fight at Boonville, and was informed that the enemy was in the vicinity, but no word had yet reached him that a large Confederate force had crossed or was preparing to cross to the north side of the river. When he landed he found at Glasgow the companies of Captain James A. Adams and Captain S. A. Hunter, of the Ninth Missouri State Militia Cavalry, some twenty men of the Thirteenth Missouri Cavalry under Captain J. E. Mayo, Captain Stein- metz's company of Citizen Guards, and Captain Bingham's Company Saline County militia. The loyal militia who had been stationed there had thrown up breastworks of earth around a square about as large as the usual court house square, on a high point in town, and it would have served as an excellent defence against an enemy not sup plied with artillery. Colonel Harding was the senior officer, and on assuming command of the post sent out scouts from the mounted militia and had infantry pick ets posted around town guarding all the approaches. Late in the afternoon of the I4th, reports came in that a Confederate force was crossing to the north side of the river at Arrow Rock, about sixteen miles be- 454 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. low, for the purpose of marching up on that side to at tack him. During the night a cavalry scout returned and reported that a large Confederate force had crossed to the north side of the river, was advancing under General Clark, and that an attack might be expected the next morning. At Glasgow the Missouri River turns nearly due south for several miles. In the plan of attack it had been arranged that General Shelby should march up and open fire with his artillery on the Federal position from the west side of the river, while General Clark, who had crossed to the north side, should attack the Federal force with small- arms and three pieces of artillery on the south, east, and north. Shelby marched during the night and arrived in front of Glasgow and posted a battery on a sand bar, and at sunrise on the morning of the I5th the roar of his artil lery was heard from across the river and the shot and shell from his guns were flying through town, causing a good deal of excitement among the people. While Gen eral Shelby was cannonading the town and Federal camp, Colonel Harding was preparing to meet the Confederate force advancing under General Clark. He posted the six companies of his own regiment and one company of militia, dismounted, on the south and east sides of town, and the two companies of Captains Adams and Hunter, of the Ninth Missouri State Militia Cavalry, on the north side of town. Captain Mayo with twenty men of the Thirteenth Missouri Cavalry and some sixty men of Saline County militia were sent out to hold a bridge over the creek on the Boonville road, south of town. Having made these dispositions of his troops, Colonel Harding was informed about nine o'clock by some de tachments of cavalry which he sent out south of town that the Confederate advance was coming up in sight. Very soon after this the Federal outposts were driven in and General Clark took up a position on high ground CAPTURE OF GLASGOW, PARIS, AND CARROLLTON. 455 facing the creek on the south side of town, overlooking the ground occupied by the Federal troops, with Jack- man's brigade on the left, Green's brigade in the centre, and Lawther's regiment on the right of the Confederate line. The opposing forces were now about half a mile apart, separated by a creek that empties into the Mis souri River below town. It was nearly an hour after he took up his first position before General Clark commenced to extend his line entirely around the town. When fully extended the Federal officers thought that his line was upwards of a mile in length. Even before there had been any heavy skirmishing he sent in under a flag of truce a demand for Colonel Harding to surrender, which was declined. When Colonel Harding's reply was re turned, about eleven o'clock, refusing to surrender, Gen eral Clark opened fire along his line with small-arms and with three pieces of artillery, but without doing much damage to the Federal troops, the range being too great. About twelve o'clock he commenced to advance his sharp shooters and skirmish-lines and to extend his main line around the Federal position. In this advance he was met by a determined resistance from the Federal sharp shooters and skirmishers, who were posted in buildings and behind fences and trees, and who did effective work in holding back the enemy for nearly two hours. Part of the Federal troops also occupied and kept up a hot fire from the brick buildings of Lewis Brothers' Tobacco Works in the northeast part of town. When the Federal detachments on the right and left of these buildings were driven back, leaving them outside the Federal line, they were abandoned by the men posted in them, and shortly afterwards occupied by the Confed erates. General Clark now extended his lines around the Federal position from the river below to the river above, and pushed the investment with so much persist ence that Colonel Harding was obliged to draw his troops 456 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. within the fortifications. The force under Captain Mayo which had been sent out to hold a bridge over the creek on the Boonville road, after repulsing several charges of the enemy, was compelled by overwhelming numbers to abandon the position and fall back upon Colonel Hard- ing's main line. At half-past twelve o'clock, after Colo nel Harding had retired to his fortifications, General Clark sent in to him another demand to surrender, and threat ened that if his demand was not complied with, Ander son's guerillas would be turned loose upon him. Colonel Harding again declined to yield and resented the threat, and the fight was resumed with sharp firing on both sides for about an hour, when General Clark sent another demand for the surrender of the Federal force. This command was not coupled with any dire threats in the event of refusal, and the proposition was entertained and terms soon agreed upon. The ammunition of the Federal troops was nearly exhausted ; the fire of General Clark's three guns was concentrated upon them ; they were surrounded on three sides by the Confederate forces, and on the other side was the river, which was commanded by Shelby's artillery on the west side, and there was no hope of reinforcements coming to their assistance. In the terms of surrender the Federal officers were per mitted to retain their side-arms and Colonel Harding was to have an escort for his officers and men to the Federal lines. The Federal troops then marched out of their fortifications to an open space and stacked their arms and surrendered. They were then paroled, but were obliged to stay in Glasgow that night under guard ; they were, however, well treated by the Confederate officers and men. The next day, with an escort for pro tection, they started for Boonville. It was estimated by Captain Kirkham, from whom this account of the fight is taken, and other Federal officers, that General Clark had from 5000 to 7000 men on the field that day, while CAPTURE OF GLASGOW, PARIS, AND CARROLLTON 457 the troops under Colonel Harding, including the militia, did not exceed 750 men. In his report of this action Colonel Harding stated his casualties at 1 1 men killed and 32 wounded. Captain Steinmetz, of the Citizen Guards, was killed at the head of his company, and Lieutenant George F. Simmonds, Sixty-second United States Colored Infantry, who was on sick-leave and who reported to Colonel Harding for duty, was shot and instantly killed while leading a de tachment of soldiers to a favorable position for sharp- shooting. Colonel Colton Greene, commanding a brigade of the Confederate force, reported his loss at 7 men killed and 46 wounded, including 2 officers killed. The loss in Jackman's brigade is not reported. On entering Boonville Price's army captured a steam ferryboat, which was used in crossing and recrossing his troops and recruits over the river at that and other points above. When Colonel Harding assumed command of the Federal forces at Glasgow, telegraphic communica tion with St. Louis had just been interrupted, and he did not know that Price was prepared to throw a large force with artillery to the north side of the river at his pleasure. An attack by the guerilla forces of Anderson, Quantrill, and Todd and by the Confederate recruits of Thrailkill and other recruiting officers from Price's army was con sidered probable ; but Colonel Harding believed that with his Regular troops and the militia, posted behind the rifle-pits and in one or two brick houses, he could hold the place against all these hostile forces. The surrender of Glasgow and the report of a large Confederate force with artillery north of the Missouri River made the Enrolled Missouri Militia on that side of the river very cautious about encountering the Southern troops. As Price marched up the south side of the river, having the use of a steam ferryboat, he sent over to the north side large recruiting parties under energetic 458 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. officers, who were sometimes successful in their move ments against the detachments of Enrolled Militia sta tioned in the different towns. This militia had rendered very effective service in the various operations against the guerilla bands of that section ; but they were not prepared to engage regular Confederate forces, supplied with artillery, and they were constantly impressed with the exaggerated number of men in every detachment of the enemy. They saw from published reports and were told by Southern sympathizers that Price's army was upwards of thirty thousand strong and was steadily ad vancing in spite of every effort of all the Federal forces of the Department to check him. As nearly all the Fed eral troops were south of the Missouri River and moving on the left flank of Price to keep him in near the river, his detachments were able to overrun the counties north of the river with very little opposition — with such oppo sition only as the Enrolled Militia were able to offer. On the same day that Glasgow surrendered, a Confed erate force, more than three hundred strong, attacked Cap tain William E. Fowkes' company, Seventieth Regiment Enrolled Missouri Militia, stationed at Paris, in Monroe County, and after some resistance compelled him to sur render. Two days later a Confederate force of about six hundred men under Major Jerry C. Cravens and Captain Williams surprised Major George Deagle, commanding the post of Carrollton, with 160 men of the Sixty-fifth Regiment Enrolled Missouri Militia, and demanded the immediate surrender of his command, stating that if the demand was not complied with in fifteen minutes they had their artillery planted and would shell the place. After some parleying as to terms Major Deagle sur rendered his command, and his men were taken to the south side of the Missouri River and paroled near Wa- verly, except six men who were turned over to Anderson's bandits and brutally murdered — shot down and their CAPTURE OF GLASGOW, PARIS, AND CARROLLTON. 459 bodies left by the roadside. The murdered men were charged with being connected with the killing of Colonel William F. Peery and two other Confederate recruiting officers near Carrollton the latter part of September while operating in Carroll County as guerillas. At the time these men were captured Price's invading wave had reached the flood mark and was receding, and intelligent officers like General Shelby and Major Cravens should have known that such atrocious acts would certainly soon bring upon their own people the severest retaliation. Many Southern sympathizers were so much elated by Price's advance that they hastened to join some of the organizations of his army, without stopping to think that his victorious hosts might in a few days become a panic- stricken, demoralized, and starving mob. These mis guided men, who had so often regarded the leniency of the Government as a weakness, were deceiving them selves in thinking that the preparations of the Federal forces to strike were due to weakness and fear. For several weeks the operations of Price's army in chasing the Enrolled Militia, sacking towns, and the bringing of trains loaded with spoils into the camps of his troops appeared to the Southern sympathizers as a merry war in which they would like to participate. But the picture was not so fascinating when they came to face the hard ships and realities of war — when they were chased day and night by the Federal cavalry, and were obliged to live on corn or meat without salt. In many instances they abandoned their colors and dropped out of ranks on the march at night and endeavored to work their way back to their homes. They generally fled from the sight of Federal cavalry and were pursued and shot down or captured. Most of those captured claimed that they had been conscripted and taken off by the Southern army. There were probably a few men conscripted, but nearly all the men who went off with Price were Southern sym- 460 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. pathizers or belonged to the Order of American Knights, a disloyal organization that had a large membership in the State. Before the end of December the prisons at the military posts of the State were filled with prison ers who had been picked up by the Federal cavalry, or who had surrendered to the Federal authorities, without arms, claiming that they had been conscripted by certain Confederate recruiting officers, and had deserted at the first opportunity.

## independence-big-blue

CHAPTER XXX. BATTLES OF INDEPENDENCE AND BIG BLUE, MISSOURI. ON the igth of October Major-General Pleasonton, under orders from Department Headquarters, assumed command of the Provisional Cavalry Division in person at Dunksburg, relieving Brigadier-General John B. San- born, who up to that time had been in command of the cavalry in the field operating against Price. In the re organization that took place, Brigadier-General E. B. Brown was assigned to the command of the First Bri gade, relieving Colonel John F. Philips, Seventh Missouri State Militia; Brigadier-General John McNeil was as signed to the command of the Second Brigade, relieving Colonel J. L. Beveridge, Seventeenth Illinois Cavalry; and Brigadier-General John B. Sanborn was assigned to the command of the Third Brigade, relieving Colonel J. J. Gravely, Eighth Missouri State Militia Cavalry. The brigade commanders thus relieved resumed command of their respective regiments. The Fourth Brigade, Colonel E. F. Winslow commanding, joined General Pleasonton at once from Sedalia. Colonel Catherwood's Thirteenth Missouri Veteran Cavalry, and the Seventh Kansas Cav alry under Major Francis M. Malone, were assigned to General McNeil's brigade. A section of 3-inch rifled guns was attached to each brigade. With the cavalry thus organized, and General Smith's infantry and artillery within supporting distance, the troops of General Rose- 461 462 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. crans' Department were for the first time since the opening of the campaign prepared for active aggressive operations against the invading army. To defend St. Louis and Jefferson City separately General Rosecrans had been obliged to concentrate all the available troops of his De partment at those places, and when the danger of attack upon those points had passed, some time was necessarily lost in repairing the railroad and bridges and in waiting for General Mower's division of infantry from Arkansas to come up. It was perhaps a fortunate circumstance for the Federal forces that Price was kept in Saline County nearly four days waiting for the return of the troops which he had despatched under Clark and Thompson for the capture of Glasgow and Sedalia. During this interval General Rose crans was able to repair the railroad, forward supplies to Sedalia for his troops, and push forward his infantry to the support of his cavalry at Dunksburg and Cook's Store, to engage Price if he attempted to pass out south from Saline County, or to move upon his rear if he marched west in the direction of Kansas. Before the arrival of General Pleasonton at Dunksburg General Sanborn re ceived reports indicating that Price was about to counter march his army from near Marshall so as to strike the railroad east of Sedalia and again threaten Jefferson City, or pass out south by way of Springfield. With the view of obtaining reliable information of Price's movements, General Sanborn sent out a reconnoissance on the night of the iQth under Colonel Phelps, Second Arkansas Cav alry, consisting of his own regiment and two squadrons of the Sixth Missouri State Militia under Major Plumb, with instructions to move north until he struck the Southern army or reached the Missouri River at Dover. Moving forward rapidly, Colonel Phelps received reliable information several miles south of Dover that the South ern army had been moving west through that place all BATTLES OF INDEPENDENCE AND BIG BLUE. 463 the afternoon and evening of the iQth, and that late in the evening artillery firing had been heard in the direc tion of Lexington. He immediately sent a messenger to General Sanborn with the information thus obtained, and then continued his march north, entering Dover on a charge at sunrise on the morning of the 2Oth, routing and driving out a Confederate force of about five hundred men, killing four men and capturing four officers and ten enlisted men. On receipt of this information that morn ing General Rosecrans ordered Pleasonton to push forward his cavalry to Lexington, with instructions to General Smith to support the movement with his infantry and artillery. General McNeil's Second Brigade, in the advance, en tered Lexington the night of the 2Oth, and was fired upon by two parties of Confederates who had been left by Price in his rear to observe the movements of the Federal troops. In the skirmish that ensued in the darkness the Fifth Missouri State Militia, in the advance, drove the Confed erates, about two hundred strong, out of town, capturing seven men. From Lexington Pleasonton's cavalry moved forward on the 2 1st on the road to Independence, his ad vance under McNeil encamping that night about ten miles east of Little Blue. Resuming the march early on the morning of the 22d, McNeil's brigade arrived at Little Blue about ten o'clock, and finding the bridge over the stream destroyed, crossed it at a ford below, and imme diately attacked Price's rear-guard, consisting of two brigades of Pagan's division. As the ford was considered impracticable for crossing the trains and artillery, a tem porary bridge was hastily constructed for the purpose, and a section of Captain Montgomery's battery, Second Missouri Light Artillery, was got over, and moving to the front at a gallop soon came up with General McNeil's brigade, which was deployed and steadily driving the enemy under General Cabell back upon Independence. 464 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BOEDER. In his efforts to check the Federal advance General Cabell very soon brought into use a section of artillery. But the Federal troops pushed forward with such deter mination that he was obliged in every instance to with draw his guns after firing two or three rounds. Thus the fight continued over the ground over which General Curtis had retreated fighting, the evening before, until nearing Independence, when General Cabell determined to make a stand at the eastern limits of the city and to bring into action all of Fagan's division. Directly after getting his troops and artillery in position the Federal advance came in sight and his battery opened fire upon it. General Pleasonton, who was at the front with his leading brigade directing the movements of his forces, at once commenced making his dispositions for battle. Mc Neil's Second Brigade, which had been advancing for several miles dismounted, on coming up was ordered into action, supported by a section of the Second Missouri Light Artillery under Captain Montgomery and two 12- pounder mountain howitzers attached to the Fifth Mis souri State Militia under Lieutenant A. Hillerich. In a short time Sanborn's Third Brigade came up at a gallop, and, dismounting under a hot fire from the Confederate artillery, formed on the right of McNeil and immediately advanced against Cabell's left. Closely following San born's brigade, Captain Thurber's battery, Second Mis souri Light Artillery, came upon the field, and being placed in position by Colonel Nelson Cole, Chief of Artil lery on the staff of General Pleasonton, immediately went into action, firing thirty rounds into the Confederate lines, causing a good deal of damage and demoralization. The troops of McNeil and Sanborn now pressed forward, firing as they advanced, while the Federal batteries played upon the Confederate position with a storm of shot and shell. This vigorous attack soon caused Cabell's line to give way and fall back through Independence. At this BATTLES OF INDEPENDENCE AND BIG BLUE. 465 moment General Pleasonton ordered McNeil to mount his command and charge the enemy in retreat. His regi ments were mounted as quickly as practicable, and Colo nel Catherwood, Thirteenth Missouri Cavalry, was ordered to lead the charge with his regiment, using the sabre, which they did most gallantly. His bugles sounded and he dashed forward at the head of his regiment, sweeping everything before him and capturing two guns of the Confederate battery and four hundred prisoners on the west side of town. Generals Marmaduke and Cabell, who were in town, barely escaped falling into his hands. He was supported in this movement by the Seventeenth Illinois, the Seventh Kansas Cavalry, and the Third, Fifth, and Ninth Regiments Missouri State Militia. At the same time the troops of General Sanborn's brigade on the right, dismounted, were gallantly performing their duty, moving through the north part of town, crossing fences and yards and keeping almost abreast of the charging column, and giving the enemy no time to form line. Indeed, General Cabell was pressed so closely on his left by Sanborn's troops that Colonel Phelps, Second Arkansas Cavalry, captured his sword and an officer on his staff. When the fight opened that morning on Little Blue, General Marmaduke's division was encamped along Rock Creek about two miles west of Independence. Re ports of the Federal advance upon the Confederate rear were immediately sent in to Generals Fagan and Marma duke, and when the sound of the artillery firing was get ting nearer and nearer, showing that the Federal forces were steadily approaching and the Confederates retiring, Marmaduke's division was formed in line facing east to support Fagan if necessary. This disposition of the supporting troops enabled Fagan, after his division had been driven back through Independence in confusion and with heavy loss in killed, wounded, prisoners, and guns, VOL. 11. — 30 466 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. to pass to the rear of Marmaduke and rally his men and re-form his lines. Meanwhile, Pleasonton had handled his troops so as to use them as effectively as possible in the operations of the day. Most of McNeil's brigade, which had been dismounted near Little Blue to press the Confederates back upon their position where they made a stand east of Independence, had become greatly ex hausted in marching to the right and to the left to pass hedges and inclosures and in crossing ravines or hollows, and his men were anxious enough to be relieved of further exertion of that kind when the order was given to re mount and make the charge that was led by Colonel Catherwood. Up to this time Sanborn's brigade, which had been marching mounted all day, was in good condi tion to be dismounted to advance on foot on the right of the Federal line. But the ground just east of Independ ence is broken by steep hollows, and in the general move ment when the charge was ordered these dismounted troops of Sanborn's brigade were required to advance at a double-quick. In crossing the hollows and in passing around houses, fences, and obstructions in town, Sanborn had been unable to keep a perfect alignment of his men, and it became necessary to re-form his lines when the charge was over resulting in the capture of the guns and prisoners. It was now about four o'clock, and by the time McNeil and Sanborn had re-formed their brigades, now much in need of food and a respite from their exer tions, the First Brigade under General Brown and the Fourth Brigade under Colonel Winslow came up and were pushed to the front to renew the attack on the Con federate forces on the Westport road — Brown in advance, supported by Winslow. In this movement Colonel McFerran, with the First Missouri State Militia, advanced to the front at a gallop, and about a mile or so west of town encountered General Clark's skirmish-line in a skirt of timber east of Rock BATTLES OF INDEPENDENCE AND BIG BLUE. 467 Creek. He quickly dismounted his regiment, except one company held in reserve, and deploying his dismounted men, opened fire on the Confederates. By some mis take the Fourth and Seventh Regiments Missouri State Militia, also of the First Brigade, had been halted in town, leaving Colonel McFerran with his single regiment for nearly an hour to contend with a superior force of the enemy, which was rapidly flanking him on the right and left when the other two regiments of the brigade came up to his assistance. A battery of Marmaduke's division which had already commenced shelling the Fed eral line was soon effectively replied to by a section of Thurber's battery which was sent to the front by Colonel Cole. General Brown now came up and renewed the at tack and after severe fighting drove the Confederate line back about two miles on the Westport road, close upon the rear of Price's train. His troops had now been en gaging the enemy for two hours, it was getting dark, and two of his regiments reported that they had nearly ex pended their supply of ammunition, so he requested Colonel Winslow to take the advance with his brigade, consisting of the Third and Fourth Regiments Iowa Cavalry, and detachments of the Fourth and Tenth Regi ments Missouri Cavalry. With the view of relieving General Curtis, who had been obliged to fall back from Independence to Big Blue, thence to Westport and Kansas City, General Pleasonton deter mined to push the Confederate force in his front all night, and ordered Colonel Winslow to dismount his brigade and keep up a vigorous attack. Though the night was intensely dark, Colonel Winslow cautiously moved forward. The silence and the stillness that pre vailed were now and then broken by the sharp volleys of musketry of the opposing forces, and the flashes of the guns at each volley momentarily lighted up the deep gloom of the forest. These attacks were kept up by 468 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. Winslow's brigade, closely supported by Brown's brigade, until nearly eleven o'clock that night, driving Marma- duke's division back within a mile or so of the Big Blue, when the Federal troops were ordered to bivouac in line. Shelby's division having forced a crossing of the Big Blue at several points early in the day by driving back General Curtis' forces guarding the fords, Price's trains crossed to the west side of the stream by night and started south on the road to Little Santa Fe. Fagan's division, which was driven in confusion through Independence by Pleasonton, after passing to the rear of Marmaduke crossed to the west side of the Big Blue that evening to support Shelby and protect the train. After ordering up his ammunition and supply trains from the rear, General Pleasonton directed McNeil to move with his brigade at twelve o'clock that night on the road southwest to Little Santa Fe, and to be at that point at daylight the next morning to intercept Price's trains moving south. Be fore marching, a battalion of the Third Missouri State Militia, under Lieutenant-Colonel H. M. Matthews, which had participated in all the operations of the cam paign up to that time, was detached from the brigade and left to garrison Independence. Having made the necessary preparations, General Pleasonton determined to move forward before daybreak the next morning and renew the attack upon the Confed erate force in his front, and ordered Colonel Winslow, whose brigade had bivouacked in advance, to continue in advance until daylight, when he would be relieved by General Brown, commanding the First Brigade. At four o'clock that morning Winslow's brigade was in motion and soon came upon part of Marmaduke's division, which was driven back after some skirmishing to the west side of Big Blue. Here the First Brigade, Colonel Philips commanding, relieved the Fourth Brigade under Colonel Winslow of the advance. On coming to the front that BATTLES OF INDEPENDENCE AND BIG BLUE. 469 morning, General Pleasonton thought that General Brown had not relieved Winslow's brigade of the advance as promptly as he should have done and arrested him and sent him to the rear, and directed Colonel Philips, Sev enth Missouri State Militia Cavalry, to take command of the First Brigade. Colonel McFerran, First Missouri State Militia Cavalry, was also arrested, and Lieutenant- Colonel B. F. Lazear ordered to take command of that regiment. Passing to the front and finding a strong Con federate force posted on the west side of the Big Blue to contest the crossing of the ford, Colonel Philips ordered Lieutenant-Colonel T. T. Crittenden, commanding the Seventh Missouri State Militia, to dismount his men, deploy them to the left of the road, and engage the enemy on the opposite bank of the stream. The Fourth Missouri State Militia under Major G. W. Kelley and the First Missouri State Militia under Lieu tenant-Colonel Lazear, the other two regiments of his brigade, were pushed forward mounted across the stream in the face of a hot fire of bursting shell from Marma- duke's battery, placed in position to sweep the ford and approaches. The bend in the river above the ford en abled Colonel Crittenden to attack the enemy in the right flank and rear, and driving them from their position in front of the ford, he crossed his men to the west side of the stream. He then moved to the right far enough for the cavalry which had crossed over to form in his rear. In the further dispositions which were made, Colonel Crit tenden advanced on the left of the road with his dis mounted men, and Major Kelley on the right with his mounted men, supported by Lieutenant-Colonel Lazear with the First Missouri State Militia, driving the Confed erates perhaps a quarter of a mile to the bluffs which rise from the valley. To carry this strong position of the enemy required a severe struggle. Finding the nature of the ground such that it was impracticable to advance 470 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. against the position with mounted troops except in col umns of fours, Major Kelley was allowed to dismount his command and form on the right of Crittenden. A Confederate battery was posted on the crest of the hill so as to sweep the road and the approaches in front with shell and canister, making it impossible for cavalry to advance on the narrow road in columns of fours without suffering a terrible loss. In the face of this situation there was a determination to charge the position with cavalry and, under instructions, Colonel Philips ordered Lieutenant-Colonel Lazear to move forward with the First Missouri State Militia. After two gallant charges made by Colonel Lazear the effort to carry the position failed. It was now decided to dismount the entire bri gade to make the attack, and in a few moments Colonel Philips advanced with his three regiments and drove the Confederates from their position back across a field to the woods on the west side where the main part of Mar- maduke's division was formed in line of battle. In falling back from this position on the hill across the field to the timber, the Confederates fiercely contested every step of the ground fought over, leaving their numerous dead and wounded where they fell. At this point in the fight, Colonel Winslow's Fourth Brigade came up on the right and Sanborn's Third Brigade on the left of Philips' First Brigade, and assisted in driving the Confederates from their position in the timber to the prairie about two miles beyond, where Marmaduke again formed line of battle. In this fight in the timber Colonel Winslow received a severe wound in the leg with a musket-ball and turned the command of the Fourth Brigade over to Lieutenant- Colonel F. W. Benteen, Tenth Missouri Cavalry. But up to this time the main part of the fighting on the Fed eral side had been done by the First Brigade, composed of Missouri State Militia, one regiment, the Fourth, under Major Kelley, having that morning sustained a BATTLES OF INDEPENDENCE AND BIG BLUE. 471 loss of two officers and seven enlisted men killed and three officers and forty-four enlisted men wounded, a loss much heavier than was sustained by the entire Fourth Brigade since leaving Independence, including the night fighting. In dislodging the Confederates from their several posi tions that morning, and in effectively replying to their guns, Captain Thurber's battery, Second Missouri Light Artillery, and a section of Captain Montgomery's battery of the same regiment under Lieutenant Smiley, all under the direction of Colonel Cole, Chief of Artillery, rendered effective and efficient service, using shell and grape and canister from every position where they could go into action. Having forced Marmaduke's division from the line of the Big Blue back two or three miles to the south west on the Harrisonville road, General Pleasonton ordered the regiments of his brigades which had been dismounted to remount at once for a cavalry charge against Pagan's division and Jackman's brigade, Shelby's division, which had come up on the prairie. The horses were quickly brought up from the rear, when the troops remounted and moved in a gallant charge against the enemy, striking them, breaking their lines, throwing them into the greatest confusion, and causing them to burn a large number of wagons and to abandon a large amount of artillery ammunition. This movement of Pleasonton in forcing Marmaduke's and Pagan's divisions south to protect the Confederate trains, uncovered and exposed to his attack the right flank and rear of Shelby's division, then engaging General Curtis' forces under Blunt on Brush Creek near Westport. In fact the Southern army was now completely severed, and Price pushed to the front with his escort to form his recruits and recall his advance-guard for the protection of his train, which was now threatened by General McNeil, who had been sent out from Independence the previous night to attack it. 4/2 THE CIVIL WAR OX THE BORDER. On seeing the situation rapidly developing, Price sent orders to Shelby and Pagan to fall back and rejoin him as quickly as practicable. In withdrawing their troops from the conflict with Curtis' forces and facing south, they soon saw in their new front the prairie covered with Pleasonton 's cavalry. It was now perhaps one o'clock when Pleasonton recalled his troops from the pursuit after dispersing and scattering Pagan's division and Jack- man's brigade, and before he had completely re-formed his brigades the head of Shelby's division was seen advancing from the direction of Westport. Both sides prepared for immediate action. Shelby commenced the fight by ordering a charge of a brigade against the left of the Federal line, striking Sanborn's brigade and caus ing it to yield a little. Colonel Cole had eight pieces of artillery up within easy range, and double-charging them with grape and canister, opened a terribly destruc tive fire upon the Confederate line, causing almost instant demoralization. General Pleasonton now ordered his cavalry to charge, which they did, breaking the Confederate lines and de stroying all organization of the enemy. It was now a run for life with the Confederates, and they were pursued, shot down, and captured by the Federal cavalry, who were close upon their heels until near the village of Little Santa Fe, when they struck the brush and timber of In dian Creek and most of them escaped. It was a sight for the mirth of gods and men to see the officers and soldiers of that division, who had dubbed themselves "the avengers of blood," throwing the dust from their heels into the eyes of their pursuers and suddenly losing their appetite for blood — for they had often told with boastful swagger of riding down Federal detachments and com panies of loyal militia armed with worthless guns. Mc Neil's brigade, which was sent out from Independence on the night of the 22d to reach Little Santa Fe at daylight BATTLES OF INDEPENDENCE AND BIG BLUE. 473 to intercept and attack Price's train, did not arrive at the designated point at the appointed time and failed to ac complish the object for which it was detached. When Price was informed of the position of this Federal force, he immediately ordered up Marmaduke's division to pro tect the left flank of his train against the threatened attack, and Pagan's division to protect his rear. About two o'clock that day General McNeil's line of march intersected the road on which the Confederate forces and trains were passing. He immediately formed his brigade in line of battle, advanced his skirmish-line of two com panies Seventeenth Illinois Cavalry under Captain John F. Austin, and directed Captain Montgomery to shell the Confederate column with a section of his battery. But in a short time the Confederate forces commenced coming up in such numbers as to threaten to flank him on the right, and he withdrew his command to another position where he could make a better defence. A small force of Confederates was left to attract his attention until nearly night, while the main part of the Confederate army and train were moving rapidly south. His movement in this instance was so barren of expected results as to incur General Pleasonton's decided disapprobation. But Pleasonton, too, made a mistake, even more serious than that made by McNeil. The night he was fighting Marmaduke's division west of Independence, he sent a despatch to General Rosecrans to order General Smith's infantry corps of about nine thousand men to Independ ence, as there was a prospect of getting a fight out of Price. Feeling certain that Price would turn south when he struck Curtis' force, General Rosecrans had ordered Gen eral Smith, who was coming up on the Lexington and Independence road, to march across the country by way of Chapel Hill to Hickman's Mills and Little Santa Fe to intercept the Southern army. General Smith had reached Chapel Hill when he received instructions to march to 474 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. Independence. It was nearer to Hickman's Mills than it was to Independence, and had he marched to the former place, Price's army would probably have been crushed and his entire train captured or destroyed.

## big-blue-westport

CHAPTER XXXI. SKIRMISH ON THE BIG BLUE AND BATTLE OF WESTPORT, MISSOURI. AFTER being forced back from the Little Blue through Independence to the west side of the Big Blue, on the evening of the 2ist, General Curtis was confident that this line of defence had been so strengthened that he would be able to check the further advance of the South ern forces, and so advised General Rosecrans by telegraph. When General Curtis decided to make the Big Blue his main line of defence, Captain George T. Robinson, Chief Engineer on his staff, made a survey of the stream from the Missouri River to a point three or four miles above its junction with Indian Creek, a distance of about fif teen miles, and determined the points to be fortified so as to command the fords and approaches. He also di rected the felling of timber to obstruct the passage of the fords and the different fordable places in the stream, and to form abatis in front of the different field-works to be constructed. A large force of Kansas militia was em ployed under the direction of Major-General Deitzler, Kansas State Militia, and Colonel C. W. Blair, Four teenth Kansas Cavalry, to push forward this work as rapidly as practicable a day or so before the other troops fell back from the Little Blue. A force of colored volun teers, organized by Captain R. J. Hinton, an aide-de-camp on General Blunt's staff, was also employed on these de- 475 476 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. fensive works until they were ordered to take position in line of battle. On the 2 1st, rinding that the Confederate forces were certainly advancing and pushing back upon Independence the troops under General Blunt from the Little Blue, General Curtis directed General Deitzler to order up all the Kansas militia who were encamped in the vicinity of Shawneetown and Shawnee Mission, in Kansas, to positions on the Big Blue. Retiring with his troops that evening after the fight near Independence, General Curtis made his headquarters a short distance west of the Big Blue on the main road from Independence to Kansas City, thus selecting a cen tral position from which he could conveniently direct the further operations of his forces. As the invading army was directly in his front, he lost no time in making dis positions of his troops for the struggle the next day. Major-General Blunt was assigned to the command of his right wing, extending south of the Independence and Kansas City road to near Hickman's Mills, and Major- General Deitzler was assigned to the command of his left wing, extending north of the Independence road to the Missouri River. In the left wing there was only the Third Brigade, com manded by Colonel Blair, and some unassigned regiments of Kansas State Militia. The Third Brigade consisted of Colonel William D. McCain's Fourth, Colonel G. A. Colton's Fifth, Colonel James Montgomery's Sixth, and Colonel William Pennock's Tenth Regiment Kansas State Militia Cavalry; Lieutenant-Colonel George P. Eve's battalion Bourbon County (Kansas) Militia; Lieu tenant W. B. Clark's detachment Fourteenth Kansas Cavalry ; Lieutenant D. C. Knowles' section Second Kansas Battery; and Captain James H. Dodge's Ninth Wisconsin Battery, six guns. In the right wing there were the First, Second, and Fourth Brigades, commanded respectively by Colonels SKIRMISH ON THE BIG BLUE. 477 Jennison, Moonlight, and Ford, besides a brigade of Kansas State Militia Cavalry under Brigadier-General M. S. Grant, which had taken position on the Big Blue above its junction with Indian Creek. Captain McLain's Colorado battery was assigned to the right wing in addi tion to the mountain howitzers attached to each brigade. There were also some unassigned Kansas militia under Colonel George W. Veale, of the Shawnee County regi ment, in the right wing, who were guarding the upper fords of the Big Blue when General Blunt's command fell back from Independence on the night of the 2ist. The banks on both sides of the Big Blue from its junction with Indian Creek to its mouth were generally steep and pre cipitous, with very few good fords for the passage of trains and artillery. Of the four or five fords above the crossing of the Independence and Kansas City road, General Curtis knew not at which one Price would make the most determined effort to force a passage. It was therefore impracticable to post the Federal troops so as to effectually check the Confederates and prevent them from crossing the stream at whatever point they might select. There was heavy timber or brush woods on both sides of the river, extending out a mile or so except where cleared farms came up to the banks, so that it was diffi cult for the Federal signal officers to observe the early movements of the Confederates when making a demon stration against any particular point. On the morning of the 22d, General Blunt directed Colonel Ford to send six companies of the Second Colo rado Cavalry forward on the Independence and Kansas City road east of the Big Blue to skirmish with the enemy and observe their movements from that quarter. This force engaged Jackman's brigade for several hours, when Shelby withdrew his troops from that part of the field and concentrated them five or six miles south of that point to force a passage of the Big Blue at Byram's Ford. 478 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. This movement of Shelby towards the Federal right was immediately reported to General Curtis by Captain E. I. Meeker, his chief signal officer, who had early that morn ing sent out his assistants to make observations from favorable positions of the movements of the Confederate forces, with instructions to report every thirty minutes. As soon as General Blunt was informed of this movement being made against his right, he sent Colonel Jennison with the First Brigade to defend Byram's Ford, and Colonel Moonlight with the Second Brigade to hold Simmons' Ford and two other fords between that point and the mouth of Brush Creek. Colonel Ford, of the Fourth Brigade, formed on the left of Colonel Moonlight with six companies Second Colorado Cavalry and the Twelfth Kansas State Militia, having already sent the Six teenth Kansas Cavalry under Lieutenant-Colonel Sam uel Walker to the assistance of Colonel Jennison at Byram's Ford. The Fourth Kansas State Militia under Colonel McCain was also sent to reinforce Colonel Jennison. That morning the advance of Price's army moved for ward from Independence, and at eleven o'clock Thomp son's brigade of Shelby's division appeared in front of Jennison at Byram's Ford, making an attack upon his outposts and endeavoring to force a passage of the stream. The entrance to and exit from the ford were obstructed by trees which had been felled across the road. Trees had also been felled so as to form breastworks near the ford, behind which Colonel Jennison posted a strong line of skirmishers, and with the aid of a section of howitzers repulsed every attack the Confederates made in front. After skirmishing had been kept up for several hours be tween the opposing forces at and near the ford, General Thompson dismounted a part of his brigade and ordered his men to wade the river and effect a lodgment on the west side. As soon as this was accomplished the rest of SKIRMISH ON THE BIG BLUE. 479 his brigade at once crossed over, when he attacked Jenni- son and drove him back nearly to Westport. On hearing cannonading at one o'clock some distance to his right, General Blunt despatched a courier to Colonel Moonlight, commanding the Second Brigade, with an order to move at once to the assistance of Colonel Jennison at Byram's Ford. Captain Grover, with his Missouri battalion, hold ing a ford near the mouth of Brush Creek, on hearing the cannonading galloped to the assistance of Colonel Jenni son and participated in the action at the ford and on the retreat. But as the First Brigade had commenced falling back from Byram's Ford before Colonel Moonlight re ceived the order to reinforce it, he moved back by West- port, and two or three miles southwest of that place on the State line joined Colonel Jennison. The two brigades now formed line of battle facing east, threw out a strong skirmish-line, and advancing, soon en gaged the Confederates, who, after making slight resist ance, fell back about two miles. Shortly after Shelby's division had forced Jennison from Byram's Ford, flanking the Federal position on the right, Generals Blunt and Deitzler commenced to with draw their forces from the line of the Big Blue and to fall back upon Kansas City. Captain Grover's Missouri bat talion, which had been taking an active part in all the operations on the Big Blue, was in the evening detached as an escort to accompany Governor Carney, of Kansas, who had that day been to the front with the troops, back to Kansas City. Directly after Moonlight left his posi tion on the Big Blue, Colonel Ford, who was formed on his left with part of the Fourth Brigade, was ordered to Westport, and reached that place about four o'clock that afternoon and formed his command a short distance north of town, with McLain's battery, covering the ap proaches to Kansas City from that direction. The movement of Shelby in severing the Federal line 480 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. at Byram's Ford cut off the Kansas militia under General Grant at Hickman's Mills, and prevented them from forming a junction with General Curtis' forces north of that ford. After crossing the Big Blue General Shelby detached Gordon's regiment from Thompson's brigade to observe the movements of the Federal forces on his left in the direction of Hickman's Mills. This regiment soon became engaged with Colonel Sandy Lowe's Twenty- first Regiment Kansas Militia, which formed a part of General Grant's militia force then guarding the fords of the Big Blue below Hickman's Mills. In the first skir mish the Confederates were driven back some distance, but were soon reinforced by Jackman's brigade, when General Shelby ordered his entire force to charge the militia. In this charge the line of the militia was broken, the men thrown into some confusion, and a howitzer captured from them. The militia under Colonel Veale lost in this affair and in the pursuit by Jackman after their line was broken, thirty-six men killed, forty-three wounded, and one hun dred taken prisoners. General Grant reported that the disaster was due to the bad conduct of Major Laing, Fifteenth Kansas Cavalry, who with a battalion of that regiment was a short distance in his rear and failed to sup port him after he was requested to do so. As he was unable to join the forces of General Curtis at and near Kansas City, General Grant retired with his command to Olathe, Kansas, that night. After the skirmish on the prairie south of Westport, Colonel Moonlight, with the Second Brigade and a regiment of Kansas militia under Lieutenant-Colonel Johnson, fell back to the Shawnee Mission, a mile or so into Kansas, and encamped for the night, and Colonel Jennison with the First Brigade fell back to Westport at dark and encamped between that place and Kansas City, near Colonel Ford's command of the Fourth Brigade. The Kansas militia and the bat teries of artillery were that evening ordered within the SKIRMISH ON THE BIG BLUE. 481 fortified lines of Kansas City, and the early part of the night was spent in making extensive preparations for an attack early the next morning. Having during the day shown much less energy and perseverance in pushing the foe than on other occasions, Generals Curtis, Blunt, and Deitzler also moved their headquarters into the city that night. Though General Curtis was at the front all day and occupied suitable positions for directing the move ments of his forces and of keeping advised of the move ments of the enemy, his field batteries, some of which consisted of excellent rifled guns, did not fire a single shot at the foe, nor did his troops make a single charge to resist the Confederate advance. General Pleasonton with his Missouri forces had that morning at ten o'clock attacked a brigade of Price's rear guard at the Little Blue, drove it back upon Pagan's and Marmaduke's divisions at Independence, charged and routed these divisions, capturing two guns and four hun dred prisoners, and before night drove them back upon the Big Blue. In the fighting during the day both sides used their artillery freely, and the booming of cannon, five to six miles distant, was certainly within hearing of General Curtis' troops nearly all the afternoon. While the Army of the Border that night was being placed be hind the lines of fortified works of Kansas City, General Pleasonton's forces were rushing upon the Confederates with a reckless fierceness," as General Clark character ized the attack, in almost impenetrable darkness, and until nearly eleven o'clock. When it appeared certain that Price would endeavor to come to Kansas City, Colonel Kersey Coates, command ing a brigade of Missouri Enrolled Militia and Home Guards, commenced fortifying and erecting field-works south and southeast of the city so as to command the approaches from those quarters. As the Southern army continued to advance, and as the danger became more VOL. II .—31 482 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. imminent, the citizens were called out to work in the trenches, so that when the Army of the Border fell back within the fortified lines the city was in a good defensive condition. Directly after General Curtis moved his headquarters into Kansas City that evening he received information that General Pleasonton had arrived at In dependence and had attacked and driven Price's forces from that place back upon the Big Blue. This informa tion, and perhaps consciousness of the fact that his troops could hardly have been less effectively handled that day, determined General Curtis to act with greater firmness and resolution, and to order Generals Blunt and Deitzler to have their mounted forces and light batteries in motion at three o'clock the next morning, en route to the front to attack at daylight the enemy who were in their encamp ment on the prairie about two miles southeast of West- port and south of Brush Creek. That night and the next morning up to the time that he started to the front, General Curtis had an unreasonable fear that Price's army was trying to get into Kansas City, and left behind three or four thousand Kansas and Missouri militia and some of his heavy guns, mounted, under General Deitzler and Colonel Coates, to occupy the fortifications and to resist any attack of the Confederates in the event they should make a flank movement or kill or capture or disperse the force of seven or eight thousand men sent forward under General Blunt early that morning. After General Pleasonton 's forces attacked and drove Pagan's and Marmaduke's divisions from Independence, Price had no further thought of coming to Kansas City, but turned his attention to making such disposition of his troops as to secure the safety of his train. At daylight on the morning of the 23d, the First, Second, and Fourth Brigades under General Blunt marched in column through Westport south, and crossing to the south side of Brush Creek, deployed in line of battle in the timber along that BATTLE OF WESTPORT. 483 stream. In the formation of the line, Colonel Ford's Fourth Brigade occupied the extreme left, east of the road; Colonel Jennison's First Brigade, including Cap tain Grover's Missouri battalion, which had just come up from escort duty, the centre, on the right of the road ; and Colonel Moonlight's Second Brigade the extreme right, extending nearly to the State line. A section of McLain's Colorado battery was unlimbered in the road near the left centre and soon became engaged in a hot contest with Collins' battery of rifled guns of Shelby's division. In front of Jennison there was a large field in closed with stone and rail fences, affording an excellent shelter for his dismounted skirmishers, who were thrown forward covering his main line. These dispositions were just completed when Shelby's division, reinforced by two brigades of Fagan's division, advanced to the attack, so that the entire Federal line immediately became engaged in a fierce conflict. General Thompson's brigade coming up, it was ordered to charge the Federal centre. His men moved forward with steadi ness, but they were soon repulsed by a heavy fire from Jennison's men posted behind the stone fence. In a few moments part of Jackman's brigade made a charge to carry the Federal position, but his men, too, were driven back in confusion. The Arkansas troops coming up, they were put into action by General Shelby and ordered to charge in column up the road to take the guns of McLain's Colorado battery. This charge was led by Colonel James McGhee, of Dobbin's brigade Arkansas Cavalry, and resulted disastrously to him and his com mand. He was assailed on the Federal right by the Fif teenth Kansas Cavalry under Lieutenant-Colonel Hoyt, and in front by the Second Colorado Cavalry, supporting the section of the battery, and in the hand-to-hand con flict that took place he encountered Captain Curtis John son, Fifteenth Kansas Cavalry, both firing with their 484 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. revolvers near each other, he receiving a mortal wound and Captain Johnson a severe wound in the arm. When the Confederate charging column was thrown into confusion, the Sixteenth Kansas and Second Colo rado Cavalry were pushed forward in a counter-charge, led by Lieutenant-Colonel Samuel Walker of the latter regiment, in which he received a gunshot wound in the foot. In this conflict the Confederates sustained a heavy loss in killed and wounded and about one hundred prison ers. After several ineffectual efforts to dislodge the Fed eral troops from their position, General Shelby pushed a force to occupy a thick wood on Colonel Ford's right. In gaining this position the Confederates were not only able to flank Colonel Jennison's men behind the stone fence and force them to fall back, but they were also able to open a flank fire on Colonel Ford's command and compel him to retire to the north side of Brush Creek. While the Federal left and centre under Colonels Ford and Jennison were thus engaging the Confederate forces, Colonel Moonlight's Second Brigade on the right ad vanced, driving Shelby's left back nearly a mile after considerable resistance. But in this movement Colonel Moonlight did not look out for his left flank, and a Con federate force coming up on that flank gave him an enfilading fire, doing some damage. He immediately or dered two companies on the left of the line to wheel to the left and return the fire. This movement had the effect of checking the enemy, and his command fell back in good order to Westport, his right flank being protected by Lieutenant-Colonel G. M. Woodworth with part of the Twelfth Kansas State Militia. The entire Federal line had now fallen back to the north side of Brush Creek, and most of it to the suburbs of Westport, to await the arrival of Colonel Blair's bri gade of Kansas militia from Kansas City, which had been detained at that place until its horses were brought back BATTLE OF WESTPORT, 485 from Wyandotte, they having through mistake been sent over to that city the early part of the night. At this time General Shelby was not prepared to push the retiring Federal line, for most of his troops had so nearly ex pended their ammunition that he was obliged to halt on the prairie and in the edge of the timber south of Brush Creek to await a supply. To occupy the attention of the Federal forces until his troops could replenish their cartridge-boxes with ammunition, Collins' battery was ordered up to a position recently vacated by the section of McLain's Colorado battery; on opening fire one of his rifled guns burst at the first round. On the arrival of Colonel Blair's brigade and other regiments of Kansas militia at Westport, General Curtis, who had also come to the front, rapidly re-formed his lines, brought up additional field batteries, and made preparations for a decisive movement against the foe, whose lines on the prairie south of Brush Creek could be plainly seen from the roof of the Harris House in West- port. Up to this time only a single section of the field batteries and about an equal number of mountain howit zers had been put into action on the Federal side. But now, as the Federal line was about to advance again, Mc Lain's Colorado battery was placed in position on the brow of the hill north of Brush Creek towards the Federal left, and Captain Dodge's Ninth Wisconsin Battery, six guns, was placed a short distance to the right of McLain near the road, and both batteries opened a vigorous fire of shot and shell on the Confederate line on the high ground south of the creek. In making new dispositions of the Federal forces, Colonel Moonlight's Second Bri gade was sent around on the Federal right to keep the enemy out of Kansas, which Price was anxious to visit with desolation and ruin. Colonel Blair's Third Brigade was pushed to the front, south of Westport, and, dismount ing, formed on the bluff north of Brush Creek, with 486 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. Colonel Ford's Fourth Brigade on his left and Colonel Jennison's First Brigade on his right. The Fifth and Nineteenth Regiments Kansas Militia, commanded respectively by Colonels Colton and Hogan, were dismounted to support McLain's and Dodge's bat teries. General Curtis now came upon the field and ordered his entire line to advance to the attack. As the ground on the south side of the creek extending for half a mile back was covered with thick brush and unsuitable for manoeuvring cavalry, his heavy skirmish-lines were dismounted to engage the enemy from the timber. On the left Colonel Ford dismounted part of the Second Colorado Cavalry and part of the Twelfth Kansas Militia to advance against the Confederate skirmishers and force them back upon their main line. After dismounting his brigade Colonel Blair pushed his men forward across the creek and through the timber and underbrush up to the north side of a field, when he came in sight of a Confed erate force posted behind a stone fence on the opposite side of the field. He held his position behind a rail fence, keeping up a hot fire on the enemy for half an hour, when he was ordered to retire to the north bank of the creek. Still farther to the right Colonel Jennison's First Brigade was engaging the Confederates, and on his right Major- General Deitzler was bringing up several regiments of Kansas militia and placing them in position to cooperate in the general advance. About the time General Curtis had fairly commenced his general advance, Shelby received orders from Price to fall back and join the other divisions of the Confederate army, from which he was now cut off by Pleasonton's cavalry, which had just routed Fagan and Jackman, who were covering Shelby's rear. Finding that his rear was completely in the possession of Pleasonton's command, Shelby cautiously withdrew from before Curtis and quickly prepared to make a des perate charge to break through the line that separated BATTLE OF WESTPORT. 487 him from the other divisions of the Southern army. Had General Curtis known the desperate situation in which the Confederates were placed, he would probably have pressed the attack with greater energy than that which characterized his movements when he first came on to the field. His information led him to overestimate the strength of the Confederate forces and perhaps made him overcautious in his movements. But he was always to the front, sharing the hardships and fatigues of the field like the humblest soldier, and his presence was an inspira tion to his troops. Directly after coming on to the field, he thought that his artillery could be more effectively employed, and took Captain Dodge's battery to his right to cross to the south side of the creek to take up a posi tion from which an enfilading fire could be opened upon the Confederate line. But thick brush and a rough road made it impracticable to get the battery into position without loss of time, and he moved to the left and ordered part of his cavalry of Jennison's and Ford's brigades to charge the Confederate line. The charge was made, the enemy gave way, and then it was soon discovered that the entire Confederate line was retreating from the field, with a heavy skirmish-line to protect the rear of the column. The dismounted troops of Ford's Fourth Bri gade on the left and of Blair's Third Brigade of Kansas militia on the right continued to advance through the thickets and timber on Brush Creek until they came out upon the open prairie and into the fields south of that stream, when they were halted until their horses were brought up from the rear. They then remounted and moved forward ; but meanwhile Shelby had struck Pleason- ton's command, which gave him such a shaking-up that he was unable to get his men together in the semblance of organization until late that evening. When General Curtis found that the enemy were falling back from his front he ordered up his artillery, drew in 488 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. his troops from his flanks, and commenced immediate pursuit on the road south to Little Santa Fe. He knew from the sound of artillery firing and reports made to him by signal officers and aides-de-camp that Pleasonton's forces had all the morning been engaging the Confeder ates on his left front, and at half-past two o'clock he overtook Pleasonton, who had halted with his staff and escort to wait for him at Indian Creek, ten miles south of Westport. They held a consultation in regard to uniting their forces for a vigorous pursuit of the enemy, and moved south to Little Santa Fe, where headquarters were made that night and near which place most of their troops encamped. At Indian Creek General Curtis issued an order relieving all that part of Kansas north of the Kansas River of the operation of martial law, and dis charged the Kansas militia living north of that point, as they were anxious to return to their homes. Major-General Deitzler, who commanded the Kansas militia in the operations described, in his official report commended the officers and men for their zeal and valor in defending their State against invasion. Colonel George W. Veale's Shawnee County Regiment suffered the heaviest loss of any of the Kansas militia in the opera tions on the Big Blue and about Westport. General Deitz ler warmly praised the gallantry of the members of his staff, particularly Lieutenant-Colonel John J. Ingalls, his Judge-Advocate General, who bore himself with conspicu ous bravery on every part of the field where duty called him. The militia from Southern Kansas continued to operate with the volunteer forces of General Curtis until the invading army passed beyond the limit of threatened danger to the State, and then they, too, were disbanded. Having shared with the volunteer forces the dangers and hardships of the campaign, they returned to their homes conscious of having rendered material assistance in pre venting the enemy from desolating their State.

## mine-creek-little-osage

CHAPTER XXXII. BATTLES OF MINE CREEK AND LITTLE OSAGE. WHEN the Federal forces of Missouri and Kansas united at Indian Creek, General Curtis, being the senior officer present, assumed command and directed their further movements, designating General Pleasonton's command as the Second Division, Army of the Border. The two divisions were ordered to march at four o'clock the next morning in pursuit of Price, the First Division under General Blunt to take the advance. Colonel Moonlight with the Second Brigade was ordered to march south through Kansas and to keep on the right flank of Price near the State line to prevent his marauding detachments from entering the State to pillage, plunder, and destroy the property of the citizens. After the defeat and rout of every division of his army on the Big Blue and south of Westport, General Price retreated rapidly south, almost in a reckless flight, encamping for a few hours late that night on the Middle Fork of Grand River between Pleas ant Hill and the State line to feed and rest and await the arrival of his rearmost troops. The Federal forces failing to follow up their advantage, marching only three or four miles to Little Santa Fe after three o'clock that day, the march of the Confederate army the next day was orderly and undisturbed, so that the different divisions went into camp that night on the Marais des Cygnes near the village of Tradingpost, in Kansas. All day long the 24th, the 4S9 490 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. troops of Curtis and Pleasonton marched steadily forward on the trail of Price's retreating army, and at eight o'clock that night, at Westpoint, Pleasonton 's division was given the advance, with instructions to keep in motion until the Confederate pickets were encountered and driven in. On this night march General Sanborn's brigade led the ad vance, and shortly before ten o'clock came upon the Confederate pickets north of Tradingpost near the Marais des Cygnes River. It was then very dark and raining hard. Here General Sanborn ordered Colonel Gravely, of the Eighth Missouri State Militia, to take his own regi ment and the Sixth Missouri State Militia and move for ward cautiously until he found the enemy in force. The Colonel soon found the Confederate army encamped at Tradingpost on the Marais des Cygnes, sent a message back to General Sanborn of the fact, and halted his command until three o'clock in the morning of the 25th for further instructions. A short distance north of the Marais des Cygnes at Tradingpost, the old military road to Fort Scott on which the army was moving passed through a gap be tween two high mounds, each perhaps somewhat over half a mile in length. In the reconnoissance made by Colonel Gravely he found that the Confederates occupied the sides and summits of the mounds and the gap be tween them, and were disposed to dispute the approaches. He skirmished with the enemy until towards daybreak, when, with the assistance of the Fourth Iowa Cavalry under Major A. R. Pierce, which had been directed to report to him, he was ordered by General Sanborn to ad vance and drive the Confederates from the mounds in his front and take possession of their summits and the gap between them. The possession of the mound on the right of the road was secured by the Fourth Iowa with out much fighting; but the one on the left of the road was defended by a line of Confederates formed along its crest BATTLES OF MINE CREEK AND LITTLE OSAGE. 491 nearly its entire length who were not disposed to yield without a severe struggle. To carry this position the Sixth and Eighth Regiments Missouri Militia were dis mounted. Though it was still quite dark, they advanced steadily and soon commenced to ascend the mound, which was so steep that it was with difficulty they could keep their footing. In a few moments more the loud cheers of the ascending line of troops, followed by several sharp volleys from their carbines, announced that they had gained the heights and that the enemy had been driven in rapid flight down the southern slope of the mound towards the river. To aid in making the attack effective, the batteries of Captains Montgomery and Thurber, Sec ond Missouri Light Artillery, were ordered up, and by elevating their guns to a sufficient angle they were able to sweep the west end of the mound and the gap with a storm of shot and shell. At early dawn and just as Sanborn had driven the enemy from the mounds to the south side of the river, General Pleasonton came to the front and directed the further movements of his division. He directed General Sanborn with his brigade to immediately force a crossing of the stream, which the Confederates were holding with a strong force and endeavoring to obstruct by felling trees across the road at its exit from the ford. General Sanborn dismounted Major Mitchell's battalion Seventh Pro visional Regiment Enrolled Missouri Militia, as skirmish ers to advance on his right, cross the river about a quarter of a mile above the ford, move down on the south side, and drive the Confederates from the brush and timber. On the left of Major Mitchell, the Sixth Provisional Regiment Missouri Enrolled Militia under Colonel Mc- Mahan was also deployed as skirmishers, and assisted in driving the Confederates from their position along the south side of the river bank. After some supporting movements, Colonel Phelps, with the Second Arkansas 4Q2 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. Cavalry, was directed to take the advance and cross the river at the main ford, which he did, passing the obstruc tions on the south side in the face of a heavy fire of musketry from the Confederates formed in line a short distance in his front. He was supported in this charge by the Sixth and Eighth Regiments Missouri State Mili tia, dismounted, the Fourth Iowa Cavalry of the Fourth Brigade, and three companies of the Second Colorado Cavalry which had come to the front that morning from General Blunt's division in the rear. On being driven from the timber along the river bottom, the Confederates formed line on the prairie about half a mile south of the ford, supported by a section of artillery. As soon as he reached the open ground south of the ford, Colonel Phelps fronted his brigade into line, and advancing, charged the Confederate line of skirmishers and drove them back upon their main line, from which the section of artillery opened fire upon him. The other regiments of the Third Brigade, having been dismounted to force the passage of the river and to clear the brush and timber of the enemy, were unable to keep up with his rapid movement, and he was obliged to fall back upon their line when he found him self unsupported by other mounted troops. At the mo ment of the charge General Sanborn had returned to the ford to bring up artillery and other troops. General Pleasonton was there, superintending the removal of ob structions, getting his troops and artillery over, and pushing them to the front as rapidly as possible. General Sanborn had just returned to the front with a section of artillery, had opened fire upon the enemy, and was mounting the regiments of his brigade, when Colonel Philips with the First Brigade came forward at a gallop and advanced against the Confederate left. He was soon followed by Lieutenant-Colonel Benteen with the Fourth Brigade at a gallop, who bore to his left. By this time General Sanborn had mounted his brigade, and BATTLES OF MINE CREEK AND LITTLE OS AGE. 493 bearing still farther to the Federal left, advanced against the Confederate right. But before these three brigades, which were advancing in columns of squadrons and of regiments, deployed in line of battle, General Marma- duke, who was in command of the Confederate rear that day, withdrew his line and fell back. From the Marais des Cygnes to Mine Creek, a distance of four miles, the road passed over a broad, smooth prairie and a few un dulating ridges. As it did not seem likely that the Con federates would make another stand immediately, General Sanborn's brigade was permitted to drop to the rear to rest and feed for a few moments. His regiments had been on duty all night in the rain and all the morning up to ten o'clock, fighting and skirmishing, and as his men and horses had been without anything to eat, their powers of endurance were put to the severest test. Meanwhile Philips' brigade, followed by Benteen's brigade, kept up the pursuit over the broad prairie at a trot and a gallop and forced Marmaduke's and Pagan's divisions into line of battle about one hundred yards north of Mine Creek. This small stream, with precipitous banks and lightly wooded, had no good wagon fords in the immediate vicin ity of the main crossing, which was now blocked by the Confederate train, which had been brought to a halt by some accident. On being informed that Marmaduke was closely pressed, General Fagan halted his division to support him, and placed in position all the artillery of Price's army, except the three guns of Shelby's division, to check the Federal advance. In the rapid pursuit over the prairie, Philips' advance regiment under Lieutenant-Colonel Lazear, First Missouri State Militia, had kept so close upon Marmaduke — within five or six hundred yards of his line — that when he was brought to a halt by the train obstructing the road at the crossing of the creek he was obliged to make the most hurried dispositions for battle. In his hasty con- 494 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. sultation with Generals Fagan, Clark, and Cabell, it was decided that the situation was so critical that it would be unsafe to attempt to dismount their troops and send their horses to the rear so as to make the fight on foot. Many of their troops were armed with infantry rifles, which, after being once discharged, could not easily be reloaded on horseback, and were therefore very ineffective in a cavalry fight. In coming upon the field Colonel Philips deployed the regiments of his brigade in line at a gallop, placing Lieutenant-Colonel Lazear with the First Missouri State Militia on his left, Lieutenant-Colonel Crittenden with the Seventh Missouri State Militia in the centre, and Major Kelley with the Fourth Missouri State Militia on his right. He saw at once from the high ground of his position overlooking the valley of Mine Creek two divisions of the Confederate army drawn up in line of battle in his immediate front, supported by eight guns, and most of the Confederate train south of the creek was plainly seen making desperate efforts to get away. He sent an aid to General Pleasonton to lay before him the situation and to request immediate assistance. As the long lines of Marmaduke and Fagan threatened to flank him on the right and left, he was obliged to extend his line to the right. The Confederate batteries had commenced to play upon his position and he saw that the Confederate officers were preparing to charge him by advancing in double columns. He knew that it was of the utmost im portance to strike the Confederates before they com menced to advance, and at the moment of his supreme anxiety he was delighted to see Colonel Benteen's brigade coming up on his left. Lieutenant Smiley, with a section of Captain Montgomery's battery, Second Missouri Light Artillery, having been sent forward by Colonel Cole, came up at a gallop, and unlimbering, went into action, using double charges of canister within easy range. As soon as the advance regiment of the Fourth Brigade PHILIPS BRIGADE BLNTEELN'S BRIGADE: MARMA D UKL' CABLLL'S D I V I S --FIELD D /V / S I ON FEDERAL MM CONFEDLRA T£ rw~i ' BATTLE OF MINE CREEK, KANSAS, OCTOBER 25, 1864. BATTLES OF MINE CREEK AND LITTLE OSAGE. 495 aligned with the left of the First Brigade, Colonel Philips ordered the charge and then the two brigades were quickly hurled against the Confederate line with such terrific en ergy that it almost instantly gave way in the wildest con fusion. The giving way of the Confederate lines was immediately followed by the triumphant shouts of the Federal soldiers that rose above the clamor of the con flict. A large number of Confederate soldiers, consisting of several regiments, who were armed with long infantry guns, on discharging them wheeled their horses and turned to flight, and running over broke the lines formed in their rear. In another moment the troops of the charging columns, drawing their sabres and revolvers, were bear ing down upon and mingling with this demoralized and panic-stricken mass of the enemy, cutting and shooting them down and making fearful havoc. Confederate offi cers rode hurriedly to and fro making every effort to rally their men, to check the swelling tide of disaster; but all their appeals and threats were ineffectual, for Philips' brigade sweeping over the field broke their left and cen tre, cutting off and capturing Major-General Marmaduke, Brigadier-General Cabell, several colonels, a number of line officers, upwards of four hundred enlisted men, four pieces of artillery, and one battle flag, besides killing and wounding a large number of men in the general fight that took place. Lieutenant-Colonel Benteen's brigade swept forward on the Federal left with almost equal success, breaking the Confederate right and capturing four pieces of artil lery and a large number of prisoners, including several colonels and line officers, and two stands of colors. With out stopping to look after the prisoners and captured artillery, a part each of the First and Fourth Brigades crossed to the south side of the creek and took up the pursuit of the broken and demoralized Confederate troops, who in reckless flight were endeavoring to escape from 496 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. the scene of their disaster. In this pursuit the Federal soldiers used their revolvers and sabres freely, increasing the consternation among the Confederates and causing them to throw away their arms and equipments and every thing that impeded their flight. Colonel Colton Greene, commanding a brigade in Marmaduke's division, reported that over two thirds of his men threw away or lost their arms in this disastrous rout. General Price, who was riding in his carriage in the rear of Shelby's division several miles in advance and in front of his train, on receiving a note from General Marmaduke that the Federal troops were advancing in force, mounted his white horse and rode towards his rear until he met the men of Marmaduke's and Fagan's divisions — all who had escaped from the scene of the recent disaster — re treating in the wildest confusion. With some of his officers he endeavored to rally them ; but all his efforts in that direction were ineffective, for in their mad flight they paid very little attention to entreaties or commands. After making some details to take charge of the prison ers and captured artillery on the field, General Pleasonton pushed forward Philips' and Benteen's brigades in pur suit of the enemy, and sent his aids back to bring up the Second and Third Brigades of his division. General Sanborn, who had halted his brigade to rest and feed behind a ridge in the prairie about a mile from the battle field, on hearing the roar of the artillery and small-arms immediately mounted his command without waiting for orders and rode to the front at a gallop, arriving there just as the fight was over. He then pushed forward, and about three miles south of Mine Creek relieved Philips' First Brigade of the advance. His line of march was now over a wide expanse of prairie to the timber skirting the valley of the Little Osage River, a distance of eight miles. In passing over this prairie his advance was almost con stantly in sight of the Confederates of the two broken BATTLES OF MINE CREEK AND LITTLE OSAGE. 497 divisions and he twice formed his brigade in line to en gage them, but they showed no disposition to make a stand. On approaching the Little Osage, he came in sight of part of Shelby's division under General Thomp son and Colonel Slayback drawn up in line of battle to cover the retreat of the demoralized troops of Marma- duke's and Pagan's divisions. He at once threw his brigade into line and commenced to advance, when Shelby withdrew his troops to the timber along the Little Osage without making a fight. The Federal line, however, con tinued to advance, and when nearing the timber General Sanborn received the order to charge, which his troops received with eagerness and pushed forward, driving the Confederates from the brush and timber and across the stream to a ridge a mile beyond, when he halted to re form his line. Here General Pleasonton succeeded in getting General McNeil's Second Brigade to the front, about two o'clock, with instructions to form on the left of Sanborn. His First and Fourth Brigades were closed up to support his advance line, and he now had his entire division on the field under his immediate direction. General Shelby had taken up a strong position, formed his troops in three lines, part of them being protected behind the fences of a cornfield, and he was determined to make a desperate struggle before yielding. His divi sion up to this time in the campaign had fought the Fed eral forces more successfully than the other divisions of Price's army, giving it a prestige that enabled him to hold his men under fire with great steadiness. There was skirmishing between the opposing forces for perhaps half an hour before General Pleasonton ordered his troops to the charge. McNeil's brigade had been brought forward at a gallop for ten miles, and on reaching the front his command was much scattered and the horses of many of his men so nearly exhausted that it was with difficulty they could be VOL. II.— 33 498 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. moved to a trot. The horses of Sanborn's brigade were also much worn out, having been on duty all night and all day and having been frequently urged to the gallop in advancing or taking position in line. As soon as the rearmost regiment of McNeil's brigade had closed up and Colonel Cole had brought forward the artillery of the division, General Pleasonton ordered the Second and Third Brigades to advance to the attack. Colonel Epp- stein, with the Fifth Missouri State Militia dismounted, charged through the cornfield, driving the Confederates before him, while the other regiments of the Second Brigade charged mounted to his right around the field, forcing the Confederates from their position in that quar ter. Still farther on the Federal right the regiments of Sanborn's brigade were charging and driving the enemy before them with steadiness and courage. In the pursuit of the next four miles over the prairie there were a suc cession of charges made by the regiments of McNeil's and Sanborn's brigades whenever the Confederates attempted to make a stand. About eight miles north of Fort Scott Sanborn's bri gade halted for a short rest, the horses of his command being so nearly exhausted that they could not be urged to move out of a walk. They had had only a few hours' rest and very little feed since the brigade encamped at Little Santa Fe", eighty miles in the rear, on the night of the 23d. General McNeil, with the Second Brigade, con tinued the pursuit, and was soon joined by Lieutenant- Colonel Benteen with the Fourth Brigade, when they advanced, and in a short time came upon Price's entire army on Shiloh Creek about six miles northeast of Fort Scott. At this place Generals Fagan and Clark had rallied the troops of the routed divisions and formed them, including those who had thrown away their arms in their flight, with the other troops of Price's army, who were drawn up in quadruple line of battle, making an im- BATTLES OF MINE CREEK AND LITTLE OSAGE. 499 posing appearance by their immense numbers. Shelby's division formed the front line of this great display of force — the only troops to be depended upon in making the fight, except perhaps Tyler's brigade of recruits, who had not yet been much demoralized in the operations of the day. Colonel Cole, Chief of Artillery, brought up the batteries of the division as rapidly as his worn-out horses could be urged forward, and placing his guns in position, commenced shelling the great masses of the enemy directly in his front. His batteries expended in this and in the other actions of the day 220 rounds of shell and canister. In making this last attack General Pleasonton ordered McNeil to form the Second and Fourth Brigades into double line of battle and advance and charge the enemy. The charge was made, but it was made at a walk, for it was impossible to urge the horses forward at a more rapid gait, they were so much worn out by the exertions of the day and the continuous hard service of the campaign. In their steady advance the two brigades soon encountered Shelby's division, when a fierce conflict took place in which the Confederates were driven back a short distance. Shelby then brought to his front line other brigades of his division, and with the rallied troops of the routed divisions the Confederate line was extended, threatening to outflank McNeil. At this moment Colonel Cole turned the rifled guns of his batteries on the Confederate flanks, using shell and canister, and drove them back in confu sion. He then concentrated the fire of his ten guns on the Confederate centre and soon broke that part of Price's line, and at sundown the Southern forces moved off in rapid retreat to the crossing of the Marmiton River ten miles east of Fort Scott. In this fight the three remain ing guns of Price's army were not brought into action, so that Colonel Cole was able to use all the guns of his bat teries in sweeping the Confederate lines with shell and canister on every part of the field where he found them 500 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. most dense and accessible. It appears that the entire Southern army now became seized with panic, losing all regimental and brigade organization. The Confederate train had been sent on to the Marmiton River under heavy escort while the fight was going on. It was near midnight when the last of the Confederate troops crossed that stream. A halt of an hour or so was made to close up the demoralized troops, destroy the train, and blow up the artillery ammunition of the lost guns, when the retreat was commenced and continued without interrup tion to Carthage, a distance of sixty miles. Shortly after midnight the loud explosions from the blowing up of the Confederate ammunition train were distinctly heard at Fort Scott. From the Marmiton River, where Price ordered his train burned, back to Mine Creek, a distance of upwards of twenty miles, the route over which the Confederate army retreated was strewn with arms, equipments, abandoned wagons and teams, and the debris of a routed army. In all the operations of the day, General Pleasonton had dis played energy and good judgment, and when night came he could view with satisfaction what he had accom plished. At dark he took Philips' First Brigade and San- born's Third Brigade and his artillery and marched into Fort Scott to obtain rations for his men and feed for his horses, of which they were in great need, leaving the Second and Fourth Brigades under General McNeil to bivouac on the field. On leaving the field he saw the advance of the Kansas troops under General Curtis com ing in sight and he was soon overtaken by General Cur tis, who protested against taking his troops to Fort Scott for supplies. General Curtis expressed some anxiety about leaving General McNeil with two brigades to bivouac on the field ; but the Kansas troops under the immediate command of General Blunt coming up, they, too, bore to the right and moved into Fort Scott for BATTLES OF MINE CREEK AND LITTLE OS AGE. 50! supplies, thereby losing a golden opportunity of securing laurels which might have been easily won. These troops having rested all night and a good part of the day and coming up fresh were in good condition to continue the pursuit of the enemy then scarcely out of sight. Had General Curtis led his troops in a night attack on the Confederate forces, supported by the two brigades under McNeil, he might have secured Price's train before it was destroyed, and captured most of his men. On this day he did not display his usual energy and good judgment in handling his troops ; nor were all his actions consistent. When General Sanborn, who was commanding the advance, came up within shelling distance of Price's en campment on the Marais des Cygnes about midnight and reported the fact, General Curtis sent an aid to him or dering him to open fire with his batteries at once on the Confederate camp. It was intensely dark and raining, and as he knew nothing about the topographical features of the locality, Sanborn declined to take the responsibil ity of making the attack until towards daybreak. Had it not been for his good judgment in declining to take the responsibility of making the attack as directed, Price's army would unquestionably have got away without dis aster, for he certainly would have retreated in great haste had the heavy field batteries of Pleasonton opened upon his camp at that time of the night. It was the purpose of General Curtis thus to keep Price moving south by firing artillery in his rear, but General Pleasonton pro posed to overtake the Confederate army and crush it. After Pleasonton had been busy all day in destroying Price's army and capturing his generals and troops and artillery and trains, General Curtis suddenly became seized with a desire to complete the destruction of the enemy, but did not propose to do it with his own troops. He weakened his effective force by sending one of his veteran brigades off on a flank movement to keep Price's foraging 5<D2 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. detachments out of Kansas, when his numerous Kansas militia regiments would have been ample for that purpose. He permitted some of his numerous aids to embarrass the operations of Pleasonton's troops by their officious and offensive bearing in giving and countermanding orders in his name instead of devoting their energies to bringing his own troops on to the field. Indeed General Pleasonton was obliged to arrest at least one of these officious aids, Colonel Ritchie. While Pleasonton was at the front fighting Price from daybreak until dark, General Curtis came up and ordered his own provost-marshal to take charge of the prisoners, captured artillery, and property, and when he got to Fort Scott that night directed that these trophies of the cam paign be sent to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. He thus proposed to deprive the Missouri troops of their justly won trophies and to bestow them upon the Kansas troops, who were not entitled to them, nor to the prestige such an act would tend to give, by being bruited to the world. Even before the prisoners and captured artillery arrived at Fort Scott, Major Suess and Captain Yates of General Pleasonton's staff claimed them from General Curtis' provost-marshal as trophies of the Missouri troops, and on his refusal to give them up hot words passed between the staff-officers of the two generals about the matter. Of course when General Pleasonton saw that it was pro posed to take his hard-earned trophies from him and not permit him to convey them back into his own Depart ment, he was greatly angered and declined to take further part in the campaign by his presence at the front ; but ordered nearly three brigades of his command to report to General Curtis to continue the pursuit of Price's demoral ized army. Colonel Philips, being disabled by having received a serious injury in his right eye in the charge at Mine Creek, either from an exploded cap near him or from a sliver from a flying missile, was taken to the hotel at Fort Scott the night of the arrival of part of General BATTLES OF MINE CREEK AND LITTLE OSAGE. 503 Pleasonton's command at that place, and suffered intense agony all night. Though suffering from his wound, as soon as two regiments of his brigade were furnished with subsistence and his horses' shoes reset, which occupied about six hours, he resumed the pursuit south after Price's fleeing army, travelling himself in an ambulance. The morning of the second day of this march he received a countermanding order from General Pleasonton, and re turned with his command to the military post at Warrens- burg, Missouri. In recognition of his gallantry in the campaign he was soon afterwards placed in command of the Central District of Missouri, by order of General Rosecrans, commanding the Department. After seeing his detached brigades supplied with sub sistence and forage, and resting a day at Fort Scott, General Pleasonton, with part of Philips' brigade, took the prisoners and captured artillery and marched to War- rensburg, arriving at that place on the last day of Octo ber. It was hardly generous of General Curtis and his friends to censure General Pleasonton for withdrawing from the campaign at that point, in view of the fact that two splendid opportunities were given Curtis that day to place his troops in positions where they might have won glorious results. They were not so far in the rear when the fight opened at the Marais des Cygnes but what they could have been brought up on the right flank of the enemy, and after the battle of Mine Creek they might have cut off and captured the routed troops of Pagan's and Marmaduke's divisions who were escaping from the field. The country was open prairie, the streams were easily forded by mounted troops, and the Kansas forces could have marched on a road parallel with Pleasonton's command and cooperated with it at any point in the operations of that day. At Fort Scott Captain Grover was ordered by General Pleasonton to return with his battalion of Missouri cavalry to Warrensburg, Missouri. The Captain marched back 504 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. to his station via Hickman's Mills and Pleasant Hill. Near this latter place he ran into and engaged in a sharp skirmish part of Quantrill's bandits, who had attacked a company of the Seventh Missouri State Militia Cavalry under Captain M. W. Foster, who was escorting Gover nor W. P. Hall, of Missouri, to Warrensburg. The Gov ernor had been with the army under Rosecrans operating against Price and was returning to Warrensburg when attacked. Captain Grover came up just in time to save the Governor and his escort from possible disaster, and joined in the chase of the bandits until late that night.

## newtonia

CHAPTER XXXIII. BATTLE OF NEWTONIA— SIEGE OF FAYETTEVILLE RAISED — CONCLUSION OF THE PRICE RAID. THE gallant conduct of the Missouri forces under Pleasonton in engaging Price's army in close conflict every opportunity and in capturing from it in the last four days eleven pieces of artillery, two generals, and nearly two thousand prisoners, appears to have impressed General Curtis that he would have to adopt a more vigor ous policy to secure any substantial honors for his own troops in the campaign now drawing to a close. And yet his policy was lacking of that vigor which would likely secure any decisive results. His troops had marched one hundred miles without engaging the enemy, and he permitted them to remain in Fort Scott all night and until noon the next day before commencing the pur suit, by which time Price's army had got from thirty to forty miles the start of him. There was no necessity for his command to halt to draw ammunition, for it had ex pended none since leaving Westport. But leaving Fort Scott on the 26th, with the First, Second, and Fourth Brigades of his command under General Blunt, he marched about twenty miles in a southeast direction and encamped on the south side of Big Dry Wood, in Vernon County, Missouri, having at that point struck the trail of Price's army. He was followed in the further pursuit by the brigades of McNeil, Sanborn, and Benteen of Pleason- 506 BATTLE OF NEWTONIA. 507 ton's division as rapidly as their horses could be urged forward. After making his extraordinary march from the Marmiton to Carthage, on Spring River, and no Fed eral forces appearing in his rear, General Price halted his army to give his troops a night's rest. He then con tinued the retreat south by easy marches, and passing through Newtonia about noon on the 28th, encamped in the timber three miles south of that place. Before all the troops of his rear-guard had crossed Shoal Creek north of Granby, they were overtaken by General Curtis' advance under Colonel Ford, Second Colorado Cavalry, and rapidly driven in upon Shelby's division, which had just gone into camp in the edge of the timber south of Newtonia in the rear of the other divisions of the Southern army. Having rested and passed two days and nights without being disturbed by the Federal forces after the headlong flight from Mine Creek and Marmiton River, the morale of the Confederate troops had considerably improved when the advance of General Curtis appeared on the prairie northwest of Newtonia. But as they had destroyed and abandoned most of their train, with the camp equipage, cooking utensils, and supplies and plun der with which it was loaded, and as they had taken no time the last two days to collect subsistence from the desolate section over which they had rapidly re treated, many of them were suffering from the pangs of hunger. The loyal militia stationed at Neosho and Newtonia that year had given the citizens the best possible protec tion, so that those who had returned to their homes raised fairly good crops in that section. It was therefore Price's intention to stop a day or two near Newtonia to collect supplies for his army from these loyal citizens who were struggling so hard to reestablish themselves in their homes. When General Sanborn collected his forces in Southwest Missouri at Springfield in September, to 508 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. march to Rolla and Jefferson City, he left two companies of the Eighth Missouri State Militia under Major Milton Burch at Neosho, and two companies of the Seventh Provisional Militia under Captain J. M. Ritchey at Newtonia, to operate against the Southern bandits in the absence of the troops withdrawn from the district. These officers kept themselves advised of the movements of the Confederate army, and when informed that it was rapidly retreating down the Border, sent out their scouts to watch all the approaches from the north. When their scouts returned and reported the rapid advance of the enemy, they had just barely time to evacuate their posts without loss of men or property and retire in the direc tion of Springfield. A part of General Thompson's bri gade endeavored to intercept and cut them off, and in the skirmish that took place in the edge of the timber east of Newtonia, Lieutenant R. H. Christian and one enlisted man of Captain Ritchey's company were killed. On driving in the Confederate rear-guard through Granby and the prairie northwest of Newtonia, General Blunt, who was at the front, ordered Colonel Ford to form the Second Colorado and Sixteenth Kansas Cavalry of his brigade in line on the high ridge northwest of the village, and as soon as the two sections of Captain Mc- Lain's Colorado battery came up commenced shelling the Confederate position in the edge of the timber about a mile south. As soon as he saw the Fifteenth Kansas, under Lieutenant-Colonel Hoyt, and a detachment of the Third Wisconsin Cavalry, under Lieutenant J. B. Pond, coming up at a gallop, he led Colonel Ford's two regi ments in a charge across the prairie with skirmish-line deployed, under cover of the fire of his battery, up to within musket-range of Shelby's position behind a fence on the south side of a field. To meet the Federal attack, General Shelby dis mounted the troops of his division, with Jackman's bri- BATTLE OF NEWTONIA. 509 gade on his right and Thompson's brigade and Slayback's command on his left, and a mounted force to watch each of his flanks. He then brought up two guns of Collins' battery and opened fire on the advancing Federal troops, when the roar of artillery and small-arms announced that the opposing forces had joined in fierce conflict. Jenni- son's First Brigade coming up, formed on the right of Colonel Ford, both commands taking position behind the fence on the north side of the field, which they held for some time under a hot fire. But they were finally obliged to fall back from this position about a mile under a heavy fire from the Confederates, who advanced through the field and into the prairie on the north side of it until they were checked by the rapid discharges of canister from the Colorado battery. With his superior numbers General Shelby commenced at once to press his advantage by pushing forward his dismounted troops in his centre and his cavalry on his flanks, a movement which so seriously threatened the safety of the Colorado battery that it was ordered to fall back. As his command was dismounted, except some cavalry on his flanks, he could not effectively charge Blunt's mounted troops, and was obliged to content himself with steadily driving them back as far as seemed desirable. The situation was by no means encouraging to General Blunt. His line was gradually retiring, his battery in danger of capture, and stragglers from his com mand were moving to the rear. Were the recent suc cesses at Mine Creek and Little Osage to be followed so soon by disaster by his rashness ? He not only had another brigade of his own division with which he could have made the attack, but the three brigades of Pleason- ton's division, now under the orders of General Curtis, could have been brought up to his support. His act of rushing ahead with two small brigades of less than two regiments in numbers to attack the Confederate army 5IO THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. after it had rested and to some extent reorganized would hardly have been excusable in a captain commanding a company, much less in a major-general commanding a division. He knew that morning that Price's army was in his immediate front, and yet he allowed his Second Brigade to halt and feed ten to fifteen miles from the scene of conflict, with the three brigades of Pleasonton's division still in the rear and unable to make a rapid march to the front in consequence of their horses being so badly worn out by the hard service of the campaign. But shortly before sundown most welcome assistance came up to his support. General Sanborn, with his brigade of four regiments of Missouri State Militia and the Second Arkansas Cavalry, left Fort Scott the morning of the 27th, and after one short halt to feed and rest made the march to Newtonia, a distance of ninety-five miles, in a day and a half, and reporting to General Blunt, immedi ately went into action on the Federal left. As the horses of his brigade were in no condition to execute any rapid movements, and as the Confederates occupied fields in his front which were inclosed and in tersected with stone and rail fences, he dismounted the regiments of his command and ordered them forward to drive the enemy from the fields. He also ordered into action the section of Captain Montgomery's battery, Second Missouri Light Artillery, under Lieutenant Smiley, which he brought along, and it fired twenty-two rounds of shell and canister into the Confederate line with good effect. The steady advance of his dismounted troops soon brought them within range of the enemy, and after two or three volleys the cheers that went up from his line announced that the Confederates were leaving the field and retreating. He pursued the retiring foe about three miles into the timber, when darkness and the exhaustion of his men suspended further operations. His brigade remained at the extreme front until nine BATTLE OF NEWTONIA. 511 o'clock that night, when he received orders to return to Newtonia, where there was plenty of water and some forage, and where the other brigades, under General Curtis, which had not participated in the fight, had arrived and gone into camp. Leaving a regiment near the scene of the conflict to watch the movements of the Federal forces, General Shelby that night at twelve o'clock retired with his division in the rear of Price's army, on the road to Pine- ville. Had General Curtis not stopped — stopped to feed the horses of a part of his command a few hours after breaking camp at Carthage — he could have put four of his brigades into action at Newtonia by the middle of the afternoon, and by the time they got fairly to work the brigades of Sanborn and Benteen could have been brought up to support him. After the troops of his Department had marched two hundred miles down the Border, a small fraction of them pushed forward and engaged the enemy, but with such ill-conceived judgment that they were soon driven from the field and would certainly have suffered disaster had it not been for the timely arrival of Sanborn's brigade. On driving the Confederates from the field and pur suing them until dark, General Curtis returned to New tonia to rest until morning, when he proposed to renew the pursuit vigorously with the hope of being able to destroy Price's demoralized army. To his great disap pointment a messenger arrived from Fort Scott during the night with a despatch from General Pleasonton, noti fying him that General Rosecrans had ordered Generals Sanborn and McNeil to return with their troops to the headquarters of their respective districts at Springfield and Rolla. On the withdrawal of these troops from the pursuit the next morning, General Curtis was obliged to give up the chase, and marched to Neosho, twelve miles, on his return to Kansas.
