# Ropes: Northern Virginia Campaign selections, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR; not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers, garbled page text and map-label text. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages only; page locators refer to unverified OCR page markers, which do not match the OCR table of contents. Quotations of Pope, Jackson, Longstreet, Lee, Taliaferro and other officers remain part of Ropes, not separately inspected originals. No maps, rosters or facsimiles inspected.

## title-and-preface

THE ARMY UNDER POPE CAMPAIGNS OF THE CIVIL WAR.— IV. THE ARMY UNDER POPE BY JOHN CODMAN ROPES, MKMBEK OF THE MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY, AND THE MILITARY HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF MASSACHUSETTS. Forsan et hcec olim meminisse juvabit. NEW YORK CHAELES SCEIBNEE'S SONS 743 and 745 Broadway 1881 Copyright by CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 1881 Trow's Printing and Bookbinding Company 201-213 East lzth Street new York. $0 THE MEMORY OF MY YOUNGEST BROTHER HENRY, FIRST LIEUTENANT IN THE TWENTIETH REGIMENT OP MASSACHUSETTS VOLUNTEERS, WHO FELL AT THE BATTLE OF GETTYSBURG, JULY 3, 1863, THIS ESSAY IS AFFECTIONATELY PKEFACE, It may be considered presumptuous in a civilian to at- tempt a history of a campaign. I do not propose to discuss the question here, further than to say, that a civilian un- doubtedly does labor under many disadvantages as com- pared with a soldier who has seen active service. The study of military matters may, however, I suppose, be taken up at any time of life, as advantageously as in youth. It is not, to my thinking, a creditable thing to the counuy that the official reports of the war have not long since been published. The want of them is sensibly felt by every one who endeavors to investigate any campaign. These reports, both Federal and Confederate, are, however, now being published under the authority of Government. The Eeports of the Army of Northern Virginia, which I have had constant need to consult, constitute a most in- teresting history of the war in Virginia ending with the Bat- tle of Fredericksburg. Of course, some allowance must be made for partisanship and strong feeling, but I will say that I have found most of the writers perfectly fair and can- viii PREFACE. did. The reports of Lee, Longstreet, Jackson, and, in fact, of most of the other officers, are clear, moderate in tone, in excellent taste, and show a thorough appreciation of the soldierly qualities of their antagonists. There are a few braggarts, like D. H. Hill, who, no doubt, enjoyed at the time the rude sport of belaboring the "Yankees" in their official reports, but they may safely be left to the mortifica- tion of seeing their performances exposed by the side of the calm, temperate, and self-contained narratives of their brother officers. I desire to acknowledge my indebtedness to the exhaus- tive work of General George H. Gordon on the Army of Virginia, as also to his smaller volume entitled " The Sec- ond Massachusetts and Stonewall Jackson." I have endeavored throughout to be perfectly impartial. While the book is, of course, written from the Federal standpoint, it has been my endeavor to keep in mind that it is now sixteen years after the war, and that

## cedar-mountain

" Having received information," says that officer in his 2 18 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. report, " that only a part of General Pope's army was at Culpeper Court House, and hoping, through the blessing of Providence, to be able to defeat it before reinforcements should arrive there, Ewell's, Hill's, and Jackson's divisions were moved on the 7th, in the direction of the enemy, from their respective encampments near Gordonsville " " On the 9th, as we arrived within about eight miles of Cul- peper Court House we found the enemy in our front, near Cedar Run, a short distance west and north of Slaughter's (Cedar) Mountain." The first battle of the campaign was at hand. CHAPTEE H. THE BATTLE OF CEDAR MOUNTAIN. Genekal Banks' corps, less that portion of it which was absent on detached service, did not reach a total of 8,000 men of all arms ; of Jackson's three divisions, only two brigades, Lawton's and Gregg's, were absent. Jackson ex- pected doubtless to overwhelm the brigade of Crawford, which he knew on the 7th was supporting the cavalry. But in presence of a larger force he was not a man to hesitate, unless in face of overwhelming odds. It may safely be as- sumed that his intention was to press our army vigorously, and that he hoped to defeat it in detail. General Pope, on the other hand, was well aware of his movements. It was his intention to offer battle, but not until he had con- centrated his army. Sigel's folly had caused a delay of twenty-four hours. Pope could not retire behind Culpe- per, for that would be to sacrifice his communications with Sigel ; nor would it be wise to give Jackson an unobstructed march, or a march obstructed by cavalry only, to Culpeper, for Jackson's activity and energy were well known. It was dangerous to forego the attempt to delay him on his march ; it was perfectly safe to make the attempt, because the troops in the immediate front could take up a strong position and be reinforced, first by Bicketts, and afterward by Sigel when he should arrive. Finally, while it was wise to send a por- tion of the troops to the front, it was necessary, on account 20 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. of keeping up the communication with Sigel, to retain a considerable force near Culpeper Court House. With these views, General Pope sent to General Banks a verbal order through Colonel Marshall, of his staff, which, when at Banks' request it was reduced to writing by Major Pelouze, of Banks' staff, read as follows : * " Culpeper, 9.45 a.m., August 9, '62. "From Colonel Lewis Marshall : " General Banks to move to the front immediately, assume command of all forces in the front, deploy his skirmishers if the enemy advances, and attack him immediately as he approaches, and be reinforced from here." Whatever may have been the order as given by General Pope to Colonel Marshall, and whatever may have been the order which Colonel Marshall intended to give to General Banks, the above is, without question, the order which Gen- eral Banks received. If there was any mistake about it, the blame must rest, without any dispute, upon the superior officer, who might have put it in writing and did not. Whatever may have been the interpretation of this order, however, it was not the only one which Banks received. He tells us himself, in his testimony before the Committee on the Conduct of the War, in 1864,f that after he had, in compliance with this order, put his troops in motion, he left the head of his column to see General Pope, and asked him if he had any other orders. General Pope told him that he had sent an officer, acquainted with the country, who would designate the ground he was to hold.% That officer — General * From a letter from Major Pelouze to General G-. H. Gordon, in Gordon's " Second Massachusetts and Stonewall Jackson," printed but not published, p. 216. See also Kep. C. W., 1865, vol. iii., p. 45, at the end of the volume, where the same text is given by Banks, with a few unimportant variations. tRep. C. W., 1865, vol. iii., p. 45, at the end of the volume. % The italics are ours. THE BATTLE OF CEDAR MOUNTAIN. 21 Boberts, as is claimed by Banks, urged him to take the of- fensive. This Boberts denies, but it seems probable that he did indulge in remarks of a kind likely to provoke a high- spirited man to hazard an engagement. But, even if this were so, the language of the written despatch — " Deploy your skirmishers * if the enemy advances, and attack him imme- diately as he approaches* and be reinforced from here" — ■ though certainly far from explicit, does not, on examination, sustain the interpretation which General Banks put upon it. The taking up of a position by our forces is implied in the reference to the advance of the enemy. The enemy are contemplated as advancing upon our troops in position ; when they advance, skirmishers are to be thrown out ; when the enemy approaches, he is to be attacked with the skirmishers, and delayed as much as possible, and reinforcements are to be at once sent for to Culpeper. The reason of the thing, also, is all one way. To suppose that Pope won Id send Banks' corps out alone to attack Jackson is absurd of itself, and, taken in connection with the careful and judicious hand- ling of his troops thus far in the campaign, and with the strategic needs of the moment, of which we have spoken at length above, there should have been no doubt whatever in General Banks' mind as to his duty that day. He should have taken up a strong position, pushed his pickets well out, and ascertained the strength, positions, and intentions of the enemy, maintained a fh'm countenance, and replied at once to their guns. If they advanced, he should have deployed a strong skirnrisk-line, and given it to the charge of some alert and courageous officer, and have immediately notified General Pope. Had he done this, there might have been no serious engagement on that day ; but if Jackson had brushed * The italics are ours. THK AUMY UNDER POPR awa^ the skirmishers and pushed his way to tho main lino, e boon, and would probably haw boon re- sed, S jht have put his in- structions . . v. . Mid did not, most share the blame. And it is a (air . the instructions that they say .- word of takin . op, or of holding a position. The - besides, do, unqi ly, order Banks in a sick. It is true, he is to attack with - - .'.I. he is to attack. The order breathes the .-.rso. It Genera] Ranks was to take strong pos .1 himsolt*. why say s - aay words black irched from ( - - son's Ford on the . to the westward of Cedar Mountain, Less be road crosses a little called < - slopes of the moun- - I thai .... the troops, with the should cross the run. whioh op a strong pos s was I the little army aons brigade of . tt 7,1 [ - - s >trong other was . . I ..." A.\:... - . - IfiS THE BATTLE OF CEDAR MOUNTAIN. 23 Crawford, then Prince on Geary's left, and then, somewhat refused, the .small brigade of Greene. He had no troops in reserve. * The artillery were ranged on the plateau in front of the infantry. The cavalry were on the flanks and skirmished with the enemy. Jackson's army consisted of three divisions, his own, so- called, now commanded by General Charles S. Winder, Eattle of Cedar Mountain. Ewell's, and A. P. Hill's, and numbered, as has been stated, between 20,000 and 25,000 men ; the latter number is proba- bly nearer the truth. He pushed Ewell forward on his right (our left) along the northerly slope of Cedar Mountain, 24 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. with two of his brigades, those of Trimble and Hayes, the latter commanded by Colonel Forno. The remaining bri- gade, that of Early, was kept much nearer the road, so that a considerable interval existed between it and the two bri- gades first mentioned. Jackson's division was directed to advance along the road, with one brigade, Campbell's, com- manded by Lieutenant-Colonel Garnett on the left (our right) of the road, the brigade of General W. B. Taliaferro on their right (our left) of the road, and the famous "Stone- wall Brigade," then commanded by Colonel Bonald, in re- serve. Behind all these troops was the powerful division of A. P. Hill, comprising the brigades of Thomas, Branch, Archer, Pender, Stafford, and Field. From noon to about three o'clock in the afternoon there had been constant artillery firing. The Confederate General "Winder was killed by a shell about half-past three, while directing the fire of some batteries, and his division was taken by General "W. B. Taliaferro — the brigade of the latter being taken by Colonel A. G. Taliaferro. The enemy were pushing on in the general direction indicated above, but they moved cautiously. In time our cavalry were forced back. Our infantry were then discerned supporting the bat- teries. Then was the time for Banks to have pushed out his skirmishers, and notified Pope that an attack by the enemy could not be far off. Had he done this, he could probably have been reinforced before the attack became general by Bicketts' division of some 8,000 men, a force quite sufficient to have enabled him to hold his own. Unfortunately he de- cided on a very different course. He entirely under-esti- mated the strength of the enemy. He determined to attack himself, with his whole corps. At four o'clock he advanced his whole line forward to the further edge of the plateau. At half-past five he gave the signal of attack. THE BATTLE OF CEDAR MOUNTAIN. 25 The general plan was for Crawford to turn the enemy's left by assaulting the left flank of Campbell's brigade, while Geary's and Prince's brigades of Augur's division should at- tack Taliaferro's and Early's brigades on our left of the road. The enemy suspected nothing of the sort. They had not yet fairly formed their line of battle. They were in fact cau- tiously feeling their way, preparatory to making an attack themselves. On their right, there was a great gap between Early's right and the troops of Trimble and Hayes ; on their left, Campbell's brigade was drawn up on the edge of the woods and facing a wheat-field, but its left flank was covered by thick woods, and Jackson himself told its commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Garnett, to look well to his left flank, and to send at once to General Taliaferro, who com- manded his division, for reinforcements. The brigade of Eonald, which was to support the brigades of Campbell and Taliaferro, had not been moved up near enough to be of im- mediate service in case of need. The officers sent by Gar- nett for assistance had not returned, when all at once the storm broke. Geary and Prince, advancing rapidly in front, assaulted with vigor the brigades of Early and Taliaferro, and the right regiment of Campbell's brigade. Suddenly Crawford's men burst upon the left regiments of this brigade. Garnett, who had been on the right of the line, hurried to the spot. He found the Federal infantry rapidly advancing, not more than fifty yards from the front of his line, and bearing down also from the left, and delivering a most galling fire. The First Virginia Battalion, thus struck unexpectedly at a great disadvantage, gave way in confusion. The Forty-second Virginia was ordered to change front to meet the flank at- tack, but its commanding officer, Major Layne, was mortally Vol. IV— 2 26 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. wounded, and the regiment broke. Our troops now working round to their rear, the same fate met the other regiments of the brigade, in spite of the heroic efforts of their officers. Garnett himself was wounded ; Lieutenant-Colonel Cunning- ham, of the Twenty-first Virginia, was killed ; the flank-fire was most destructive ; the brigade was driven back in dis- order ; and soon the victorious troops of Crawford, pressing on without stopping an instant, struck the left of Taliaferro's brigade. Here the blow was, if anything, even more deci- sive, for Taliaferro was attacked in front by Geary, as well as in flank and rear by Crawford, and in spite of a gallant resistance, his troops were driven back in confusion and with great slaughter, exposing the left regiments of Early's brigade. Meantime that officer, seeing, in the beginning of the ac- tion, that he was likely to be outflanked on his right by the line composed of our brigades of Prince and Greene, suc- ceeded in getting Thomas' brigade, of Hill's division, to take position on his right. Hardly had he done this, how- ever, when Taliaferro's brigade on his left gave way entirely and carried with it the left regiments of his command. "I found," says General Early, "that the pieces of artil- lery that had been advanced had been retired, and that the left regiments of my brigade, and all the troops to their left, as far as I could see, had fallen back, and the enemy were advancing up the slope of the hill." Colonel Walker of the Thirteenth Virginia, who was on the left of the brigade, speaks of the brigade on his left (Taliaferro's), giving way and running off the field in disorder, and says that the panic thus begun was communicated to two or three regiments on his right, in consequence of which his regiment and the Thirty-first Virginia had to retire, being unsupported on either flank. Early, however, resolutely maintained his THE BATTLE OF CEDAR MOUNTAIN. 27 stand with the Twelfth Georgia, and parts of the Fifty- second and Fifty-eighth Virginia regiments, though attacked in front and flank. Had they given way, he admits that the day in all probability would have been lost. But they stood fast, holding their position, as Jackson says in his report of the battle, "with great firmness." Meanwhile, Eonald had at last got his brigade through the woods and fences, and came down upon the exhausted troops of Crawford's brigade. They received him with a firm countenance, and some of his regiments, especially the Twenty-seventh Virginia,* were roughly handled and forced back with loss. His line was badly shaken, if not giving way. f In fact, at this moment, the field was ours. Had it not been for the reserve brigades of Hill, Early and Thomas would have been compelled to fall back, leaving us masters of the field. Fortunately, however, for the enemy, Hill was within call. Three of his brigades, those of Branch, Archer, and Pender, now arrived on the ground. While Bonald was maintaining the fight with his comparatively fresh brigade in the centre, and Garnett and Taliaferro were bravely rallying their broken troops in the rear, Branch arrived on their left of the road, and under the immediate direction of Jackson himself advanced in line of battle and encountered our troops in the woods which lie beyond the wheat-field, over which they had charged". The exhausted Federal battalions fell back over the wheat-field and there halted and received the advance of the enemy. Branch's brigade took up the position from which Campbell's had been driven. For some time our men stood their ground ; but they were in no con- dition to meet fresh troops. Taliaferro's brigade having * A. N. V., Haj'nes1 Report, vol. ii., p. 68. t A. N. V., Lane's Report, vol. ii., p. 270. 28 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. been rallied and brought back to substantially its old posi- tion, our cavalry made a gallant charge upon them down the road, but were broken by their fire in front and the oblique fire from the regiments of Branch. Then the infantry on our left began to fall back. Augur had been wounded; Geary had been wounded ; Prince had been captured. But the remnants of Crawford's brigade, still clinging to the edge of the wheat-field, and firing across it, were now rein- forced by a fine regiment, the Tenth Maine, belonging to this brigade, which had not participated in the battle thus far. But one regiment could do but little, of course, though it obstinately held its own for nearly half an hour, losing out of its 461 officers and men 173 killed and wounded. Then, when it was too late, Banks sent for Gordon's brigade, hitherto held in reserve on the extreme right. It was a use- less, perfectly useless order, for it was evident that the enemy had been largely reinforced by fresh troops, and that the only thing possible to our exhausted men was to make an orderly retreat. But Banks, who was on the spot, was still uncon- vinced. He had just endeavored to get the Maine regiment to sally forth alone across the wheat-field, and now he sends for Gordon, not to cover the retreat, but to resume again the offensive. Gordon, a graduate himself of West Point, and a veteran of the Mexican war, at the head of a fine body of troops, the Second Massachusetts, into which Harvard Col- lege had sent many of her sons, the Third Wisconsin, and the Twenty-seventh Indiana, took his troops at the double- cpiick across the creek and to the edge of the wheat -field. But by this time the ground was occupied only by the dead and wounded of Crawford's brigade. The Tenth Maine even had retired. The enemy had massed their forces here. In front were the troops of Archer and Branch ; on Gordon's right were Bonald and Pender. The action was brief but THE BATTLE OF CEDAR MOUNTAIN. 29 terrible. Till they were flanked, Gordon's troops stood and inflicted severe loss on their opponents, but before long Pender had gained their right and rear and the whole thing was over. The Second Massachusetts lost heavily; 12 of- ficers and 147 enlisted men killed and wounded, and 15 prisoners, 35 per cent, of the number engaged. Never was there a more useless sacrifice of brave men's lives. The enemy pushed the retreating forces until they took up a position behind the creek and were reinforced by Bicketts' division and Sigel's corps, the latter having arrived in the evening. Unaware of this, Jackson undertook, in his anxiety to reach Culpeper before morning, to shell the Federal troops out of their position, but succeeded in rous- ing so many sleeping batteries that he shortly discontinued his cannonade, having suffered some loss. The battle of Cedar Mountain was over. It is impossible not to regard it as a wholly needless engagement. It was not any part of General Pope's plan that it should be fought. It was followed on the day but one after by the retreat of Jackson to the Eapidan. It was a mere tactical victory for Jackson, and was won only because he had the larger army and the stronger reserves. For, as a battle between Jack- son's and Ewell's divisions and Thomas' brigade of Hill's division on the one side, and the two divisions of Banks' corps on the other, it was without controversy a victory for Banks' corps. But, as we have before said, Banks knew or should have known that the whole of Hill's division was up, and that it was no part of General Pope's plan that a battle should be fought with Jackson's command before his army was concentrated. We lost one gun, it was mired in the creek on the retreat. Jackson claims to have captured 400 prisoners, 3 colors, and 5,302 (sic) small arms. There is some mistake about this last 30 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. item doubtless — probably a misprint — as there were not many more muskets in all Banks' corps. Crawford's brigade, out of 1,767 officers and men, lost 96 killed, 397 wounded, and 374 missing ; very many of the latter being doubtless killed or wounded — in all 867— nearly one-half.* Gordon's brigade, numbering less than fifteen hundred men, lost in killed, wounded, and missing, 466. Our whole loss f was 1,661 killed and wounded, and 723 missing; total, 2,393. Jackson reports 1,283 killed and wounded, and 31 missing ; total, 1,314. The loss in officers was very heavy on both sides. It was a hard-fought battle ; fierce, obstinate, sanguinary.

## rappahannock-river-actions

On the 20th and 21st his main body came up, Jackson on the left and Longstreet on the right. The latter struck the river on the afternoon of the 20th at Kelly's Ford, a few miles below Eappahannock Station, which is the point where the railroad crosses the river. The former, on the morning of the 21st, arrived at Beverly Ford, a few miles above the station; and Stuart, who accompanied him, threw a few regiments of cavalry, under Bobertson, across above Beverly Ford, and pushed a small force, under Bosser, across at Beverly Ford. But these detachments were speed- ily driven back again. On the other hand our forces still held some points on the westerly side of the river ; General Hartsuff, with a brigade of Bicketts' division, occupied a tete- depont at Eappahannock Station, and some small hills near by. The greater height of the banks on our side gave our ON THE RAPPAHANNOCK 37 artillery an advantage over that of the enemy. The river itself, though fordable every few miles, was nevertheless an obstacle, and a considerable one, as it turned out, to General Lee's advance. There was a great deal of heavy artillery firing across the river, and there were several unimportant ' skirmishes on both sides of the river, chiefly on the further, or right bank. General Lee, after several tentative movements, soon be- came convinced that he could not make a successful crossing anywhere between Kelly's Ford and Beverly Ford, and he consequently determined to seek a passage higher up. Ac- cordingly, on the 22d, Jackson marched up the river toward Sulphur Springs, a point about ten miles north of Rappa- hannock Station, closely observed by Sigel, who kept pace with him, for a time, on our side of the river. A spirited attack was made on the rear of Jackson's column by a bri- gade of infantry from Sigel's corps, who inflicted consider- able damage, and came near making a valuable capture of trains ; but they were at length driven off, with the loss of many men, and of, at least, one valuable officer — Brigadier- General Bohlen — who commanded them. Arrived at the Springs, whither Sigel was unable to fol- low him, as his line could not safely be prolonged so far, Jackson pushed over, late in the afternoon of the 22d, Early's brigade of Ewell's division, with one additional regiment and two batteries. Immediately after this, a heavy rain- storm set in, and the river rose during the night so much as to cut off all communication between Early's command and the rest of the army. Longstreet, meanwhile, had moved up from the neighbor- hood of Kelly's Ford, and now occupied the right bank of the river, from Rappahannock Station to Beverly Ford, or even somewhat beyond that point. 38 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. General Pope, of course, recognized the intention of the enemy. It was too plain to be mistaken. Lee proposed to cross at Sulphur Springs, or at Waterloo Bridge, or at both places, to turn our right, and, marching through Warrenton, threaten our railroad communications between Warrenton Junction and Manassas Junction, thus forcing us to fight in a disadvantageous position, and before our reinforcements had come up. Pope, with his inferior force, could not op- pose him at all points of the line, nor would it have been wise had he attempted it. A river can always be crossed by a superior force ; and the best thing for the resisting army to do is, generally speaking, to take up a position from which it can attack and overwhelm the advance of their opponents before it can be supported. Pope at first* determined to act on this plan. He tells us in his report f that he instructed General Sigel, who occupied the right of his line, and who expressed great apprehension that his flank would be turned, and who proposed to withdraw from his position and retire toward the railroad, to stand firm and hold his ground, and to allow the enemy to cross at Sulphur Springs, and de- velop himself on the road toward Warrenton ; that, as soon as any considerable body had crossed, he would mass his army and throw it upon any force of the enemy that at- tempted to march upon Warrenton. The despatch to Sigel, to which General Pope refers, is to be found inserted in his report,J but while the instructions to Sigel are as given above, nothing whatever is said in it of General Pope's in- tention of massing his army, and attacking the enemy found marching upon Warrenton. It is possible that General Pope's memory may have been at fault here, as it is probable, * Pope to Halleck, August 20 ; P. E., p. 123. Same to same, August 22, 5 p.m. ; P. R., 126. + P. R. p. 124. $ Ibid., p. 129. ON THE RAPPAHANNOCK. 39 from another portion of his report, that this despatch to Sigel, which was undoubtedly written very early in the morning of the 23d, was penned when Pope had a very dif- ferent operation in his mind. General Pope had, in fact, conceived a most daring plan, the direct opposite of this of which we have spoken, namely, to recross the river and assail the enemy's flank and rear. At Rappahannock Station he had, as has been stated, a tete- de-pont on the other side of the river. His artillery also commanded the fords. Writing to General Halleck at 9.15 p. m. of the 22d,* he says " I must do one of two things — either fall back and meet Heinteelman behind Cedar Run [which is near Catlett's Station] or cross the Rappahannock with my whole force, and assail the enemy's flank and rear. I must do one or the other at daylight. Which shall it be ? I incline to the latter." And General Halleck, replying at eleven o'clock that night, says f that he thinks the latter of the two propositions the best. Pope thereupon, at 2.20 a.m. of the 23d, requests % Halleck to order all the troops coming up the river from Fredericksburg to cross the Rappahannock at the various fords, and march rapidly on Stevensburg and Brandy Station ; and that his movement will be made the next day, as soon as he finds that the enemy has passed a sufficient number of his troops over the river. It was during this night of the 22d and 23d — an anxious night, doubtless, for General Pope, and a wakeful one, for he seems to have been up at all hours of it — that he received from Sigel the despatch of which he speaks in his report, notifying him that the enemy had crossed near Sulphur Springs, and suggesting that his corps should be withdrawn to Bealeton. In his reply, which was doubtless an immedi- *P. R.,p. 127. tlb., p. 137. Jib., p. 128. 40 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. ate one, he orders * him, as he says in his report, to stand firm, and let the enemy develop toward Warrenton, and that he desired the enemy to cross as large a force as he pleased in the direction of Warrenton. This seems to settle the question, what was the plan in General Pope's mind when he was writing to Sigel. The more troops of the enemy on our side of the river, the fewer there would be for Pope to fight on the other side. Had he intended at that time to overwhelm those who had crossed, he would hardly have thus given them permission to cross as many as they liked. The matter is not of any particular importance, ex- cept as showing that the intention of attacking on our side of the river, if it was entertained at first, was soon aban- doned for the plan of recrossing the river. But the next morning, the 23d, it was found that the rise in the river had rendered this project of a counter-attack im- practicable. It was perhaps quite as well that it was not at- tempted ; no army that had not been thoroughly trained, and that was not under officers accustomed for years to act with each other, would have had much chance of success in such a dangerous operation. Pope's army had just been or- ganized. As for those troops on which he must have relied to guard the railroad during this incursion on the other side of the river, they had not yet even reported for duty. Still, the freshet which put a stop to this plan, rendered it possible to capture that part of Jackson's command which had crossed near the Springs. Accordingly, on the morning of the 23d, Sigel, whose corps had been posted between Beverly and Freeman's Fords, was ordered to move up the river to Sulphur Springs, and thence toward Waterloo Bridge, and to attack whatever force of the enemy he might * Pope to Sigel, August 23 ; P. R., p. 139. ON THE RAPPAHANNOCK. 41 find on our side of the river. Nothing, however, came of this expedition. Early had retired behind Great Bun, one of the affluents of the Bappahannock, which was so much swollen by the rain that Sigel was delayed till too late in getting across it. But this was no fault of General Pope's. In this attempt to caijture those of the enemy's troops that had crossed the river, Pope did not hesitate to uncover for the time being the lower fords of the Bappahannock. Owing to the freshet, the danger of a crossing by the enemy at these fords had very greatly diminished, if it had not entirely disappeared, for the bridges had been swept away and the fords were gone, and then there were the troops of Heintzel- man and Porter, now arriving from Alexandria and Aquia Creek, who would furnish for the moment a sufficient de- fence. He, therefore, on the morning of the 23d, ordered * General Sigel upon Sulphur Springs, as has just been stated, and thence, if he did not find the enemy, upon Waterloo Bridge, some few miles higher up the river. He ordered f Banks and Beno to support Sigel, and he pushed McDowell's corps to Warrenton, where he fixed his own headquarters. To Warrenton he also directed J Beynolds, who had come up on the 23d from Aquia Creek, with his fine division of Pennsylvania reserves — 2,500 strong — the first arrival from the Army of the Potomac — and which he attached to McDowell's command, to which it had, as we have seen, originally belonged. He also, on the 23d, abandoned his works beyond the river at Bappahannock Station and with- drew the troops ; he destroyed the bridge there ; and for the time being, at any rate, he renounced \ his plan of recrossing the river. These movements were certainly wise, and they were ordered with commendable promptitude. * P. R., p. 129. + Pope to Banks : P. B., p. 131. X P. R., p. 132. § Though not definitely. Pope to Hallec .-. ; P. R., 135. 42 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. While this was going on in our army, General J. E. B. Stuart, the celebrated cavalry officer, whose enterprise and audacity were justly famous, on the night of the 22d, conducted an expedition of 1,500 horse or thereabouts, to our rear, striking the railroad at Catlett's Station. The weather was horrible, and the march exceedingly severe, but the object of the expedition was in part attained, for baggage, despatches, and prisoners were taken. The trestle bridge across Cedar Run, however, could not be destroyed. Still, the moral effect of this raid, so far as it went, was of course favorable to the enemy. On the 24th Early succeeded in rejoining his corps. Sigel, who arrived near Sulphur Springs on the night of the 23d, having marched from Freeman's Ford, was delayed, as we have said, at Great Run, till the morning of the 24th. Whether he could not have accomplished more than he did is still an unsettled question. Between his corps and that of Jackson there was an artillery duel all that day. Buford, with his cavalry, had pushed out to Waterloo in the forenoon of the 24th. Pope directed him to destroy the bridge there, but for some reason this was not done. Sigel was or- dered to support him, and Milroy's brigade, constituting the advance of his corps, reached Waterloo late in the afternoon of the same day. In the evening of the 24th Jackson retired to Jefferson, a place about four miles west of Sulphur Springs, and his po- sitions on the river were occupied by the corps of Longstreet. That evening, Pope's headquarters were at Warrenton ; Sigel was on the river from Waterloo to the Springs ; below him, on the river, was the corps of Banks ; the two divisions of Reno were a short distance east of the Springs ; Ricketts' division of McDowell's corps was partly between Warrenton and Waterloo, and King's division was between Warrenton ON THE RAPPAHANNOCK. 43 and the Springs. Reynolds was near Warrenton. Buford's cavalry observed the extreme right beyond Waterloo. Every- thing was ready to repel another attempt at crossing either at the Springs or at Waterloo Bridge.

## manassas-station-raid

That same evening Stonewall Jackson was at Bristoe Sta- JACKSON'S RAID. 51 tion with his whole force, consisting of the divisions of Taliaferro, A. P. Hill, and Ewell, numbering some twenty- five thousand men. He had marched all day from Salem, through White Plains, Thoroughfare Gap, and Gainesville, and had nowhere met with the smallest opposition. He had marched all that afternoon some fifteen miles in rear of our army with his twenty-five thousand men, and our army knew nothing about it. It is hardly necessary to say that this was the result of great negligence. Enough was known to de- mand the sending of parties of observation to the road which Jackson took ; nay, enough was suspected of the intentions of the enemy to make a reasonably prudent officer detach ten thousand men to Thoroughfare Gap. And what was the object in maintaining such a forward position with the amry ? Why was it not the wisest course, in view of the possible movement of Jackson through Thoroughfare Gap, to fall back to that line with the whole army ? General Pope, indeed, tells us in his report (p. 140) that he confidently expected that by the afternoon of the 26th Franklin would have been at or near Gainesville ; and that the forces under Sturgis and Cos would have been at War- renton Junction. There may, undoubtedly have been a time when he did expect this.* But he certainly did not on the evening of the 26th suppose that Franklin was at Gainesville, for we find him writing to Porter at seven o'clock that even- ing this : " Franklin, I hope, with his corps, will, by day after to-vzorrow night, occupy the point where the Manassas Gap Railroad intersects the turnpike from Warrenton to Washington City," i.e., Gainesville. And in this letter he tells * On the 24th General Haupt telegraphed him from Alexandria that thirty thousand troops, or more, demanded transportation ; and on the 25th, that he expected to send on all the troops now there, and all that were expected to ar- rive that day, P. R , p. 133. 52 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. him what he expects about Cox and Sturgis, who have not yet joined him, namely, that Cox will join him in the after- noon of to-morrow, and that Sturgis will move forward the day after to-morrow. Pope, it is perfectly evident, knew, on the night of the 26th, that neither Gainesville nor the Gap were guarded. It must be remarked that the above statement in his report is misleading, as are also others on page 142. The truth is just this : he knew perfectly well, on the even- ing of the 26th, that there was no force of our army at the Gap, or near it, but he did not sujDpose that Jackson was coming through the Gap. On the evening of the 26th* Pope determined to form a new line running substantially East and West between Warren- ton and Gainesville. He wrote McDowell at eight p.m., that he thinks the fight should be made at Warrenton. Sigel was already there. It was not necessary, of course, to issue any special orders to McDowell for the concentration of his own divisions. Banks, too, at Fayetteville, was in a good po- sition to support the new line. Reno was ordered to move from Warrenton Junction at daylight to the neighborhood of Warrenton, and McDowell was directed, as soon as he got near Warrenton, to send him to Greenwich, a village nearly east of Warrenton, and about as far from Warrenton as War- renton is from Warrenton Junction. Why Reno was to make this fatiguing march it is not easy to see. Greenwich is nearer the Junction than Warrenton is. Arrived at Green- wich, Reno was to throw forward four regiments and a bat- tery to Gainesville. Heintzelman, who was at the Junction, was ordered to send Kearney's division to Greenwich. Hooker was to remain near the Junction. Porter was ordered * The statement in his Report, p. 139, that he came to this determination on the evening of the 95th, is an error. The orders to Reno and Porter dated on the evening of the 20th. JACKSON'S RAID. 53 to march through Fayetteville to the vicinity of Warrenton. Ox his two divisions, Morell's was at Kelly's Ford and below, and Sykes' was five miles east of Bealeton Station, as has been stated. While writing these orders General Pope was informed that the enemy's cavalry had interrupted the railroad near Manassas. He at once ordered Heintzelman " to put a regi- ment on a train of cars and send it down immediately to Manassas to ascertain what had occurred, repair the tele- graph wires, and protect the railroad there until further orders." Pope evidently did not at this moment suppose this interruption to be a matter of very great consequence. But at midnight he writes to McDowell that the question whether the whole force of the enemy or the larger portion of it " has gone round (i.e., through Thoroughfare Gap) is a question which we must settle instantly, so that we may deter- mine our plans." During the night he made up his mind to take the most prudent course and throw the main body of the army upon Gainesville, a thing which the direction he had the evening before given to his columns enabled him to do without difficulty. This decision was a wise one, and it was taken with General Pope's customary promp- titude. At half past eight in the morning of the 27th, accordingly, General Pope ordered McDowell, with his own and Sigel's corps and the division of Reynolds, to pursue the turnpike from Warrenton to Gainesville so as to reach Gainesville that evening. McDowell at once ordered Sigel to send for- ward instantly a strong advance from his corps, to seize the position of Buckland Mills, on Broad Run, and to fol- low immediately with Ms corps. Bayard's cavalry preceded the march. Reynolds, King, and Ricketts followed. Sigel reached Buckland Mills in time to save the bridge, which 54 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. the enemy's cavalry who covered Jackson's movement had attempted to set on fire. Milroy's brigade and Schurz's di- vision reached Gainesville that evening ; Schenck's division remained with McDowell's corps at Buckland Mills. By the same order, Beno, with his two divisions, was or- dered upon Greenwich from Catlett's Station, the nearest way, instead of first going to Warrenton, as directed the evening before. He was followed by Kearny's division of Heintzelman's corps. Beno and Kearny reached their al- lotted positions that evening. By the same order, General Porter was to remain at War- renton Junction till relieved by Banks, who was ordered thither from Fayetteville, to assume charge of all the army trains, which were to retire by a road parallel with the rail- road, and of all the railroad trains, which were to be run back to Manassas as fast as practicable. While Pope was issuing this order for the concentration of the army upon Gainesville he was undoubtedly of the opinion that the railroad had been cut only by the enemy's cavalry, or at least by a small force of the enemy, whether cavalry or infantry. The regiment which Heintzelman had been, the evening before, directed to send out to ascer- tain the facts, reported the next morning very early that they had found the enemy in full force. At 7 a. m. of the 27th Hooker's division was sent out from Warrenton Junc- tion to drive them away. Nine miles from the Junction, near Bristoe Station, Hooker encountered Ewell's division in position. It was between two and three o'clock in the afternoon. Hooker immediately attacked the enemy, and in a sharp action, lasting till dusk, in which he manoeuvred his troops admirably, causing Ewell to think that he was largely outnumbered, he drove him back across Broad Bun. Ewell was directed by Jackson to retire toward Manassas if JACKSON'S RAID. 55 threatened by a superior force, and doubtless lie did not contest the possession of the ground so sharply as he would have done had he been expected to contest it stubbornly. Still, it appears from Early's report that Ewell was out- manoeuvred by Hooker. At the close of the action General Pope in person arrived on the field at Bristoe Station. He now for the first time learned the truth, namely, that Jackson was in front of him with his whole corps, consisting of his old division under Taliaferro, the division of Ewell, and the light division (so- called) under A. P. Hill. He very properly sent at once for Porter to come right up from "vVarrenton Junction, about nine miles off, and for Kearny to come from Greenwich, which was not more than half that distance. He would thus, in the morning, have four divisions at Bristoe, includ- ing Hooker's. Banks was ordered to take Porter's place at Warrenton Junction. If necessary, there were his two divi- sions, now entirely recovered from the losses of Cedar Moun- tain, available for some more active service than guarding trains. In fact, General Pope, had he contented himself with these orders, would have had his army admirably dis- posed the next day for any emergency. At Gainesville and in its neighborhood he w7ould have had the three divisions of McDowell and the two divisions of Sigel. At Greenwich, he would have had the two divisions of Beno ready to march upon Gainesville or Manassas, as might be required. At and near Bristoe he would have had Hooker's and Kearny's divisions and the two divisions of Porter ; and, within sup- porting distance, the two divisions of Banks — a perfectly adequate force with which to encounter Jackson. It was absolutely certain that Jackson's command was somewhere to the eastward, and this army of Pope's, in the position it would then have been in, would separate Jackson's force 56 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. from the rest of Lee's army. The situation would have been as favorable as could be desired. But General Pope did not content himself with these or- ders. He ordered Eeno's divisions from Greenwich to Man- assas Junction ; and he ordered McDowell and Sigel, even, to march on the same place at daylight the next morning. But as these orders need a fuller discussion, in view of the movements of the enemy, we will postpone further mention of them until we shall have briefly narrated the exploits of Stonewall Jackson on his daring raid. On arriving, after a fatiguing march from Salem, through White Plains, Thoroughfare Gap, and Gainesville, at a point near Bristoe Station, without any opposition, after sunset of the 26th, Jackson captured without difficulty the small force guarding the road there. As the Confederates were coining in sight, one train ran past the station toward Manassas Junction. Another, passing in the same direction, they tried to stop by firing at it, but the engineer resolutely drove ahead and escaped, carrying with him the news. A third train was thrown from the track by tearing up the rails, and the communication was now interrupted. General Jackson felt the importance of attacking the post of Manas- sas Junction without delay, as the news received at Alexan- dria of the appearance of his troops at Bristoe might natur- ally cause reinforcements to be sent to the garrison. He, therefore, eagerly accepted the offer of General Trimble, who undertook with the Twenty-first North Carolina and the Twenty-first Georgia to carry the post that night. To secure success he ordered General J. E. B. Stuart, with his cavalry, to move forward, and, as the ranking officer, to take com- mand of the expedition. The escaped trains do not seem to have informed the garrison of the danger. A little after midnight the place was taken ; the resistance of the Federals JACKSON'S RAID. 57 was not desperate ; the Confederate loss was insignificant ; the booty was enormous. Considerable controversy ensued between Trimble and Stuart, as to the honor belonging to them respectively in the affair, into which we do not propose to enter here. The captures, according to Jackson's official report, amounted to eight guns, with horses, equipments, and ammu- nition ; immense supplies of commissary and quartermaster stores, upward of 200 new tents, 175 horses, 300 prisoners, and 200 negroes. The stores consisted, by the same author- ity, of 50,000 pounds of bacon, 1,000 barrels of corn beef, 2,000 barrels of salt pork, 2,000 barrels of flour, and other things in proportion. The next day, the 27th, at seven in the morning, a gallant attempt to recapture the place was made by a New Jersey brigade under General Taylor. Jackson says of their ad- vance, that it was made with great spirit and determination, and under a leader worthy of a better cause. It was of course unsuccessful, as it met the divisions of Hill and Tali- aferro, and in the affair Taylor was mortally wounded. After furnishing to the hungry men as many of the stores as they could use or cany away, the remainder were burned. Ewell, as we have seen, after his fight with Hooker, retired from Bristoe Station late in the afternoon, destroying the bridge on Broad Bun as he retired.

## thoroughfare-gap

Salem, and actually forced Longstreet to halt and deploy at White Plains, detaining him an hour or more. He discov- ered that Jackson with a large force had passed through these villages and through Thoroughfare Gap toward Ma- nassas Junction, the day before his arrival, and that Long- street was following him with a larger force.* This con- vinced f McDowell that Longstreet would be coming through the Gap the next morning, and he so told Sigel. During the evening, and before 11.30 p.m., which was before General Pope's order of 9 p.m. arrived, McDowell took de- cided steps to hold the positions in front of the Gap. He or- dered the whole of Sigel's corps to Gainesville and Haymarket, the latter a village between Gainesville and the Gap, and he retained Reynolds' division at Buckland Mills to operate against the flank of the enemy coming through the Gap, or to march to Haymarket as might be thought best. With King's and Eicketts' divisions, he proposed himself to find out what had become of Jackson. These dispositions show very clearly that General McDow- ell fully realized the gravity of the situation, and that he had no idea of allowing a junction to be effected between the forces of Longstreet and Jackson, if it could be avoided. He knew that time was all important for us ; that if Jackson could be kept isolated for twenty-four hours longer, he ought to be overwhelmed, horse, foot, and dragoons. And he did not hesitate in this emergency to detach half of his force to retard the advance of Longstreet. Near midnight General Pope's order of 9 p.m. arrived, di- recting him to march with his whole command upon Manas- sas Junction at daylight. This necessitated a change of the * P. V. C, McDowell's Rep., p. 41 ; Lloyd's Rep., p. 136 ; McDowell's statement, p. 38 ; A. N. V., Longstreet' s Rep., vol. ii., p. 81. + P. V. 0., p. 41. 68 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. dispositions previously made by McDowell. Sigel, whose advance was at Gainesville, was ordered to march immedi- ately, with his right resting on the railroad. Reynolds was ordered to march in echelon with Sigel, and on his left ; King in echelon with Reynolds, and on his left ; so as to cany out the intention of General Pope, which was, as is stated in his order, that the left should be thrown well to the east. These orders were delivered before 3 a.m. of the 28th. Early in the morning, cavalry were sent to the Gap to reconnoitre, and, on their report that the enemy were advancing through the Gap, Ricketts' division, which was to bring up the rear, and which was to have followed on King's left and marched to Manassas Junction, was detached and sent to the Gap by way of Haymarket, where it arrived at 3 p.m. Ricketts was seriously delayed * by wagon trains in marching from his bivouac of the night before, west of Buck- land Mills, to the road, where he turned off to the left to go to Haymarket and the Gap. However, his troops delayed the passage of Long-street's command through the Gap dur- ing the rest of the day and early part of the evening ; and the enemy were obliged to send three brigades through Hopewell Gap, to the north of Thoroughfare Gap, before our troops retired. After dark Ricketts fell back to Gaines- ville. This action of McDowell's, taken, as it was, on his own responsibility, and contrary to the letter of the order of 9 p.m., directing him to inarch on Manassas Junction "with his whole force," undoubtedly secured for us the whole day of the 28th in which to fight Jackson without interruption. We have before expressed our wonder that Thoroughfare Gap should not have been strongly held several days before. But the * Sec Appendix B. THE PURSUIT OF JACKSON. 69 step taken by General McDowell, though taken late, was taken without orders, and it would seem that even when General Pope wrote his report,* he still disapproved of McDowell's course.

## gainesville-august-28

King, it will be remembered, had brought tip the rear of McDowell's column in the march of the morning, and had not in the afternoon got very far beyond Gainesville on his road to Manassas. He therefore had only a short distance to make before again finding himself on the pike, and he ac- cordingly complied with the order to march on the pike to Centreville, at once. By five o'clock or thereabouts he was marching along the turnpike eastwardly toward Centreville, perfectly unaware of there being any force of the enemy upon his left flank. Our movements this day had completely puzzled General Jackson. When he saw our troops march off in the forenoon toward Manassas, he thought* we were "in full retreat," and sent word to A. P. Hill, who was at Centreville, to " move down to the fords [of Bull Bun] and intercept us." Hill, however, having captured some of our dispatches, knew that Pope had no thought of retreating, but only of attack- ing Jackson, and he proceeded to rejoin his corps with all speed on the Bull Bun battlefield. Informed by General Bradley T. Johnson of our movements toward Manassas, and yet seeing that large bodies of our troops were still coming on the pike from Gainesville, in their march from Buckland Mills, Jackson made his dispositions to attack us, based, as * A. N. V., Hill's Rep., vol. ii„ p. 124. 76 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. he says,* " on the idea that we should continue to press for- ward on the turnpike toward Alexandria." But, fearing that King's division was intending to leave the road and incline toward Manassas, he advanced the divisions of Ewell and Taliaferro, and attacked with his customary impetuosity. But he was soon undeceived if he thought that this column was intending to escape. Our men turned savagely ujdou their assailants. Their batteries were at once enfiladed and compelled to change their position. Our skirmishers were immediately advanced and supported by the infantry in line, and our troops crossed the road and fiercely advanced upon the enemy. On their side their troops pushed forward with their customary hardihood to close quarters, and there en- sued, says Taliaferro,! " one of the most terrific conflicts that can be conceived. . . . For two hours and a half, with- out an instant's cessation of the most deadly discharges of musketry, round shot and shell, both lines stood unmoved, neither advancing, and neither broken nor yielding, until at last, about nine o'clock at night, the enemy slowly and sul- lenly fell back and yielded the field to our victorious troops." As to our having had the worst of it, however, General Taliaferro is in error. He is doubtless misled by the fact that when General King withdrew to Manassas, as we shall see that he did, about one o'clock in the morning, he aban- doned the field of battle. But there was no falling back for hours after the engagement had ceased. On the contrary, our troops held all the ground north of the turnpike, to which they had advanced in the beginning of the action, un- til they took up their line of march in the middle of the night for Manassas Junction. * A. N. V., Jackson's Rep., vol. ii., p. 94. t A. N. V., Taliaferro's Rep., vol. ii., p. 201. THE BATTLE OF GAINESVILLE. 77 General Taliaferro was wounded in the action himself, and may not have known the result from personal observation. General Stafford,* whose brigade seems to have been trans- ferred from A. P. Hill's to Taliaferro's division, says, "the battle commenced at five o'clock p.m., and lasted till nine o'clock p.m., resulting in the reirulse of the enemy, we holding the battle-ground." Major Pelham,| too, whose battery was HopevOle August 2Sth, 6 P.M. engaged, says, "we drove the enemy back." All that these officers claim is that they held their own, which is admitted by the Federal authorities. It was, in fact, a drawn battle. The attack made by us was repulsed, but that was all. * Stafford's Rep., A. N. V. , vol. ii., p. 359. t Pelham's Rep., A. N. V., vol. ii., p. 421. 78 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. Our forces engaged consisted only of the brigades of Gib- bon and Doubleday, but these were strong brigades and among the best in the army and admirably commanded. The whole division of Taliaferro and two brigades of Ewell's division, at least, those of Lawton and Trimble, constituted the force of the enemy. We were no doubt considerably outnumbered. "Why this was so, with the brigade of Hatch in front and that of Patrick in the rear, is, perhaps, remark- able. Doubtless the darkness of the night prevented these troops from participating in the action. The losses on both sides were very severe. The enemy lost Generals Ewell and Taliaferro wounded, the former losing a leg, besides three colonels, one lieutenant-colonel, and four majors, killed and wounded. On our side it is stated * that " more than one-third of the Federal com- mand were left dead or wounded on the field." Truly, a '•'fierce and sanguinary conflict," as Stonewall Jackson calls it. It was also a purely accidental one. Jackson, no doubt, thought he was attacking the rear guard of a demoralized army in full retreat for the defences of Washington. But, instead of meeting troops in retreat before him, he met troops who had been all day in search of him, and he cer- tainly had his fill of fighting before the action closed.

## groveton-august-29-position

Jackson was found to occupy a long line, stretching from Catharpin Creek, near Sudley Springs, on the north, to a point near and on the heights above the turnpike near Groveton ; he was fronting east or southeast. Jackson's old division under Starke, Taliaferro having been wounded the evening before, occupied the right ; Ewell's division under Lawton, Ewell having been also wounded the evening be- fore, held the centre ; while A. P. Hill's division was on the left. Their main line rested on the excavation * of an un- finished railroad, which ran in a northeasterly direction to- ward Sudley Mill. In front of the greater part of this old * Jackson's Rep., A. N. V., vol. ii., p. 95. THE BATTLE OP GROVETON. 103 railroad were tolerably thick woods, which were occupied by their skirmishers.

## groveton-august-29-assessment

We have no doubt in our own minds that Pope, who was, as we have said, a sanguine man, overpersuaded himself into believing that this estimate of the day's doings was sub- stantially a correct one. Yet this only shows the terrible mis- take which a man makes who closes his eyes to facts. "We had not driven the enemy from their position behind the railroad embankment ; we had not in any way disintegrated their army ; there it was, in line of battle, every unwounded man with his colors, every battery in position. And what was vastly more important, Pope now knew for a certainty that Longstreet had joined Jackson. He says this in his despatch. Was there, then, such ground for triumph as he tries to be- lieve there was? There was assuredly no reason to feel de- spondent ; there was every reason to feel cheerful ; Porter and Eicketts would be up in the morning, which would give us more than fifteen thousand additional troops ; but still the situation was a grave one. The Confederate army was all there before him ; and it was a serious question what had better be done. Our troops were exhausted from hard marching, hard fighting, and want of food. Would it not have been wiser to adhere to the determination formed in the morning, before the elation of this partial victory had disturbed his judgment, and to have fallen back to the other side of Bull Bun ?

## manassas-august-30

The next day was fought the Second Battle of Bull Bun, as we call it ; the battle of Manassas, as the Confederates call it. As they won it, perhaps they have the best right to give it a name. It was the morning of Saturday, the thirtieth day of Au- gust, 1862, General Pope had, as we have seen, got it into his head that the enemy were bent upon retreating, that they had, on the day before, suffered a severe defeat. He found indications in the morning that confirmed him. The enemy were readjusting their line, and had really fallen back over ground which had been disputed the evening before. Then, although he knew, from the fact of Hatch having been repulsed by Hood's and Evans' commands late in the previous afternoon, that a part of Longstreet's force had joined Jackson, this very fact, that nothing had been seen of them till very late in the day, convinced him, being, as we have before remarked, a sanguine man, that the reinforcement had been but small, and that it had only come up late in the afternoon. General Porter, who had been sent for during the night to join the main army, and had come up early in the morn- ing, saw General Pope and endeavored to disabuse his mind of the belief that the mass of Longstreet's command was not 6* 130 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. yet up. He recounted his own observation, and that of his officers. But in General Pope's preoccupied mind, these facts, when stated by Porter, partook rather of the character of excuses for very culpable inactivity and disobedience of orders, than of information of the enemy's position and strength. He could not, or would not, see that it was all- important to him to know the facts as to Lee's strength south of the turnpike the afternoon before ; and that it stood to reason, that by sending for Porter, Morell, Butter- field, and others, he would get the facts. He preferred to act on the belief which his own limited observation of the field justified, and he would not listen to information com- ing from officers of whose good faith he chose to entertain doubts. Such a course by a general in his position was ex- tremely culpable ; it was thoroughly wrong-headed. We need not, we are sure, do more here than to remind our readers that it was, on the morning of the day before, very clearly General Pope's judgment,* that it would not be wise for him to engage the united forces of Jackson and Longstreet on the westerly side of Bull Bun, but that it would be better, in the event of the junction of the two wings of the enemy's army, to retire behind Bull Bun to Centreville, supply his exhausted army, and receive such re- inforcements from the Army of the Potomac as General Hal- leck might be able to send him. This opinion was clearly a sound one, warranted by the highest military reasons, and in his cool moments General Pope entertained it, and meant to act on it. But his mind was now disturbed by two causes : first, by the excitement of the bloody battle which he had been fighting, and by the success, such as it was, which he had gained in it ; and secondly, by vexation and indignation * See ante, pp. 8S et seq. THE BATTLE OF MANASSAS. 131 at Porter's not having supported him by an attack on Jack- son's flank ; and he would listen to nothing in excuse or ex- planation of this. It unfortunately happened that the very things which Porter had to urge by way of excuse and ex- planation were the most important things Pope could have known, with reference to his plan of action on Saturday — that is, they were the results of Porter's observation and in- formation as to the strength and dispositions of the enemy. But he would not hearken to anything of the sort. Accordingly, having sent out reconnoissances in his front, north of the pike, and ascertained, as he supposed, that the enemy were in full retreat, he issued the following order : * [Special Order No.-] Headquarters, near Groveton, August 30, 1862, 12 m. The following forces will be immediately thrown forward in pursuit of the enemy, and press him vigorously during the whole day. Major- General McDowell is assigned to the command of the pursuit. Major-General Porter's corps will push forward on the Warrsnton turn- pike, followed by the divisions of Brigadier-Generals King and Reynolds. The division of Brigadier- General Ricketts will pursue the Haymar- ket road, followed by the corps of Major-General Heintzelman ; the necessary cavalry will be assigned to these columns by Major-General McDowell, to whom regular and frequent reports will be made. The General Headquarters will be somewhere on the Warren ton turn- pike. By command of Major-General Pope. GEO. D. RUGGLES, Colonel and Chief of Staff'. * P. V. C. 15. 47. It is difficult to reconcile the sanguine and confident tone of this order with what General Pope tells us in his Report, p. 150, of his feeling that morning discouraged and nearly hopeless of any successful i=sue to his opera- tions ; that his object in fighting this battle was to cripple the enemy as much as possible, and delay his further advance toward the capital. These reflections and intentions, we are disposed to think, should bear a date subsequent to this Order of Pursuit. 132 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. It will be observed that the corps of Sigel and Reno are not mentioned in this order. They were to constitute the reserves. A brief glance at the field will be in place here. 3 Confederate Positions on August 30th, 6 p.m. The Warrenton turnpike runs east and west ; the Sudley Springs road runs north and south ; the Haymarket road runs parallel to the Warrenton pike, and about a mile and a THE BATTLE OF MANASSAS. 133 half to the north of it. The forces marching on the Hay- market road were therefore attempting to turn the enemy's left, and even cut him oft' from Haymarket and the Gap. On the south of the turnpike were woods, mostly very thick, with occasional clear places. There were two consid- erable hills south of the turnpike and near to it, with more or less clear land near them — the Henry House Hill, just east of the crossing of the Sudley Springs road with the turn- pike, and the Bald Hill, some distance to the west of the Henry House Hill, but still east of Groveton. Near the Bald Hill was a house known as the " Chinn .House." The pos- session of these was of the first importance to us, as will presently appear. The reconnoissances which our forces had made in the forenoon seem to have satisfied General Lee that his adver- sary was preparing to attack him on the north side of the turnpike. Seeing that we were making a mistake, he al- lowed our movement to go on. He desired that we shordd expend a portion of our strength in attacking again Jackson's embankment, the approaches to which the guns of Long- street, now advanced somewhat, swept with a destructive fire. Lee had been reinforced during the night by the di- vision of B. H. Anderson, of Longstreet's command. General Pope's plan was that Porter's corps should move forward, their left on the turnpike, supported by King's division, under Hatch. On Porter's left and on the south of the pike was to be Beynolds, to look out for the left flank. On the right of Porter were to be Heintzelman's two divi- sions under Hooker and Kearny, and, supporting them, the division of Bicketts. Shortly before the engagement fairly opened, Beynolds discovered the enemy in force on the south of the pike, and facing it, concealed in the woods, and preparing a serious 131 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. attack on our flank. On reporting tins he was ordered to form his division to resist this attack, which he proceeded to do. Porter, meantime, about four o'clock, pushes Morell's divi- sion in front, the brigades of Barnes and Butterfield * lead- ing. They drive the enemy from the outlying woods, back upon the old railroad entrenchment. Sykes' division of reg- ulars is in reserve. To the right, Hatch pushes in King's division. The attack is made with great resolution. Jack- son's veterans resist with their never-failing tenacity and pluck. Our officers and men push up to the embankment. It is a powerful attack and is pressed home, and for a mo- ment Jackson is afraid he cannot resist it. He sends to Lee for reinforcements, says he is " severely pressed " and Lee orders Longstreet to send them from his hitherto unem- ployed command. But that officer has, with a soldier's eye for position, placed his guns where their fire enfilades any troops attacking the front of Jackson's position. There is no need of reinforcements, the guns do the work. "As it was evident," says General Longstreet, "that the attack against General Jackson could not be continued ten minutes under the fire of these batteries, I made no movement with my troops. Before the second battery could be placed in position the enemy began to retire, and in less than ten minutes the ranks were broken, and that portion of the army put to flight." Jackson says his " entire line was engaged in a fierce and sanguinary struggle. As one line was repulsed, another took its place, and pressed forward, as if determined, by force of numbers and iury of assault, to drive us from our positions. So impetuous and well- sustained were these on- * Only Barnes' and Buttcrfield's brigades were present,, Griffin's having, by an unaccountable blunder, gone to Centreville. THE BATTLE OF MANASSAS. 135 sets as to induce me to send to the Commanding General for reinforcements. " Porter's and Hatch's attack had failed, but it is plain, from what Jackson himself says of it, that it was a very gallant and a very well-sustained attack.* It may be that had it not been for the enfilading fire of Longstreet's guns, our brave ti'oops might have effected a lodgment in the embankment. General Hatch was slightly wounded. On the extreme right, Hooker's division, or rather a part of it, for Grover's brigade was not put in again after its heavy losses the day before, drove the enemy from some woods, but does not seem to have made a serious attack. Further to our right, Kearny and Eicketts were to have at- tacked by the Haymarket road. The movement failed, owing to the withdrawal of a large portion of Eicketts' command, to be used on the Warrenton pike, or to the south of it, against the enemy, who were rapidly developing a very seri- ous movement against our left flank. On the retirement of Morell and Hatch, General Pope in- cautiously ordered Reynolds to leave the commanding posi- tion which he had taken up on the left flank of the army, south of the turnpike, and cross over to the north of the turnpike and support Porter's corps.f This seems to have been unnecessary, as well as incautious, for Sykes' division had not been severely engaged in the attack. The effect of * Pope, in his Report, p. 157, says the attack of Porter was neither vigorous nor persistent. This is entirety unwarranted. Early, commanding Eweil's di- vision, says it was a " determined attack,"' and Johnson, commanding a brigade in Jackson's division, says, "the fight was most obstinate." A. N. V., vol. ii., pp. 1S5, 2-15. t General Reynolds (P. V. C, p. 69) says he was not ordered away from his po- sition south of the pike till after Porter was repulsed. Porter himself, however (Statement, Gov. ed., p. 52). says it was before the repulse. Sykes says it was just previous to the attack. It was no doubt after a portion of the troops had become engaged that Reynolds was ordered over to support the movement. 136 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. this change in Reynolds' position was to expose the left flank of the troops who were attacking Jackson. Of course they could make no headway in front, if their left flank was at- tacked, and, as we have seen, the enemy was massing south of the pike for this purpose. Warren, with great prompti- tude, takes his little brigade, with Sykes' approval, to the left, and endeavors to maintain himself against a heavy at- tack which the enemy do not fail to make immediately upon his small command. But he, as well as Anderson, whose brigade of Reynolds' division had been left on the south of the pike when the remainder of the division crossed it, was overwhelmed by superior numbers. Major-General McDowell, though charged at noon wi'h the conduct of a "pursuit," very soon recognized that the enemy were fully aware of our great tactical mistakes, and were determined to avail themselves of them with their cus- tomary energy. "We had made all our arrangements on the theory that the enemy would not put in an appearance south of the turnpike. Reno, Heintzelman, King, and Ricketts, Porter, and Sigel were all north of the pike, and before any adequate measures could be taken to guard our left flank, half of these troops had become heavily engaged ; and more than that, had been repulsed with loss. But McDowell was equal to the occasion. He gave up all thought of oversee- ing the progress of the pursuit ; he devoted himself entirely to the defence of the turnpike against an attack coming from the south or southwest. And General Pope, now seeing his danger, was prompt to take such steps as were yet available to ward off disaster. And gallant and determined as was the assault, and bloody as was the repulse of Porter and Hatch on the north of the pike, the chief military interest attaching to this battle will always attach to the struggle for the turn- pike. THE BATTLE OF MANASSAS. 137 The enemy went into it with a rush. " My whole line," says Longstreet, " was rushed forward at a charge. The troops sprang to their work, and moved forward with all the steadiness and firmness that characterize war-worn veterans. . . . The attack was led by Hood's brigade * closely sup- ported by Evans'. These were rapidly reinforced by Ander- son's division from the rear, Kemper's three brigades, and D. B. Jones' division from the right, and Wilcox's brigade f from the left. The brigades f of Brigadier-Generals Feather- ston and Pryor became detached and operated with a portion of General Jackson's command. The attacking columns moved steadily forward, driving the enemy from his differ- ent positions as rapidly as he took them. My batteries were thrown forward from point to point, following the move- ments of the general line." His brief summary is, however, altogether too favorable for his own side. The enemy were doubtless generally suc- cessful, for they were the stronger at the point of contact. We had left our line of retreat, the turnpike, exposed, under the mistaken supposition that the principal forces of the enemy were those of Jackson, who was, we knew, behind the railroad embankment, north of the turnpike, assisted on his right by, perhaps, one of Longstreet's divisions. Instead of this, Longstreet was able to advance on the south of the pike, from beyond Groveton to the Sudley Springs road, the five divisions of Evans, J Anderson, Kemper, Jones, and WTlcox. These troops could be concealed in a great part of their movements by the woods. But when they reached the neighborhood of the pike, they found our batteries in posi- * We take it that this is a misprint for " division." t The brigades of Wilcox, Featherston, and Pryor constituted Wilcox's divi- sion. See ante, p. 119. % Evans' division consisted of his own brigade, formerly Whiting's, and of two brigades, Hood's and Law's, under Hood, and known as Hood's division. 138 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. tion and infantry supporting them. There was not, to be sure, a regular line of battle, but the two principal emi- nences, the Bald Hill and the Henry House Hill, were occu- pied, and the troops from the right were hurried down to the south of the road as fast as Pope and McDowell could get them there. Fortunately for us, Sigel's corps had not joined in the attack, and was therefore available both to cover the retreat of the divisions of Morel! and King, and to occupy and hold Bald Hill. Two brigades of Ricketts' division were sent for at once, under General Tower, with two batteries ; they also went to the Bald Hill. To the Henry House Hill were sent two brigades from the fine division of Sykes, consisting main- ly of regulars. The other brigade, that of General Warren, had, as we have seen, lost very heavily near, or rather beyond the Bald Hill, early in the action. Reynolds, also, with his two excellent brigadiers, Meade and Seymour, was near the Henry House Hill. On the north of the turnpike Reno and Heintzelman re- sisted the advance of Jackson, who, as soon as he saw Long- street moving forward, ordered a general advance of his own line. The struggle for the possession of the Bald Hill was most obstinate and sanguinary. McLean's brigade of Schenck's division was first sent to hold it, and did hold it handsomely, repulsing several attacks both in front and rear, until the command was rechTced to a skeleton. Schenck himself was severely wounded at the head of the reinforcements which he was leading to McLean's support. The other bri- gade of Schenck's division, Stahel's, was maintaining the ground on the north side of the road, and Schenck could not withdraw it. But Sigel, seeing the danger, sent Schurz's division to the aid of McLean. The two brigades of Koltes THE BATTLE OF MANASSA.S. 139 and Kryzanowski were put in, and for a time stayed the ad- vancing tide. Tlie losses were very severe, as the enemy were in large force. The brave Colonel Koltes here fell, sword in hand, at the head of his men. In the conflict around this hill General Tower was severely wounded at the head of two of Ricketts' brigades, and Colonel Fletcher Webster, of the Twelfth Massachusetts, a son of the great statesman, was killed while leading his regiment. In their first violent attack on this strong position, even the impetuosity of Hood's Texans failed to make any im- pression. Hood* was compelled to fall back, and all that could be done, says Evans, who commanded the division, was to hold the enemy with the other brigade until Anderson's division came up. In one of his brigades 631 officers and men were killed and wounded, probably one-fourth of the actual force present on the field. Two colonels were killed, and one wounded. D. K. Jones f also found his way to the neighborhood of the Chinn House, and the two brigades which he had with him " went in most gallantly, suffering severe loss." In one of these brigades, Anderson's, consisting of five regiments, but one field officer was untouched. They had to fall back, however, and were evidently very severely handled. The ac- count which Generals Benning J and Anderson § give of their experience with these two brigades is very interesting. It was evident that the troops who held the hill held it with obstinate courage, and that they yielded only to the assaults of fresh troops. Jones' division got no further than the Chinn House that day. * Evans' Rep., A.N. V. , vol. ii., p. 228. + D. R. Jones1 Rep., A. N. V., vol. ii., d. 217. t Bcnning's Rep., A. N. V., vol. ii., p. 302 et seq. § Anderson's Rep.. A, N. V., vol. ii., p. 316 et seq. 140 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. In spite, however, of this heroic resistance, the enemy car- ried the position by main force. They suffered heavily, but fresh relays pressed on with great enthusiasm, and they finally drove our forces from the Bald Hill. We pass now to the struggle for the Henry House Hill. Here were Sykes' regulars, in first-rate order, and ready to receive the enemy. Buchanan, an old veteran of the war with Mexico, who had with his own hand forced open the door of the Molino del Bey, commanded one brigade ; Chapman, his comrade in the same gallant fight, the other. Here, too, were gathered all the troops that could be collected from the front. It was a post of the last importance. We could not afford to lose it. There was no position west of Bull Bun which offered such advantages for defence as this. The army was in full retreat, though in orderly retreat ; but that orderly retreat would be changed into a rout if the enemy should drive us from our position on the Henry House Hill and its neighborhood. There would be nothing between them and the Stone Bridge across Bull Bun. And they did not carry it. Their exertions had been severe before they reached this position. They had marched a considerable distance and over difficult country. They attacked, however, with their customary energy and courage, and while they suffered much, they inflicted heavy losses upon the regulars of Sykes. But fortunately for the Federal army, darkness came on, and the exhausted Confederates ceased from farther assaults upon their obstinate antago- nists. When Buchanan and Chapman were withdrawn, after suffering heavy losses, McDowell, who had charged himself with the defence of this vital position, stationed Gibbon there with his brigade, and that force remained there some two hours after dark. Schurz, who also placed the brigade THE BATTLE OP MANASSAS. 141 of Sehiinrnelpfenniiig on the Henry House Hill, withdrew it about eight o'clock by orders of General Sigel, in the direc- tion of Bull Run. By this time everything was quiet. The retreat of the Federal army had been assured. " The artillery continued to fire," says General Wilcox,* " after the musketry had ceased, but by half-past eight o'clock it had all ceased. My brigade bivouacked at this point of the field, which was the most advanced point reached by our infantry, and near the hill where Bee and Bartow fell, on the 21st July, 1861, the first battle of Manassas." This hill was the Henry House Hill. Schurz, with his one brigade, crossed Young's Branch about nine, and remained between that stream and Bull Run, guarding the bridge and the neighboring ford till eleven o'clock. Between eleven and twelve they crossed Bull Run, but still continued near the bridge. About one in the morning they were joined by Colonel Kane's bat- talion of Pennsylvania Bucktails, which General McDowell had assigned to the duty of covering the retreat. The bridge was then destroyed, and they all marched to Centre- ville. Thus ended the Second Battle of Bull Run. It was a severe defeat for General Pope ; but it was nothing else. It was not a rout, nor anything like a rout. The army retired under orders, and though, of course, there were many stragglers, it retreated in good order. The advance of the enemy had been definitely checked, and there was no pursuit. In fact, there was no battle fought in the whole war in, which the beaten army acquitted itself more creditably than * Wilcox's Rap., A. N. V., vol. ii., p. 231. 142 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. did General Pope's army on this bloody day. Compromised as its line of retreat was by the unexpected appearance of Longstreet's powerful corps on the south of the turnpike, confusing and embarrassing as was the attack of this corps, made as it was upon troops who had been disposed upon a different part of the field and who had been repulsed with heavy loss in their assaults upon Jackson's strong posi- tion, terrible as were the charges of the fresh divisions which Longstreet hurled upon our hungry and wearied men, the Federal army, like a noble ship struck by a sudden squall, soon righted itself, and all, from the Commanding General and his able lieutenant, to the brave regiments under Meade, Eeynolds, Buchanan, Tower, McLean, Koltes, and their other gallant commanders, in the confusion of this flank attack and in the gathering shades of the evening, rallied on the hills and faced their determined foes with indomitable pluck and unyielding fortitude. Beaten they were, but not put to flight. They retreated, indeed, but in good order, and carrying off all their artillery that had not been lost in actual combat. The battle was indeed one of which General Lee had good reason to be proud. It would be hard to find a better in- stance of that masterly comprehension of the actual condi- tion of things which marks a great general than was exhib- ited in General Lee's allowing our formidable attack, in which more than half the Federal army was taking part, to be fully developed and to burst upon the exhausted troops of Stonewall Jackson, while Lee, relying upon the ability of that able soldier to maintain his position, was maturing and arranging for the great attack on our left flank by the power- ful corps of Longstreet. Lee claims to have captured in these engagements 30 pieces of artillery and 7,000 unwounded prisoners. So far THE BATTLE OF MANASSAS. 143 as we know, no statement lias been made of these losses by any Federal authority, except the very inaccurate one in General Pope's despatch to General Halleck, written the evening of the battle, in which he claims to have lost neither guns nor wagons.* Among the casualties on our side were Brigadier-Generals Hatch, Schenck, and Tower, wounded. On the other side, Colonel Baylor, commanding the Stonewall brigade, was killed.

## chantilly

The day after the battle was rainy, and the fords near the turnpike were rendered impassable. General Lee felt, how- ever, the necessity of promptly following up his victory, and he therefore pushed his troops off in the course of the after- noon, the ever active Jackson taking the advance, followed by Longstreet. They crossed Bull Run high up, at Sudley Ford, and then pursued their way by cross roads to Little River turnpike, a fine road which runs from Aldie Gap through Fairfax Court House to Alexandria. Turning then to the southwest, they marched for Fairfax Court House, which is seven miles east of Centreville ; hoping to strike the Line of communication of the Federal army, and bring about a hasty retreat of our forces, defeated, as they knew they had been, and demoral- ized, as they doubtless supposed them to be. This movement of Jackson's, like his previous one to Man- assas Junction, was conducted with what we should call — Were we not speaking of Stonewall Jackson— a heedless dis- regard of supports. Longstreet was so far behind him that 148 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. the action known as the battle of Chantilly, which took place this afternoon, was over before he arrived. Jackson's march had been perceived by the detachments which Sumner had sent out in compliance with an order of Pope's, dated 3 a.m., of September 1st.* Jackson left his vLONGSTREET'S The Field of Chantilly. bivouac at Sudley Ford early that morning, marched down the turnpike, and just after passing Ox Hill, which is on the right of the road, finding himself to be opposed by our forces, which had by General Pope's order been falling back during the day to the neighborhood of Fairfax Court House, formed his line of battle. Jackson recklessly moved his troops by a cross road to their right, so that the right of * It would seem that, separated as he was from Longstreet, Jackson might have been advantageously attacked by Franklin and Sumner, supported by Reno and Heintzelman, before it was so late in the afternoon. THE BATTLE OF CHANTILLY. 149 A. P. Hill's division was close to the "Warrenton turnpike, and at right angles to it, while the left of Jackson's old di- vision was on the Little Kiver turnpike. Ewell's division, commanded by Early, was in the centre. The whole line thus faced east. Here, then, was a chance for- a success. An attack by Sumner's corps on the right flank of this line, while its left and front was assaulted by Franklin and other troops, would have been simply fatal to Jackson. He had absolutely no retreat. In the rear of the cross road were woods and difficult country. By moving down the cross road towards the War- renton pike he had jeopardized his line of retreat. A vigor- ous attack on Franklin's corps on his left might have cut him off from the Little River pike, and a flank * attack on his right and rear by Sumner would have given Pope his revenge. Luckily for Jackson, it was nearly dark, and came on to rain very heavily. Our officers could not well discover the position of the enemy. By good luck, too, for Jackson, neither Franklin nor Sumner were anywhere near him, and he was opposed by troops which had been fighting him at Manassas. But, as it was, there was no success in store for him that afternoon. Branch's brigade of Hill's division, which was on his extreme right, was thrown into great dis- order by a flanking fire, and its commander, General Lane, says the engagement was considered by the brigade as one of its severest. Gregg's brigade, that lost so many men at Manassas, here again suffered heavily. Hays' brigade got into confusion and fell back. Trimble's brigade evidently had a severe experience. And all that is claimed is that they held their position, which they certainly did. * Sue Sumner's testimony, C. W., vol. i., p. 367. 150 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. The brunt of the battle was borne by Reno's divisions, and Kearny's division of Heintzelman's corps. The action was very severe, though short. Stevens' division fell back, and Stevens, an excellent officer, was killed. The gallant Kearny also was killed, while reconnoitering in front of his troops ; a loss which was very deeply felt. He was a man who was made for the profession of arms. In the field he was always ready, always skilful, always brave, always untiring, always hopeful, and always vigilant and alert. These severe losses and the indecisive character of the engagement, which after all was only a repulse of the enemy, could not restore the morale of the army. The enemy pursued his design of outflanking oiir right. Long- street was up in the course of the night. On September 2d, at noon, the army being weary and the Government evidently subjected to great pressure, the order was given to withdraw the troops within the lines of "Washington, and the campaign of the army under Pope was ended.

## appendix-d-losses

THE LOSSES EST BATTLE. It is not claimed that the Federal Army lost either guns or prisoners at the battles of Gainesville and Groveton, on the 28th and 29th. The one gun which was taken on the even- ing of the 29th, was left on the ground.* Nor did we sus- tain any loss of this kind at Chantilly. The only loss" in guns and prisoners suffered on the plains of Manassas wai suffered in the battle of Saturday, August 30th. General Pope gives us no information on this subject. General Longstreet f claims to have captured three bat- teries, and General Jackson X claims eight guns — in all, twenty-six guns. We are, therefore, at a loss to see what authority General Lee I has for claiming 30 guns. He is speaking, probably, hi round numbers, as he unquestionably is when he claims to have captured 20,000 small arms, when those claimed by Longstreet, 12,000, and by Jackson, 6,520, together amount to only 18,520. It is harder to account for the large number of prisoners which General Lee claims || to have captured. He says : "More than seven thousand prisoners were taken, in addi- tion to about 2,000 wounded left in our hands." General * A. N. V., vol. ii., p. 82, Longstreet's Report. + Ibid., p. 83. % Ibid., p. 97. § A. K. V., vol. i., p. 26. | Ibid. APPENDIX D. 191 Longstreet says,* " a large number of prisoners" were taken. Seven thousand is a large number, doubtless ; but it is so large a number that Longstreet would have been sure to have given some sort of a round estimate of his success in this regard. Jackson says nothing about prisoners. We are very decidedly disposed to question this claim to the capture of any such number of unwounded prisoners. The 2,000 wounded were doubtless taken. In regard to the losses in killed and wounded, the reports of the Army of Northern Virginia give us more information than we can procure on the Federal side. The official list of casualties at Manassas Plains, in August, 1862, gives as the killed and wounded of Jackson's command, 3,743 men ; Longstreet's command, 3,498 men ; total in the whole army, 7,241 men. These numbers are certainly small. However, General Jackson in his official report says f that his total loss from the Rappahannock to the Potomac was 4,387, which is an increase on the figure given above of 644, or nearly one-sixth. Doubtless, the report was made up subsequently, after all the returns had come in. We are at liberty, it seems, to distribute this loss of 4,387 between the four days of fighting, 28th, 29th, 30th August, and 1st of September. We should suppose that more than one-half of this number were killed and wounded on the 29th of August. If we should, by analogy, add one-sixth to the loss of Long- street's command, given above, we arrive at a total of 4,081, nearly all of which was suffered on the 30th. General Pope,J it will be remembered, estimated his own loss at 6,000 or 8,000 killed and wounded on the 29th. These figures are evidently too large. If the Confederate * A. N. V., vol. ii., p. S3. t Ibid., p. 98. $ P. II., p. 155. Tope to Halleck, C. W., vol. i., p. 4(30. 192 THE ARMY UNDER POPE. estimate of casualties given above is to be accepted as ex- haustive, General Pope's loss could hardly have exceeded four thousand or four thousand five hundred on the 29th. On the 30th he doubtless lost as heavily, or, perhaps, more so. But, in the absence of returns, one can only conjecture, which is hardly worth while.
